VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF LEWISTON, NEW YORK 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Village Board 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS AT RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Terry C. Collesano (Mayor) 
Victor Eydt 
Ernest Krell 
Therese Mudd 
Bruce Sutherland 
Village Board 
____________ 
Edward Jesella 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Anne Welch 
Village Clerk-Treasurer 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Terry C. Collesano 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nicholas Conde 
Victor Eydt 
Daniel R. Gibson 
Bruce Sutherland, Deputy Mayor 
Trustees 
____________ 
Joseph Leone, Jr. 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Amy Salada 
Clerk/Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Lewiston, New York. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1978 Code, as supplemented through Local Law No. 2-2009, adopted October 5, 2009, and legislation subsequently adopted by the village. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, and any legislation included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Ellen Torof, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Anne Welch, Village Clerk-Treasurer, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Lewiston, New York. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Lewiston, New York. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Lewiston, New York. 2010. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res./L.L. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2-2010(L.L.) 12-20-2010 Included 1 01-2011(L.L.)  4- 4-2011 Included 2 02-2011(L.L.) 12- 5-2011 Included 2 01-2013(L.L.)  4-15-2013 Included 3 02-2013(L.L.)  4-15-2013 Included 3 (Res.)  4- 4-2011 Included 4 03-2013(L.L.)  7-15-2013 Included 4 (Amd.)  1- 6-2014 Included 4 1-2015(L.L.)  4-20-2015 Included 5 2-2015(L.L.)  5-18-2015 Included 5 3-2015(L.L.)  7- 6-2015 Included 5 1-2017(L.L.)  9-18-2017 Included 6 2-2017(L.L.) 12-18-2017 Included 6 1-2018(L.L.)  1-16-2018 Included 6 2-2018(L.L.)  3-19-2018 Included 7 4-2018(L.L.)  6-18-2018 Included 7  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances and local laws embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Lewiston Village Code." 
(Code 1978, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification of local laws, Municipal Home Rule Law § 20(3.). 
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1978, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and local laws, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the village board of trustees: 
    Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means the Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits or village limits. Whenever the term "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "village limits" is used, such term means the legal boundary of the Village of Lewiston. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Niagara in the State of New York. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the village to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing only one gender shall extend and be applied to the other and to any other person as herein defined. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than other more general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    May, shall. The term "may" is permissive, and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Mayor. Whenever the term "mayor" is used, it means the mayor of the Village of Lewiston; and where a provision of this Code, an ordinance or a local law shall direct that an act be performed or decision be made by the mayor, such expression shall be deemed to include not only the mayor but the acting or deputy mayor in the absence of the mayor, or any member of the board of trustees designated by the board or the mayor to perform the act or exercise the discretion referred to; or except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the terms "of the Village of Lewiston" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing, and vice versa. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall be any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Seal. Whenever the term "seal" is used, it means the village or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of New York. 
    State law. All references to state law shall be construed as references to the official version of the New York State Consolidated Laws, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Street. The term "street" includes, but shall not be limited to, streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, designated rights-of-way laid out for future development, viaducts and all other public highways in the village. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    The village, this village, the corporation or this corporation. Whenever the term "the village," "this village," "the corporation" or "this corporation" is used, it shall be construed as if the terms "of Lewiston, New York" followed them. 
    Trustee. The term "trustee" means any person elected or appointed to that office. 
    Village board of trustees or board of trustees. Whenever the term "village board of trustees" or "board of trustees" is used, it shall be construed to mean the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lewiston. 
    Village employee. The term "village employee" means a nonunion village employee of the Village of Lewiston, New York. 
    Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, General Construction Law § 10 et seq. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All local laws passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent local laws, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent local laws as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent local laws until such time that this Code and subsequent local laws numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the village board of trustees. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section (or article or chapter) _______ of the Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York, is hereby amended to read as follows:... ." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"That the Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered as follows _______, which said section shall read as follows:... ." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  When the village board of trustees desires to enact a local law of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which said board desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the local law: "Section _______. It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this local law shall become and be made a part of the Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York, and the sections of this local law may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1978, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances or local laws. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or local law shall not revive any ordinances or local laws in force before or at the time the ordinances or local laws repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or local law shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or local law repealed. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Construction Law § 90 et seq. 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1978, § 1-6) 
State Law reference- Tampering with public records, Penal Law §§ 175.20, 175.25. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, resolution or local law of the village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance, resolution or local law the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific fine or penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution or local law shall constitute an offense and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution or local law shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the fine hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution or local law shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the village abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1978, § 1-7) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 1-8. - Prosecution where different penalties exist for same offense. 
    In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created by different clauses or sections of this Code, ordinances, resolutions or local laws of the village, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(Code 1978, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalties not exclusive. 
    Obedience to the provisions hereinafter set forth may be enforced by criminal information for the penalties herein prescribed as well as by prosecution of the offender as provided in section 1-7, or by civil action for a penalty, or by civil remedy at law or equity by way of injunction, or otherwise to abate or prevent a violation of the provisions of this Code. Neither a judgment in, nor the pendency of a criminal prosecution for an alleged violation of the provisions of this Code, nor a judgment in or the pendency of a civil action at law or in equity shall be a bar to the other form of proceeding. The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this Code shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the remedies herein provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin or abate a violation shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1978, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 1-10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Flag. 
    The village hereby adopts the flag as presented to the village board of trustees by historian Dr. S. N. Bruni and so designed by him. 
(Code 1978, § 2-1; Res. of 5-7-1973) 
Sec. 2-2. - Seal. 
    The village hereby adopts the design of the flag presented to the village by S. N. Bruni on May 7, 1973, as the official village seal. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2; Res. of 5-7-1973) 
State Law reference- Seal authorized, Village Law § 1-102. 
Sec. 2-3. - Terms of boards and commissions; attendance. 
(a)  The terms of office of all members appointed to commissions and boards created by the board of trustees whether by local law or resolution shall commence on the day of the first organizational meeting in the year of appointment and shall expire on the day before the first organizational meeting in the year of expiration of the term appointed to. 
(b)  The requirements of the Village Law of the state, as the same provides for the terms of office and numbers of members of the boards and commissions, are hereby superseded within the village for all matters and things which may properly be the subject of control by a local law herein adopted by the board of trustees of the village. 
(c)  Upon failure to personally attend three consecutive regular meetings, a member of any village board or commission heretofore appointed to such board or commission shall be deemed to have resigned therefrom. The chairman of such board or commission may excuse an absence after receiving a request from such member. The mayor may excuse an absence after receiving a request from a chairman of a board or commission. Any member whose absence is validly excused by a chairman of a board or commission, or mayor as the case may be, shall be deemed to be in attendance at the meeting for the sole purpose of determining whether a member has had three consecutive absences. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3; L.L. No. 6-1975, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 6-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4. - Enclosure of information of public interest in village bills authorized. 
(a)  Enclosures may be included with the village tax bills or water bills. 
(b)  Such enclosures shall consist only of public information which is of interest to the local residents. 
(c)  Such enclosures, bulletins, circulars or brochures shall be of a nonpartisan nature and shall reflect no one political philosophy or the furtherance thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 2-5; L.L. No. 7-1968) 
Sec. 2-5. - Conduct of village business, affairs. 
    The conduct of business and affairs of the village shall be through departments, boards, commissions and/or committees established and organized for the purpose by resolution of the village board of trustees. Each such department shall be under the supervision of a member of the village board of trustees appointed for that purpose. 
(Code 1978, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-6. - Removal of papers from village offices. 
    No person shall carry out or remove any papers, plans, specifications, documents or records of any property whatsoever belonging to the village, from any of the village offices or rooms, in the respective departments where such papers, specifications, plans, documents or records properly belong, except under the direction of the mayor or village board of trustees, or pursuant to court subpoena served upon the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-7. - Failure to pay fees or charges due village. 
    Any fees or charges under this Code which are due the village and not paid will be added to the tax roll. 
(Code 1978, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-8. - Memorial Day observance. 
(a)  The board of trustees may appropriate in any year an amount as hereinafter provided for the purpose of defraying the expense of the proper observance of Memorial or Declaration Day which amount shall be assessed, levied and collected in the same manner as other village expenses. 
(b)  The amount which may be so appropriated in any year shall not exceed the sum of $750.00. 
(c)  Such monies shall be expended by the board of trustees, except that the board of trustees may designate the American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars, AMVETS, American Veterans of World War II, or similar organizations, or more than one of such organizations to have charge of such observance and may pay the expense of such within the limits herein provided to the organization designated upon the voucher of one or more of the officers of such organization when duly approved by it. 
(d)  A designation of an organization shall be made by resolution of the board of trustees and shall be on such conditions as the board of trustees determines to be in the best interests of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 2-9; L.L. No. 5-1978, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9. - Procedure for enacting zoning amendments. 
    Every amendment to appendix B to the village Code constituting the zoning law of the village enacted by the village board shall be posted conspicuously at or near the main entrance to the office of the village clerk-treasurer for a period of ten days after its enactment. There shall be no requirement to publish the amendment or any map incorporated or referred to therein in any official newspaper. Reference to the enactment of the local law which makes the amendment shall be reflected in the minutes of the village board. The local law will take effect with the filing of same in accordance with Municipal Home Rule Law and upon posting. Such local law shall take effect, in any event from the date of its service as against a person served personally with a true copy of same. The section supersedes Village Law § 7-706(2.). 
(Code 1978, § 2-10; L.L. No. 3-1989, § 2) 
State Law reference- Authority to supersede provisions in Village Law, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1.(ii)e.(3)). 
Secs. 2-10-2-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Village boards generally, Village Law § 4-412. 

Sec. 2-39. - Election; terms. 
    Elections for two members of the board of trustees shall be held biennially on the third Tuesday in June of even-numbered years. Members shall hold office for four years. 
(Code 1978, § 2-19; Res. of 9-16-1974, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-40. - Meeting times. 
    Regular meetings of the board shall be at 6:30 p.m., local time, on the first and third Mondays of each month, except that there shall be no first Monday meetings during June, July and August of each year. 
(Code 1978, § 2-20; Mo. of 4-17-1961; Res. of 4-7-1975) 
Sec. 2-41. - Meetings to be public; exception. 
    All meetings of the village board of trustees shall be open to the public; provided, however, that the board shall have the authority to sit in executive session, which session shall be closed to the public. 
(Code 1978, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-42. - Rules for conduct of meetings. 
    The village board of trustees shall determine and prescribe the rules for the conduct of its meetings and the order of business thereat. 
(Code 1978, § 2-22) 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe rules, Village Law § 4-412(2.). 
Sec. 2-43. - Minutes of meetings. 
    The village clerk-treasurer shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the village board of trustees, which journal shall be open to public inspection in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
Sec. 2-44. - Standing committees of village board. 
    At its first meeting in each official year, the village board of trustees by resolution shall establish the standing committees of the board, and shall prescribe the functions and duties thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 2-21) 
State Law reference- Official year, Village Law § 3-302(1.). 
Sec. 2-45. - Appointment of chairman of standing committees. 
    At the meeting of the village board of trustees described in section 2-44, the mayor shall appoint one trustee as chairman of each standing committee established by the board. 
(Code 1978, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-46. - Compensation. 
    The annual salary of each trustee of the village shall be as may be set from time to time by the village board of trustees per adoption of budget in accordance with the procedure set forth in the village law, per April 16, 1984, and kept on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-26; L.L. No. 3-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 12-1980, § 1; Res. of 5-7-1984) 
Secs. 2-47-2-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-67. - Salary establishment procedure for elected officials. 
    The board of trustees of the village shall fix the salaries of all elected officers through the inclusion of said salaries in the schedule of wages set forth in the budget and upon the adoption of said budget in accordance with the procedure set forth in the Village Law, said salary shall be thereby fixed. 
(Code 1978, § 2-37; L.L. No. 8-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 2-68. - Treasurer's term; position of deputy treasurer created. 
    The term of office of the village treasurer shall be four years. 
(1)  The position of deputy treasurer in the village is hereby created, and the term of office of the deputy treasurer shall be one year. 
(2)  The deputy treasurer is authorized to act in the absence of the clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-38; Res. of 9-16-1974, § 5; Res. of 11-1-1999; L.L. No. 2-1999) 
State Law reference- Terms of office, Village Law § 3-302; treasurer, Village Law § 4-408. 
Sec. 2-69. - Clerk's term; position of deputy clerk created. 
    The term of office of the village clerk shall be four years. 
(1)  The position of deputy clerk in the village is hereby created, and the term of office of the deputy clerk shall be one year. 
(2)  The deputy clerk is authorized to act in the absence of the clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-39; Res. of 9-16-1974, § 5; Res. of 11-1-1999; L.L. No. 2-1999) 
State Law reference- Terms of office, Village Law § 3-302; clerk, Village Law § 4-402. 
Sec. 2-70. - Expense money restrictions. 
(a)  The clerk-treasurer is authorized to advance such sums as are reasonably necessary to all employees, officers or officials to finance official travel expenses by such person. The amount of any such advance shall not exceed $200.00 unless specifically authorized by the village board of trustees. 
(b)  A person seeking such an advance shall apply to the clerk-treasurer for such advance on such forms as may be required by him, and shall account to the clerk-treasurer for the expenses of such travel and repay any unexpended funds to the village within five days after returning from such travel. The clerk-treasurer is hereby authorized to make payment of any such advance. 
(c)  The village may withhold from the salary of any official, officer or employee the amount of any unreturned advance where the advance exceeds actual reimbursable expenses and such official, officer or employee fails to return the excess within a period of time to be specified by the board. 
(Code 1978, § 2-40; Res. of 4-1-1969) 
Sec. 2-71. - Refusing to obey or resisting officers in discharge of duty prohibited. 
    No person shall refuse to obey or shall resist any officer or employee of the village in the discharge of his duty. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 15; Code 1978, § 2-41) 
State Law reference- Obstructing government administration, Penal Law § 195.05. 
Sec. 2-72. - Pension benefits. 
    The village hereby elects to come under the provisions of Retirement and Social Security Law § 75-b, in relation to establishing noncontributory retirement plans and ordinary death benefits for state employees and members of participating employees"; the members' contributions in the employ of the village shall be suspended and the effective date of such suspension shall be the payroll period beginning on May 24, 1970. 
(Code 1978, § 2-42; Res. of 5-19-1970) 
Editor's note- Subsequent to the resolution of May 19, 1970, the village has adopted various additional benefits relating to the pension and retirement plan. Such resolutions are not included herein, but may be found on file in the village offices. 
Sec. 2-73. - Guaranteed ordinary death benefits. 
    The village hereby elects to provide the benefits of Retirement and Social Security Law § 360-b, as presently or hereafter amended, to become effective with the payroll period beginning on June 3, 1973. 
(Code 1978, § 2-43; Res. of 5-30-1973) 
Sec. 2-74. - Work hours. 
    Normal work hours for village employees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Department of public works: 
a.  Eight-hour day. 
b.  One-half hour unpaid lunch. 
c.  40-hour week unless otherwise scheduled by the department head. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Administrative offices: 
a.  35-hour to 40-hour week. 
b.  One hour unpaid lunch. 
c.  Unless otherwise scheduled by department head: 
1.  Overtime will be paid after 40 hours have been worked. 
2.  Holidays, vacation days and jury days will be counted as days worked. 
(Code 1978, § 2-44; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 5-28-1981; Res. of 12-21-1981) 
Sec. 2-75. - Holidays. 
    Nonunion full-time village employees shall receive holidays subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Scheduled holidays: New Year's Day; Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Patriots Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day, July fourth; Labor Day; Columbus Day, Veterans Day; Thanksgiving Day and the day after; Christmas Day; Good Friday; Christmas Eve, one-half day in the afternoon; New Year's Eve, one-half day in the afternoon. 
(2)  One floating holiday, the time to be chosen by the employee, subject to approval by the department head. 
(3)  A holiday falling on a Saturday shall be celebrated on the preceding Friday. 
(4)  A holiday falling on Sunday shall be celebrated on the following Monday. 
(5)  An employee may, with the permission of the department head and board, observe a holiday one day other than the actual day of holiday; providing essential and adequate services are covered. 
(6)  Pay for time off and straight time plus holiday pay for work on a holiday with the stipulation that one must work as scheduled the day before and the day after a holiday unless excusably absent. 
(Code 1978, § 2-45; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978) 
Sec. 2-76. - Vacations. 
    Full-time village employees shall be entitled to vacations in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Eligible vacation will be taken within the fiscal year June 1 through May 31. 
(2)  Vacation requests shall be submitted to the department head in writing by May 1. 
(3)  Seniority will normally be the basis for scheduling. 
(4)  An employee's vacation time will be based on the following schedule, after completion of the stipulated continuous service: 
Years of Service Vacation 1 1 week 2 2 weeks 5 3 weeks 10 3 weeks, plus 1 day with an additional day per year to a maximum of 4 weeks 15 4 weeks, plus 1 day, with an additional day per year to a maximum of 5 weeks 20 5 weeks  
(5)  After ten years of service an employee is permitted to carry over one week of his three weeks to add to another year's eligibility to make a total of four weeks vacation. This and any extended vacation schedule must be with the approval of the department head. 
(6)  Eligibility for vacations. An employee must have accumulated six months of active employment to be eligible for vacation in the following year. 
(7)  A holiday falling during vacation will result in an extra day's pay. 
(8)  In addition to regular vacation, when an employee leaves village service during the course of the year, for reasons of retirement or death, he shall receive a vacation credit of one day for each month worked during the fiscal year not to exceed ten days for an employee. 
(Code 1978, § 2-246; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 5-28-1981; Res. of 5-7-1984) 
Sec. 2-77. - Jury pay. 
    Employees of the village shall be eligible for jury pay based on the difference between their basic hourly pay for a 40-hour workweek and the jury pay for actual time spent on jury services. 
(Code 1978, § 2-47; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978) 
Sec. 2-78. - Military leave allowance. 
(a)  Permanent employees of the village shall be eligible for military leave allowance based on the following schedule: 
Years of Service Allowance 1 1 week 2 2 weeks  
(b)  The basis for payment of military leave allowance shall be as follows: the amount shall be the amount payable for a 40-hour week less the amount received as base military pay for a week multiplied by the number of weeks of allowance as determined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 2-48; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 3-21-1994) 
Sec. 2-79. - Sick leave allowance. 
    Full-time employees of the village shall be eligible for sick leave allowance in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  On completion of 90 days of service, three days. 
(2)  One additional day is added for each month thereafter up to a maximum of one 200 days. 
(3)  Verification: 
a.  Sick leave allowance commences with the first day of illness provided the employee is hospitalized. 
b.  Paid from first day if verified by a physician. 
c.  No pay if not verified by a physician until the fourth day and then no pay unless verified by a physician. 
(4)  No sick leave allowance will be paid if vacation, holiday or other benefits have been paid for the same day. 
(5)  Benefits such as compensation or NYS disability will be deducted from sick leave allowance. 
(6)  Sick leave may only be used for actual illness. 
(7)  Upon the recommendation of his supervisor, after all sick time and vacation time have been exhausted, a full-time employee who has been continuously employed by the village for five years will be granted by the village board of trustees one-half pay (one-half salary or 20 hours weekly) for six months. 
(8)  Two accumulated sick days may be used each year for illness of an immediate family member. Up to ten days of unused family illness days may be accumulated. Immediate family is defined under section 2-81(b). 
(9)  In addition to regular sick leave allowance when an employee leaves village service during the course of the year, for reasons of retirement or death, he shall receive one day's salary for every ten unused sick days not to exceed 200 accumulated unused sick days. 
(Code 1978, § 2-49; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 6-16-1980; Res. of 11-15-1982; Res. of 6-1-1983; Res. of 5-7-1984) 
Sec. 2-80. - Personal leave. 
    Village employees shall be eligible for three days per year of personal leave, if necessary, after one year of service, subject to approval of each employee's department head. The employee must give sufficient notice. Such leave is not cumulative, and may not be used in conjunction with other types of leave. 
(Code 1978, § 2-50; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 6-16-1980) 
Sec. 2-81. - Funeral leave. 
(a)  An employee with 30 or more days service is eligible for five days with pay for funeral arrangements for the employee's immediate family. 
(b)  The term "immediate family," for purposes of this section, means wife, husband, children, parents of the employee or spouse, brothers and sisters of the employee or spouse, step-children. 
(c)  An employee with 30 or more days service is eligible for three days with pay for funeral arrangements for the employee's extended family. 
(d)  The term "extended family," for purposes of this section, means grandparents, grandchildren, great grandparents, great grandchildren, first cousins, uncles, aunts, nieces and nephews of the employee or spouse. 
(Code 1978, § 2-51; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978) 
Sec. 2-82. - Overtime meal allowance. 
    Six dollars, or more at the supervisor's discretion, will be allowed a village employee for meals if the employee works two hours not within the employee's normal scheduled hours. The $6.00 or more must be spent on a meal, the tab to be presented to the clerk-treasurer for petty cash allowance. The money shall not be spent on alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1978, § 2-52; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 6-16-1980; Res. of 5-7-1984; Res. of 3-19-1990) 
Sec. 2-83. - Health and life insurance benefits. 
(a)  For full-time employees, health insurance options may be established from time to time by the village board of trustees, and such options shall be on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  Part-time employees can enjoy the privilege of participation in the health insurance plans available as established by the village through full reimbursement of the premium cost to the village. No flexible spending accounts will be funded by the village for part-time employees. All employees who join the plan are, upon leaving, eligible to remain in the plan for nine months after severance provided they reimburse the village. 
(c)  Upon retirement, at age 55 years (minimum), the village will pay the following portions of the most favorable rate health insurance coverage costs: 
Years of Employment Village 
(percent) Member 
(percent) 10 25 75 15 50 50 20 75 25 25 100 0  
Flexible spending accounts will not continue to be maintained by the village for employees after their retirement. 
(Code 1978, § 2-53; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 6-16-1980; Res. of 5-7-1984; Res. of 5-20-1985; Res. of 1-23-1989; Res. of 5-31-1989; Res. of 4-15-1991; Res. of 12-18-1995; Res. of 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 2-84. - Reports regarding employee absences and vacations. 
    Each department head shall: 
(1)  Prepare a monthly report, by employee, showing absences, by type, during the month and eligible time coming by type, as of the end of each month. Such reports are to be filed with the clerk-treasurer by the end of the fifth working day of each new month. 
(2)  Prepare a master vacation schedule and file with the clerk-treasurer by July 1. Schedule changes are permitted with approval of department heads and mayor. 
(Code 1978, § 2-54; Res. of 6-1-1974; Res. of 4-17-1978) 
Sec. 2-85. - Longevity pay. 
    Long-term full-time employees of the village who have completed the requisite number of years of continuous full-time employment prior to the beginning of the fiscal year shall be eligible for longevity pay in accordance with the following schedule. Longevity pay shall annually be paid to those eligible employees on the first regular payday in December, and the amount shall be included in the regular paycheck. 
Years of service completed 
prior to start of fiscal year Annual longevity 
pay amount 10 $100.00 15  150.00 20  200.00 25  250.00 30  300.00  
(Code 1978, § 2-55; Res. of 6-16-1975; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 4-18-1988) 
Sec. 2-86. - Mileage allowance. 
    Mileage allowance for the approved use of personal vehicles shall be in accordance with the standard of the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
(Code 1978, § 2-56; Res. of 4-17-1978; Res. of 7-16-1979; Res. of 5-28-1981; Res. of 5-29-1992) 
Sec. 2-87. - Residency requirements. 
    Before an appointment to a position as an employee of the village in the competitive class, as defined by the Civil Service Law, a person shall first be a resident of the village and any person so appointed must during the employee's tenure remain a village resident, subject to the restrictions of Public Officers Law §§ 3, 30. When any such employee shall cease to be a resident of the village of said position shall thereby become vacant. The village board of trustees, at its discretion, may waive the residency requirement. 
(Code 1978, § 2-58; L.L. No. 8-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 2-88. - Sexual harassment. 
(a)  The village finds that sexual harassment in the workplace is not merely an offensive working condition; it is against the law and is a violation of Section 703 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and the New York State Human Rights Law (Executive Law § 290 et seq.). 
(b)  In accordance with the equal employment opportunity commission guidelines, unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature will constitute sexual harassment when: 
(1)  Submission to the conduct is either an explicit or implicit term or condition of employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as a basis for an employment decision affecting the person rejecting or submitting to the conduct; or 
(3)  The conduct has the purpose or affect of unreasonably interfering with an affected person's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. 
(c)  Any individual believing himself to have been sexually harassed shall set forth all pertinent facts in writing and submit it to his immediate supervisor and the board of trustees inasmuch as sexual harassment is considered employee misconduct and sanctions will be taken against individuals engaging in such actions. Complaints will be investigated and disciplinary action will be determined by the board of trustees. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge upon nor limit or abridge the rights of any person under the United States or State of New York Constitutions or the statutes of the United States or the state. 
(Code 1978, § 2-59; L.L. No. 4-1998) 
Secs. 2-89-2-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Responsibilities of mayor, Village Law § 4-400. 

Sec. 2-113. - Election; term. 
    The mayor shall be elected on the third Tuesday in June of appropriate even-numbered years and shall hold office for four years. 
(Code 1978, § 2-63; Res. of 9-16-1974, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Terms of office, Village Law § 3-302. 
Sec. 2-114. - Compensation. 
    The mayor's annual salary shall be as may be set from time to time by the village board of trustees per adoption of the budget in accordance with the procedure set forth in the Village Law, per April 16, 1984, and kept on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-64; L.L. No. 3-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 12-1980, § 2; Res. of 5-7-1984) 
Sec. 2-115. - Removal of appointees. 
    The mayor may remove for cause, after public hearing, all persons appointed by him. 
(Code 1978, § 2-65) 
Secs. 2-116-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt code of ethics, General Municipal Law § 806. 

Sec. 2-141. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to implement the objective of assuring the highest caliber of public administration of this village through the establishment of standards of conduct, and this is enacted pursuant to authority contained in General Municipal Law art. 18. 
(Code 1978, § 2-71; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 1) 
Sec. 2-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Village means any board, commission, district, council or other agency, department or unit of the government of the village. 
    Village employee means any officer or employee of the village, whether paid or unpaid and whether serving in a full-time, part-time or advisory capacity. 
(Code 1978, § 2-72; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 3) 
Sec. 2-143. - Prohibited conflicts of interest. 
    No village employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature, which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest. 
(Code 1978, § 2-73; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 4) 
Sec. 2-144. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Disclosure of interest. Each village employee shall, to the extent that he is cognizant thereof, disclose in writing on the form as prescribed by the village clerk-treasurer, any interest he may have in legislation or a decision pending before the village. Such disclosure statement shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer and with the village board, agency, commission or governmental organization with whom the conflict arose and such statement shall become a public record. 
(b)  Investments. No village employee shall hold investments in any enterprise which will be in conflict with his official duties. 
(c)  Other employment. No village employee shall accept other employment which will be in conflict with his official duties. 
(d)  Termination of employment. No village employee, after termination of his services or employment with the village, shall accept employment which will be detrimental to the village or in direct conflict with his prior village relationship. 
(Code 1978, § 2-74; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 5) 
Sec. 2-145. - Distribution of copies of division to employees. 
    The mayor shall cause a copy of this division to be distributed to every village employee. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any village employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with this division, nor the enforcement of provisions hereof. The mayor shall further cause a copy of this division to be kept posted conspicuously in the municipal building under the jurisdiction of the village. Failure to so post this division shall have no effect on the duty of compliance herewith, nor the enforcement provisions hereof. 
(Code 1978, § 2-75; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 7) 
Sec. 2-146. - Applicability of other laws. 
    The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established in this division are in addition to any prohibited acts, conflicts of interest provisions or procedures prescribed by statute of the state and also in addition to common law rules and judicial decisions relating to the conduct of village officers to the extent the same are more severe in their application than this division. 
(Code 1978, § 2-76; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 2) 
Sec. 2-147. - Violations; penalties. 
    In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any village employee who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this division may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1978, § 2-77; L.L. No. 3-1970, § 6) 
Secs. 2-148-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LEGAL DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Defense and indemnification of officers and employees of public entities, Public Officers Law § 18. 

Sec. 2-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee, as used in this division, unless the context otherwise requires, means any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the village, whether or not compensated, but shall not include an independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative. 
    Legal expenses includes reasonable attorney's fees and all costs and disbursements necessary to the subject action, but does not include any costs or expenses of the plaintiff, or damages awarded to the plaintiff, should said plaintiff be successful in his action. 
(Code 1978, § 2-81; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 2) 
Sec. 2-182. - Conditions of defense. 
(a)  Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of this division, the village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the village. 
(b)  Subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the counsel retained by the village, provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil, judicial proceeding whenever retained village counsel determines, based on his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation by the village-retained counsel would be inappropriate, or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be represented by the counsel of his choice. The village shall notify the employee, in writing, of said determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel. The village may require as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same counsel. Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the village to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding subject to certification by the board of trustees that the employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this division. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or reasonableness of attorney's fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding. 
(c)  Where the employee delivers process and a request for defense to the village as required by this division, the village should take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel under the terms and conditions provided herein, on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any questions pertaining to the obligation to provide a defense. 
(Code 1978, § 2-82; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 2) 
Sec. 2-183. - Indemnification-Generally. 
(a)  The village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of any judgment obtained against such employee in any state or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of the claim, provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose, occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this division shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrong doings or recklessness on the part of the employee. 
(b)  An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be submitted to the board of trustees any proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification by the village; and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, the board of trustees shall review such proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give its approval if, in its judgment the settlement is in the best interest of the village. Nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize the village to indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by the board of trustees. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall authorize the village to indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties, or money recovered from an employee pursuant to State Finance Law art. 7. 
(d)  Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon the settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered mail, within ten days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the mayor and village clerk-treasurer; and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, the judgment or settlement shall be paid. 
(Code 1978, § 2-83; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 2) 
Sec. 2-184. - Same-Conditions; subject to review. 
(a)  The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this division shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Delivery to the village clerk-treasurer by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five days after he is served with such document; and 
(2)  The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in the defense of any action or proceeding against the village, based upon the same act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal. 
Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the village provide for his defense pursuant to this division. 
(b)  A determination by the board of trustees that the employee is not entitled to a defense under the provisions of this division shall be reviewable in a court of law. 
(Code 1978, § 2-84; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 2) 
Sec. 2-185. - Construction of division. 
(a)  The benefits of this division shall enure only to the employees as defined in section 2-181 and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party nor shall any provision of this division be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provisions of the Worker's Compensation Law. 
(b)  This division shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to give notice to the village under General Municipal Law § 50 or any other provisions of law. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted. 
(e)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, the provisions of this division shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any department officer or employee of the village or any right to defense and/or indemnification provided for any municipal officer or employee by, in accordance with or by reason of, any other provisions of state or federal statutory or common law. 
(Code 1978, § 2-85; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 2) 
Secs. 2-186-2-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law § 84 et seq. 

Sec. 2-209. - Records access officer. 
    The village clerk-treasurer is designated records access officer. 
(Code 1978, § 2-89; Res. of 3-17-1975, § 1; Res. of 5-20-1996) 
Sec. 2-210. - Appeal from denial of access to records. 
    The village attorney shall respond to appeals for denial of access to records. 
(Code 1978, § 2-94; Res. of 3-17-1975, § 4; Res. of 5-20-1996) 
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BINGO[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local option for conduct of bingo by certain organizations, General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.; Bingo Control Law, Executive Law § 430 et seq. 

Sec. 3-19. - License required. 
    No person other than a licensee under the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 14-H (General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.), shall conduct a game of bingo or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting a bingo hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect. 
(Code 1978, § 4-16; Ord. of 3-17-1958, §§ 300.00, 300.10; Res. of 4-15-1963) 
Sec. 3-20. - Application for license; investigation; issuance; revocation. 
    Licenses required under this article shall be applied for, the applicants investigated, hearings held and licenses issued, suspended or revoked, pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 14-H (General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.). 
(Code 1978, § 4-17; Ord. of 3-17-1958, § 300.30) 
Sec. 3-21. - Restrictions on conduct of games. 
    Bingo games conducted under this article shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Prohibited lease arrangements. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid wholly or partly on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game. 
(2)  Use of proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same. 
(3)  Prize limit for single games. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000.00 in any single game of bingo. 
(4)  Prize limit for series. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more than $3,000.00. 
(5)  Permitted management personnel. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in the management or operation of such game. 
(6)  Authorized suppliers. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 14-H shall purchase, lease or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law Executive Law art. 19-B or from another authorized organization. 
(7)  Compensation for management prohibited. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or operation of any game of bingo. 
(8)  Violations. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of any provision of this article shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(9)  Suppliers. No person licensed to sell bingo supplies or equipment, or their agents, shall conduct, participate in, or assist in the conduct of bingo. Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensed distributor from selling, offering for sale, or explaining a product to an authorized organization, or installing, or servicing bingo equipment, upon the premises of a bingo game licensee. 
(10)  Limited period bingo. Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 14-H and the rules and regulations of the state racing and wagering board. 
(11)  Statutory restrictions. Any and all other restrictions shall be as established by General Municipal Law art. 14-G or any amendments thereto establishing further restrictions. 
(Code 1978, § 4-18; Ord. of 3-17-1958, § 300.20; Res. of 4-15-1963) 
Sec. 3-22. - Applicability of state laws. 
    This article shall be subject to the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 14-H (General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.) or any amendments thereto; and further subject to the provisions of the Bingo Control Law (Executive Law § 430 et seq.) or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1978, § 4-19; Ord. of 3-17-1958, § 300.40) 
Secs. 3-23-3-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAMES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 3-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Games and amusements devices means any electric, mechanical, computerized, electronic or other device, machine or implement which is either designed and intended, or used, operated or maintained, as a game, amusement or means of entertainment, including, but not limited to, the following: pinball machines, shooting galleries, computerized games, electronic games, skillboards, billiard or pool tables, electronic bowling or shuffleboard tables, table top bowling alleys and casino-type games. 
(Code 1978, § 4-20; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2) 
Sec. 3-49. - Licenses and permits; conditions of licensing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, store, possess, use, operate or maintain any game or amusement device for commercial or business purposes, in or upon any premises within the village except in conformity with the provisions of this article and only after having previously obtained all licenses and permits as required herein. 
(b)  A separate premises permit shall be required for each building, facility, structure or other premises in which games or amusement devices are owned, leased, stored, possessed, used, operated or maintained. 
(c)  Applications for permits and licenses shall be made in writing on forms provided by the village clerk-treasurer, and shall be filed in the office of the village clerk-treasurer during regular business hours. Every such application shall provide for such information as the board of trustees may, from time to time, direct or require by rule, resolution or order. No application shall be accepted for filing unless fully completed, signed and notarized, and unless accompanied by payment of all application fees provided for elsewhere in this section. 
(d)  No license or permit may be granted or issued pursuant to this section unless and until all of the provisions of this article are fully complied with. In addition to the foregoing requirement, the board of trustees, as licensing body, shall consider the following factors before passing upon any application hereunder: the possible effects on the public health, peace, safety, comfort and welfare, including, but not limited to, the size, floor area, design and location of the premises; the nature and type of game or amusement device proposed to be used; the proposed hours and days of operation; the proximity of residential uses; the impact on municipal services, facilities and public areas; compatibility with surrounding business uses; potential increase in pedestrian and vehicular traffic; the adequacy of existing and proposed fire safety devices, such as sprinklers, alarms, extinguishers and fire exits; the potential for increased noise and other noxious disturbances; and compliance with all fire, building, zoning, plumbing and other ordinances and laws. 
(e)  Issuance; renewal. 
(1)  In the event that the board of trustees shall deem it advisable to grant the application for a permit or license, the village clerk-treasurer, after payment of the annual fees for licenses and permits provided for elsewhere in this section, shall issue the appropriate license and/or permit. Licenses and permits shall be issued on an annual basis only, and shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, and no such license or permit shall be transferable. 
(2)  In the event that a license or permit issued hereunder shall not be renewed, and the annual renewal fee paid therefor, on or before January 15 next succeeding the date of expiration of such license or permit, then the same shall be null and void and of no further force or effect, and the holder thereof shall be required to file a new application, and pay a new application fee, before any such license or permit may be validly reinstated by the board of trustees and lawfully reissued and renewed by the village clerk-treasurer. 
(3)  If a license for game/amusement devices is issued, it shall be applicable to all game/amusement devices permitted upon a particular premises and shall set forth the maximum number of game/amusement devices that may be placed therein. Should a licensee have on his premises a number of game/amusement devices in excess of that permitted by the license, it shall constitute one of the grounds for suspension or revocation of the license and permit under section 3-52. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  The fees required under the provision of this section shall be as follows: 
a.  For each application for a premises permit, the sum of $25.00; 
b.  For each application for a game/amusement device license, the sum of $20.00; 
c.  For each premises permit, the sum of $100.00 annually for each such permit; and 
d.  For premises having games/amusement devices, for each game/amusement device authorized by license, the sum of $35.00 annually, the sum thereof representing the total annual license fee. 
(2)  All fees provided for herein shall be nonrefundable and without proration. 
(3)  The board of trustees may, from time to time, amend, repeal, abolish or otherwise modify any fee provided for herein by order or resolution of the board. Except for good cause shown, and unless specifically provided for therein no such order or resolution shall be retroactive, in either its effect or application, from the date of its adoption. 
(g)  The building inspector or such other designee of the village board of trustees shall periodically review and examine each premises for which a premises permit has been issued to assure full compliance with the provisions of this law and will provide a report of all violations discovered to the board promptly. 
(Code 1978, § 4-21; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1982, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 4-1988, § 1; L.L. No. 01-2002) 
Sec. 3-50. - Location restrictions relating to the use, operation, etc., of games and amusement devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, store, possess, use, operate or maintain any game or amusement device for business and for commercial purposes within the village and no license or permit shall be granted or issued therefor, within any of the following restricted locations or premises: 
(1)  Any area of the village which is zoned for a use classification other than general business classification under the zoning laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of the village; 
(2)  Any area within a 500-foot radius of any school, nursery, day care center, church, synagogue, public park or playground, library, hospital or clinic, public building or community center, or nursing home; 
(3)  Any open area, open court or other mandatory open portion on any lot, plot or premises; 
(4)  Any area within a 250-foot radius of any place or premises, other than a bar or bar-restaurant, in which any game or amusement device is currently and lawfully used, stored, owned, leased, possessed, operated or maintained under a valid license or permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(5)  Within or upon any place, premises or building, other than a bar or bar-restaurant, in which any type of food, beverage, liquor or alcoholic beverage is or may be sold, offered for sale, purchased, dispensed, served or consumed, or in which the same is permitted to be brought into or possessed in or upon any part or portion of such place, premises or building; 
(6)  Within or upon any place, premises or building, any part or portion of which is designed, constructed, altered, intended, used or maintained as or for a residential dwelling or apartment, whether or not the same shall be segregated from the remainder of such premises, and whether or not the same shall be located on the same or a different floor of such building or premises as the remaining portion thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment actually licensed by the village for the use, operation or maintenance of any game or amusement device installed and in operation prior to October 1, 1982, solely in respect to any such game or amusement device actually covered under the provisions of any such license for a period of six months from October 1, 1982, unless extended by resolution of the board of trustees. Upon the expiration of the term provided for hereby, or the expiration of the term specified in a resolution adopted by the board of trustees, if any, this section shall apply fully, with equal force and effect to every person, place, premises and building within the village. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, store, possess, use, operate or maintain any game or amusement device for business or commercial purposes within the village and no license or permit shall be granted or issued therefor where the intended scope of operations or existing operations: 
(1)  Permit a person under the age of 16 years to be permitted on said premises during the hours when schools are in session, and during the time when the curfew is in effect as provided by section 12-44. 
(2)  When the premises shall be open for operation between the hours of midnight and 9:00 a.m. or any part thereof. 
(3)  When insufficient adult supervisory employees are on premises. 
(Code 1978, § 4-22; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1982, § 3) 
Sec. 3-51. - Area requirements. 
    Every game and amusement device within the village shall be so situated and placed within and upon a premises that it shall not: 
(1)  Block or otherwise obstruct any window, door, doorway, ventilating duct, fire exit, boiler, furnace, radiator, baseboard or other heater device, stairs or stairway, toilet or other sanitary facility; 
(2)  Obstruct, encumber or otherwise interfere with the free, clear passage of any person into, through, or from such premises; or 
(3)  Have an open, unobstructed area, surrounding such game or device, from floor to ceiling, of less than five feet, measured from each of the actual exterior sides of every such game or device, except the one side (and no more than one) which is placed near or against a wall or partition. 
(Code 1978, § 4-23; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2) 
Sec. 3-52. - Suspension or revocation; appeals. 
(a)  Any license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this law may be suspended or revoked by order of the board of trustees or by order of the village clerk-treasurer or building inspector for a violation of any of the provisions of this law. The effective date of any such revocation or suspension shall be the date of service of a written notice of same, and such notice shall be deemed served, in compliance with this section, on the date that same shall be either personally served or delivered to the person to whom the license or permit was issued, or on the date such notice is mailed, return receipt requested, by either certified or registered mail, to the last known address of the holder thereof as the same shall appear on the most recent application for such license or permit. 
(b)  Any person whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked, pursuant to the provisions herein, shall have the right to a hearing before the board of trustees to review such suspension or revocation, provided that such person files a written petition requesting such hearing in the office of the clerk-treasurer within 30 days of the date of service of the notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section. The board of trustees, within 30 days of the date of filing of such petition, shall fix the date for such hearing, and shall hold the same, and render its decision thereon within 60 days of the date of the hearing. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked, or whose license or permit has become null and void after expiration and nonrenewal thereof, to use, operate or maintain any game or amusement device for business or commercial purposes, or to allow any other person to use, operate or maintain the same, within the village, during any period of time after which such license or permit has been suspended, revoked or become null and void, and before which such license and permit has been actually and validly reissued, reinstated or restored. 
(Code 1978, § 4-24; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2) 
Sec. 3-53. - Off-street parking. 
    In addition to the parking requirements contained in the zoning law of the village as set forth in appendix B, section 12 no license or permit shall be issued or granted for the premises or devices until provision has been made for two parking spaces for each such game or amusement device permitted by this law. Such parking spaces shall be regulated pursuant to the provisions of appendix B, section 12. 
(Code 1978, § 4-25; L.L. No. 4-1981, § 2) 
Sec. 3-54. - Variance of strict applicability of restrictions. 
    Upon consideration of the granting of an application for permit or license, the board of trustees after considering the factors described in section 3-49(d) and upon a proper showing by the applicant that the strict application of the restrictions contained in section 3-50 would cause undue hardship, the board of trustees may vary by waiver or modification of the strict application of the requirements contained in section 3-50. 
(Code 1978, § 4-26; L.L. No. 6-1986, § 1) 
Sec. 3-55. - Waiver of article for existing premises. 
    The village board may, in its sole discretion by resolution, waive the applicability of any provision contained in sections 3-50, 3-51 and 3-53 to a premises which has in use and in operation a game or amusement device on the effective date of L.L. No. 6-1986. 
Secs. 3-56-3-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAMES OF CHANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Local Law No. 7-1988, which local law is codified in this article, was approved at a referendum held on November 8, 1988, by a majority of the voters voting thereon. 
State Law reference- Games of Chance Licensing Law, General Municipal Law § 185 et seq. 

Sec. 3-84. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law" of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 4-41; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 1) 
Sec. 3-85. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates different meaning: 
    Authorized organization means an authorized organization as defined in General Municipal Law § 186(4.). 
    Games of chance has the same meaning as defined in General Municipal Law § 186(3.). 
(Code 1978, § 4-42; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 3-86. - License; regulations. 
    Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the clerk-treasurer of the village conduct games of chance within the village as provided in General Municipal Law art. 9-A (General Municipal Law § 185 et seq.) and as provided further in this local law. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with the general state law and with the rules and regulations of the state racing and wagering board and this local law. 
(Code 1978, § 4-43; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 3) 
Sec. 3-87. - Signs. 
    No signs advertising the conduct of games of chance within the village shall be permitted except as may be permitted pursuant to the zoning laws of the village and upon complying with the provisions governing same as contained therein. 
(Code 1978, § 4-44; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 4) 
Sec. 3-88. - Conducting games on Sunday. 
    Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as Sunday, may be conducted pursuant to this local law and appropriate statute and regulation. 
(Code 1978, § 4-45; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 5) 
Sec. 3-89. - Control and supervision of games. 
    The chief law enforcement officer of the village shall exercise control over and supervision of all games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such officer shall have all those powers and duties set forth in General Municipal Law art. 9-A (General Municipal Law § 185 et seq.). 
(Code 1978, § 4-46; L.L. No. 7-1988, § 6) 
Sec. 3-90. - Restrictions on conduct of games. 
(a)  License required. No person other than a licensee under the provisions of General Municipal Law § 191, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of chance premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect. 
(b)  Rental based on receipts. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game. 
(c)  Suppliers. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 9-A shall purchase, lease, or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of chance from other than a supplier licensed by the state racing and wagering board or from another authorized organization. Lease terms and conditions shall be subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the board. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to authorize or permit an authorized organization to engage in the business of leasing games of chance, supplies, or equipment. Furthermore, no organization shall purchase bell jar tickets, or deals of bell jar tickets from any other person or organization other than those specifically authorized under General Municipal Law §§ 195-n and 195-o. 
(d)  Use of proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same and the net proceeds of any rental derived therefrom shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the authorized games of chance lessor. 
(e)  Amount of prizes. No single prize awarded by games of chance other than raffles shall exceed the sum or value of $300.00, except for merchandise wheels, no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250.00. No single prize awarded by a raffle shall exceed the sum or value of $50,000.00, except that an authorized organization may award by raffle a single prize having a value of up to and including $100,000.00 if its application for a license filed pursuant to General Municipal Law § 199 includes a statement of its intent to award a prize having such value. No single wager shall exceed $6.00 and for bell jars, coin boards, or merchandise boards, no single prize shall exceed $500.00 provided, however, that such limitation shall not apply to the amount of money or value paid by the participant in a raffle in return for a ticket or other receipt. For coin boards and merchandise boards, the value of a prize shall be determined by its costs to the authorized organization or, if donated, its fair market value. 
(f)  Series of prizes. No authorized organization shall award a series of prizes consisting of cash or of merchandise with an aggregate value in excess of $10,000.00 during the successive operations of any one merchandise wheel, and $3,000.00 during the successive operations of any bell jar, coin board, or merchandise board. No series of prizes awarded by raffle shall have an aggregate value in excess of $100,000.00. For coin boards and merchandise boards, the value of a prize shall be determined by its cost to the authorized organization or, if donated, its fair market value. 
(g)  Games during one license period. In addition to merchandise wheels, raffles and bell jars, no more than five other single types of games of chance shall be conducted during any one license period. 
(h)  Five or more games. Except for merchandise wheels and raffles, no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $400.00 when the licensed authorized organization conducts five single types of games of chance during any one license period. Except for merchandise wheels, raffles and bell jars, no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $500.00 when the licensed authorized organization conducts less than five single types of games of chance, exclusive of merchandise wheels, raffles and bell jars, during any one license period. No authorized organization shall award by raffle prizes with an aggregate value in excess of $100,000.00 during any one license period. 
(i)  Participant's prizes. Except for the limitations on the sum or value for single prizes and series of prizes, no limit shall be imposed on the sum or value of prizes awarded to any one participant during any occasion or any license period. 
(j)  Management, operation of games. No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized organization shall participate in the management of such games; no person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in the operation of such game, as set forth in General Municipal Law § 195-c. 
(k)  Remuneration. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or operation of any such game. 
(l)  Credit. No authorized organization shall extend credit to a person to participate in playing a game of chance. 
(m)  Location; raffle winner. No game of chance shall be conducted on other than the premises of an authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor. Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of raffle tickets to the public outside the premises of an authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor; or in municipalities which have passed a local law, ordinance or resolution in accordance with General Municipal Law §§ 187 and 188 approving the conduct of games of chance that are located in the county in which the municipality issuing the license is located and in the counties which are contiguous to the county in which the municipality issuing the raffle license is located, provided those municipalities have authorized the licensee, in writing, to sell such raffle tickets therein and provided, however, that no sale of raffle tickets shall be made more than 189 days prior to the date scheduled for the occasion at which the raffle will be conducted. The winner of any single prize in a raffle shall not be required to be present at the time such raffle is conducted. 
(n)  Conduct of games by supplier. No person licensed to manufacture, distribute, or sell games of chance supplies or equipment, or their agents, shall conduct, participate in, or assist in the conduct of games of chance. Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensed distributor from selling, offering for sale, or explaining a product to an authorized organization or installing or servicing games of chance equipment upon the premises of games of chance licensees. 
(o)  Violations. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(p)  Coin board, etc. No coins or merchandise from a coin board or merchandise board shall be redeemable or convertible into cash directly or indirectly by the authorized organization. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Municipal Law § 189. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Allowing dangerous animals in public places. 
    No person shall permit any dangerous animal to run at large, nor lead any such animal with a chain or rope or other appliance in any street or public place, whether such animal is muzzled or not. 
(Code 1978, § 5-2) 
Sec. 4-2. - Keeping noisy animals prohibited. 
    No person shall keep or harbor any animal shut up or tied up in any yard, enclosure, stable, house or other place which by barking, howling, bawling or by any other noise disturbs the peace and quiet of any family, individual or neighborhood. 
(Code 1978, § 5-3) 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping vicious, dangerous animals prohibited. 
    No person shall keep or suffer to be kept any type of vicious or dangerous animal, snake or other type of reptile in the village which shall cause injury or fright to any person. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4) 
Sec. 4-4. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  A person who overdrives, overloads, tortures or cruelly beats or unjustifiably injures, maims, mutilates or kills any animal, whether wild or tame, and whether belonging to himself or to another, or deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food or drink, or neglects or refuses to furnish it such sustenance or drink, or causes, procures or permits any animal to be overdriven, overloaded, tortured, cruelly beaten, or unjustifiably injured, maimed, mutilated or killed, or to be deprived of necessary food or drink, or who wilfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal, or any act tending to produce such cruelty, is guilty of a class A misdemeanor and for purposes of Criminal Procedure Law § 160.10(1.(b)) shall be treated as a misdemeanor defined in the penal law. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with any properly conducted scientific tests, experiments or investigations, involving the use of living animals, performed or conducted in laboratories or institutions, which are approved for these purposes by the state commissioner of health. The state commissioner of health shall prescribe the rules under which such approvals shall be granted, including therein standards regarding the care and treatment of any such animals. Such rules shall be published and copies thereof conspicuously posted in each such laboratory or institution. The state commissioner of health or his duly authorized representative shall have the power to inspect such laboratories or institutions to insure compliance with such rules and standards. Each such approval may be revoked at any time for failure to comply with such rules and in any case the approval shall be limited to a period not exceeding one year. 
(Code 1978, § 5-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Agriculture and Markets Law § 353. 
Secs. 4-5-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 4-31. - Adoption of Town of Lewiston law. 
    The provisions of the Dog Control Law of the Town of Lewiston, being Local Law No. 3-1983, as now or hereafter amended are hereby adopted by reference. 
Chapter 5 - AUCTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Auctions and auctioneers, General Business Law § 21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auction means a public sale of property to the highest bidder, except that it shall not include household and garage sales of goods not sold through the auction process. 
    Auctioneer means a person who conducts such a sale as described under "auction" and who must secure a license therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 6-1; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Improper dealing. 
    No auctioneer shall: 
(1)  Make any false representation as to the character, quality, condition, previous history, value or ownership of any property offered for sale. 
(2)  Substitute any other article for the article sold to the bidder. 
(3)  Bid on any property offered for sale by himself, and no person shall act as an accomplice or "capper" for the purpose of making mock bids at any auction. 
(4)  Employ a bellman, crier, instrument of music or means of attracting the attention of passersby, other than a sign or flag, which shall bear the number of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  Conduct any auction sale for a transient merchant or other person who has not procured a permit required by this chapter, or whose permit has expired or been revoked. 
(6)  Refuse to exhibit his permit to any police officer upon demand at the place where an auction is being conducted. 
(7)  Receive for sale by auction or sell by auction any goods, wares or merchandise from or to any minor, knowing him to be a minor. 
(Code 1978, § 6-2) 
Sec. 5-3. - Records. 
(a)  Every auctioneer or person engaged in the business of selling goods at auction, whether acting in his own behalf or as the officer, agent or representative of another, shall, upon the receipt or acceptance by him of any goods for the purpose of sale at auction, and before offering the same or any part thereof for sale at auction, write or cause to be written in a book to be kept by him for such purpose, the name and address of the person who employed him to sell such goods at auction, the name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf or account such goods are to be sold at auction; the name and address of the person from whom such auctioneer received or accepted such goods; the name and address of the person who was the owner, the authorized agent of the owner or the consignor of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance for the purpose of sale at auction of the same by such auctioneer; the location, with street and number, if any, of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance of the same by such auctioneer for the purpose of sale at auction; the date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of such goods for the purpose of sale at auction; the place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be held, kept or stored until sold or offered for sale at auction; the place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be sold or offered for sale at auction; a description of such goods, the quantity thereof and the distinctive marks thereon, if any; the terms and conditions upon which such auctioneer receives or accepts such goods for sale at auction. 
(b)  The word "goods" as used in this section signifies any goods, wares, works of art, commodity, compound or thing, chattels, merchandise or personal property which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale, but shall not include goods damaged at sea or by fire and sold or to be sold for the benefit of the owners, insurers or for the account of whom it may concern or goods sold by virtue of judicial decree. The word "person" as used in this section includes a corporation, joint-stock association or copartnership. Nothing herein shall apply to the sale of real property at auction. The foregoing records shall be in addition to any other records required to be kept pursuant to the uniform commercial code. 
(c)  The record book required by subsection (a) of this section and the entries therein shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the village officials and the district attorney, and any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that purpose by any or either of them and who shall exhibit written authorization therefor to the auctioneer. 
(Code 1978, § 6-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Business Law § 25. 
Secs. 5-4-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 5-16. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction, as defined in section 5-1, in the village without first having secured a permit to so do from the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 6-16; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-2) 
Sec. 5-17. - Application; fees; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to procure a permit to conduct an auction shall file with the village clerk-treasurer a written application. The village clerk-treasurer shall approve or disapprove the application within five days upon payment of a fee of $5.00 for a permit which shall expire 24 hours after issuance. 
(b)  The village clerk-treasurer may also issue a permit for periods of longer duration based on a like charge of $5.00 per 24 hours, or may in his discretion issue a permit for a period of time and indicate thereon the specific dates for which the permit is valid. In any event, the fee charged shall be $5.00 for any 24-hour period that the permit authorizes. 
(Code 1978, § 6-17; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-4) 
Sec. 5-18. - Exemptions from article-Sales pursuant to law. 
    None of the provisions of this article shall apply to the sale of goods or real property by an officer pursuant to law. 
(Code 1978, § 6-18; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-3) 
Sec. 5-19. - Same-After issuance of certain number. 
    Any auctioneer who has secured and paid for 36 permits pursuant to this article within any given 18 months period shall thereafter be considered a regularly established business within the village and not be required to secure, apply for, or request any permit to operate. Proof of the existence, operation and prior applications for permits must be supplied to the village clerk-treasurer by the person or operation so requesting to be considered to be included in this exception. Such proof shall be that which the village clerk-treasurer reasonably believes necessary to establish the applicant's compliance and eligibility for this exception. This exception shall be deemed to run to and with the auctioneer-applicant and shall not be assignable to any other auctioneer or other person without the written consent of the village trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 6-19; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-3a) 
Sec. 5-20. - Conviction of chapter violations to effect forfeiture. 
    Conviction of any violations of this chapter shall constitute and effect an immediate forfeiture of any permit issued pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1978, § 6-20; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 21-5) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, Executive Law § 373. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Demolition and removal of unsafe structures, General Municipal Law § 78-b. 

Sec. 6-16. - Legislative intent. 
    The intent of this article is to promote and preserve a clean, wholesome and attractive environment within the village, which is declared to be of importance to the health, safety and welfare of residents and owners of property located within the village, by providing a method of removal or repair of buildings or structures within the limits of the village, that from any cause may be or shall become dangerous or unsafe to the public. It is further declared that the unrestrained allowance of unsafe buildings and structures is a hazard to such health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village, necessitating the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 7-16; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-1) 
Sec. 6-17. - Dangerous building defined. 
    All of the buildings or structures that have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed, for the purposes of this article, to be dangerous buildings: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more, of damage, deterioration or other signs of decay to the supporting member, or 50 percent of damage, deterioration or other signs of decay to nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the village. 
(5)  Those that have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or the carrying on of the usual occupation or business, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work an injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein or thereby. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of escape. 
(8)  Those which have parts so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or other property. 
(9)  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this village. 
(10)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the zoning regulations of the village, or a special use permit, or any other ordinance or local law of the village. 
(11)  Any building or structure which remains vacant and unattended continuously for a period of 18 months. 
(Code 1978, § 7-17; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-3) 
Sec. 6-18. - Prohibited; declared nuisances. 
(a)  No person owning, possessing or controlling a building or structure in the village shall permit, suffer or allow such building now or hereafter to be or become dangerous or unsafe to the public from any cause whatsoever. 
(b)  All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 6-17 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as hereinbefore mentioned or provided. 
(Code 1978, § 7-18; L.L. No. 4-1968, §§ 40-2, 40-8) 
Sec. 6-19. - Inspection and notice to correct violations. 
    In the event that it shall come to the attention of the board that any building or structure in the village may be dangerous or unsafe to the public, the board shall appoint one of its members or employees as a committee of one to inspect the alleged unsafe building. If the board of trustees adopts the committee report as to an unsafe building, or a dangerous building, then the board shall cause notice to be served on the owner, the owner's agent or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner or the owner's agent or some other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as shown by the records of the receiver of the taxes and/or in the office of the county clerk containing a description of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous, and an order requiring same to be made safe and secure or removed. If such notice is by certified mail, a copy of such notice is to be posted on the premises. Such notice shall require the person served therewith to commence the securing or the removal of such building or structure within 30 days of the service of the notice and to complete the same within 60 days of the service of the notice. 
(Code 1978, § 7-19; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-4) 
Sec. 6-20. - Disregard of section 6-19; notice of survey. 
    In the event of the neglect or refusal of the person served with the notice provided for in section 6-19 to fully comply with the same, a notice of survey shall be served upon such person, in the same manner as indicated in such section, notifying such person that a survey of the premises will be made at the time and place specified in such notice by a person to be named by the board of trustees. The notice shall also state that in the event the building or other structure shall be reported unsafe or dangerous under such a survey, then an application shall be made at a term of the supreme court in this judicial district for an order determining the building or structure or any part thereof to be a public nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured or taken down and removed. 
(Code 1978, § 7-20; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-5) 
Sec. 6-21. - Posting of survey result. 
    A signed copy of the report of the survey carried out pursuant to section 6-20 shall be posted on the building or structure which has been surveyed. 
(Code 1978, § 7-21; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-6) 
Sec. 6-22. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance in the survey of the structure or building pursuant to section 6-20 by the surveyors in determining the condition of the structure or building: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of this article it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance or law of the village or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. 
(Code 1978, § 7-22; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-7) 
Sec. 6-23. - Assessment, collection of costs and expenses. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the removing, demolition, repairing or vacating of any dangerous building or structure, as determined pursuant to this article, including surveyor's costs or fees, attorney's fees, advertising costs, title searches, cost of actually removing or securing such building or structure and all other expenses, shall, when properly certified to and by the board, be audited and paid by the village the same as any other claim against the village. 
(b)  A bill for such expenses shall be presented to the owner or person notified pursuant to this article, or if the same cannot be so served or notified, then by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  If such owner shall fail to pay the same within ten days thereafter, the board of trustees shall file a certificate of the actual expenses incurred as aforesaid together with a statement as to the property in connection with which the expenses were incurred, with the village assessor, who shall, in the preparation of the next assessment roll of general village taxes, assess such amount upon such property and against such building or structure and the lot or land upon which the same is situated, and such bill or amount so levied is to be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties, and have the same lien effect upon such property as the general village tax and as a part thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 7-23; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-9) 
Sec. 6-24. - Emergency action. 
    In cases of great emergency, where the delay of the proceedings provided for in this article would result in probable loss of life or property, the board of trustees shall have the power to proceed at once to take such action as is needed to guard the safety of persons and property. In such cases the board of trustees shall have full power and authority to provide all necessary means therefor and all expenses therefor shall be paid and collected as provided in section 6-23. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the boarding up of an alleged unsafe structure or building, as well as other means of enclosing, blocking, preventing entry or safeguarding either the property or the public. 
(Code 1978, § 7-24; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 40-10; L.L. No. 2-1969) 
Secs. 6-25-6-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANTENNA 

Sec. 6-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means a device designed as and intended to be used as a conductor by which electromagnetic waves are transmitted and/or received. 
(Code 1978, § 7-40; L.L. No. 4-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1996; L.L. No. 03-2003) 
Sec. 6-41. - Location and size restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, store for a period exceeding seven days, possess, use, operate, install or maintain within the village any antenna which: 
(1)  Is not constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this article, the applicable building, fire, electrical and zoning codes, and/or is not in compliance with any other governmental agency having jurisdiction to regulate the same. 
(2)  Is located in the front or side yards of any property. 
(3)  The highest portion thereof exceeds 26 feet above grade. 
(Code 1978, § 7-42; L.L. No. 4-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1996; L.L. No. 03-2003) 
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Village elections, Election Law § 15-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RUN-OFF ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Run-off elections, Election Law § 15-126. 

Sec. 7-11. - Legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with Election Law art. 15 (Election Law § 15-100 et seq.) and Election Law § 15-126 in order to provide for a run-off election in the event that more eligible persons remaining than the number to be elected receive for the same office an equal number of votes in any general or special village election. 
(Code 1978, § 7 1/2-11; L.L. No. 4-1982) 
Sec. 7-12. - Compliance. 
(a)  In the event that more eligible persons than the number remaining to be elected receive for the same office of the village an equal number of votes, the board of trustees shall adopt a resolution stating the date and place and hours of the special run-off election, the names and addresses of the candidates involved in the run-off and the office and terms nominated for. Said resolution shall include a statement that the run-off election is for those village offices for which a tie vote was received in the previous general or special election and is limited to only the number of offices remaining unfilled and is the result of a tie vote and includes only those candidates that received the equal number of votes for the same office. In addition, such resolution shall direct the village clerk-treasurer to publish same at least ten days prior to the election date. 
(b)  The date for the special run-off election shall be held on the first Tuesday at least ten days after the final certification of such tie results, subject to the provisions of Election Code § 15-104(3)(b). This date shall be at least 17 days after the implementing resolution and at least ten days after publication of said resolution. 
(c)  The special run-off election as provided for herein shall be waived and the selection made by lot as provided for by Election Law § 15-126 as may be amended from time to time, if each person who has received such equal number of votes has filed with the village clerk-treasurer no later than two days after such final certification of such tie vote, a written notice of consent that such selection be made by lot. 
(Code 1978, § 7 1/2-12; L.L. No. 4-1982) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Interference with fire department personnel or equipment prohibited. 
    No person shall interfere with any member of the fire department or an authorized fire company in the discharge of his duty, nor shall any person drive upon any hose, or other apparatus belonging to the fire department or fire company, or against any ropes or other guards placed across any street or passageway during the progress of any fire, or injure or remove the same. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 14; Code 1978, § 8-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Inspectors. 
(a)  The state fire prevention code adopted under article II of this chapter shall be enforced by fire prevention inspectors which positions are hereby established. 
(b)  The fire prevention inspectors shall constitute a bureau of fire prevention. 
(c)  Such fire prevention inspectors shall be employees of the village and operate under the supervision of the chief of the village fire department and the board of trustees. Such inspectors shall be appointed for a period of one year by the village board of trustees from not less than four recommendations of the village fire department for each position. 
(d)  Such inspectors shall submit bimonthly reports to the fire chief and to the village board of trustees relative to all proceedings under the code adopted under article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Fire protection services contract. 
    The village shall contract with Lewiston Fire Company No. 1 for fire protection services. 
(Code 1978, § 8-3; Res. of 4-17-1975) 
Secs. 8-4-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 8-16. - Adopted. 
    The intent of this article is to prescribe regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion by the adoption of that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1970 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer of the village and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 8-16; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 1) 
Sec. 8-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corporation counsel means the attorney for the village. 
    Municipality means the Village of Lewiston, New York. 
(Code 1978, § 8-17; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 3) 
Sec. 8-18. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The entire corporate village limits without special permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 8-18; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 4) 
Sec. 8-19. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The entire corporate village limits without special permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 8-19; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 5) 
Sec. 8-20. - Establishment of limits of districts in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids is to be prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The entire corporate village limits without special permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 8-20; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 5) 
Sec. 8-21. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. 
    The limits referred to in section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: The entire corporate village limits without special permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 8-21; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 6) 
Sec. 8-22. - Establishment of routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
    The routes referred to in section 12.7m of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article, for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents, are hereby established as follows: Creek Road Extension and Route 104 South. 
(Code 1978, § 8-22; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 7) 
Sec. 8-23. - Establishment of routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
    The routes referred to in section 20.14 of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: Creek Road Extension and Route 104 South without special permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 8-23; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 8) 
Sec. 8-24. - Establishment of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. 
    The fire lanes referred to in section 28.16 of the Fire Prevention Code adopted under this article are hereby established as follows: 
    Center Street Plaza, on the north side of the building complex, 25 feet from the curb in a northerly direction and extending the entire width of the complex. 
    Tops Market (new not old), 50 feet from the northwest corner of the building and 15 feet from west corner in a northerly direction extending 25 feet from the sidewalk in each direction. 
    Colonial Plaza, on the north side of the building complex, 25 feet from the curb in a northerly direction and extending the entire width of the complex. 
(Code 1978, § 8-24; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 9) 
Sec. 8-25. - Modifications. 
    The village board of trustees shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted under this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the village board of trustees thereon shall be entered upon the records of the village and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 8-25; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 10) 
Sec. 8-26. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted under this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, shall be guilty of a offense, punishable as provided in section 1-7. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1978, § 8-26; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 11) 
Secs. 8-27-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKE DETECTORS 

Sec. 8-41. - General provisions. 
(a)  Declaration of intent. The board of trustees hereby finds and declares that smoke detectors, when properly installed and maintained, save lives and minimize property loss in case of fire. In consideration of the foregoing and in accordance with the board of trustees' obligation to enact legislation to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village , this section is enacted. 
(b)  Two-family and multiple dwelling units; responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of every owner of an occupied two-family and multiple dwelling unit in the village to comply with the requirements of this section with respect to the installation of smoke detectors. It shall be the responsibility of every owner of an occupied two-family and multiple dwelling unit in the village to assure that any smoke detector required by this section is maintained in accordance with its provisions. The village shall not be liable for any damage incurred as a result of noncompliance with the terms of this section. 
(c)  General requirements for smoke detectors. Every smoke detector required to be installed and maintained by this section must be capable of detecting visible or invisible particles of combustion and provide a suitable audible alarm thereof. Every detector required to be installed and maintained by this section must be installed and located so as to avoid dead air space, be reasonably free from false alarms, and provide visible indication that the alarm is energized. 
(Code 1978, § 8-31; L.L. No. 6-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 8-42. - Smoke detectors required in new two-family and multiple dwellings. 
(a)  In all two-family and multiple dwellings hereafter constructed in the village at least one smoke detector of a type approved by the village fire department shall be installed in every dwelling unit. Such smoke detector shall be directly connected to the lighting circuit of the dwelling unit with no intervening wall switch. Cord-connected installations shall not be permitted. At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area and must have an alarm which is clearly audible in adjoining sleeping spaces with intervening doors closed. 
(b)  In all multiple dwellings, a smoke detector system approved by the village fire department shall be installed in all public halls and stairways in a manner that the village fire department shall direct. This system shall be connected to an alarm which is clearly audible throughout the building. 
(c)  In all two-family dwellings at least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head of each stairway leading to an occupied area in such a manner as to assure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the detector and that the detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the sleeping area. Such smoke detector shall be directly connected to the lighting circuit of the dwelling unit with no intervening wall switch. 
(d)  The builder or owner of any new two-family and/or multiple dwelling in the village shall be responsible for the installation of the required smoke detectors and smoke detector system prior to the occupation of the building. Every smoke detector and smoke detector system required by this subsection shall be maintained in proper working condition at all times. 
(Code 1978, § 8-32; L.L. No. 6-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 8-43. - Smoke detectors in existing two-family and multiple dwellings. 
(a)  On or before September 30, 1984, at least one smoke detector of a type approved by the village fire department shall be installed in every dwelling unit in existing two-family and/or multiple dwellings. Said smoke detector may be wired directly to the power supply or operated by a self-monitored battery or connected to a plug-in outlet. However, in no event may any smoke detector required by this subsection be controlled by any switch other than the main power supply, and any plug-in outlet must be fitted with a plug restrainer device. At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area and must have an alarm which is clearly audible in adjoining sleeping spaces with intervening doors closed. 
(b)  On or before September 30, 1984, a smoke detector system, approved by the village fire department, shall be installed in all public halls and stairways in every multiple dwelling. Such system shall be connected to an alarm which is clearly audible throughout the building and shall be installed in a manner that the village fire department shall direct. 
(c)  In two-family dwellings, on or before September 30, 1984, at least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head of each stairway leading to an occupied area in such a manner as to assure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the detector and that the detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the sleeping area. Said smoke detector may be wired directly to the power supply or operated by a self-monitored battery or connected to a plug-in outlet. However, in no event may any smoke detector required by this subsection be controlled by any switch other than the main power supply, and any plug-in outlet must be fitted with a plug restrainer device. 
(d)  The owner of every two-family and/or multiple dwelling in the village shall be responsible for the installation of the required smoke detectors and smoke detector alarm system. Said smoke detectors and alarm system shall at all times be maintained in proper working condition. 
(Code 1978, § 8-33; L.L. No. 6-1984, § 1) 
Chapter 9 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste generally, Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized private receptacle means a solid waste storage collection receptacle as required and authorized by the director of public works. 
    Commercial premises means any privately owned lot and any dwelling, house, building or other structure not included within the definition of private premises. 
    Dump means a place used for the disposal and leaving of solid or liquid waste by the public or by any person. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Hazardous waste includes, but is not limited to, the following products and their empty containers: insecticides, herbicides, petroleum products, caustic chemicals, paint, batteries, explosives, infected materials. Hazardous wastes generally display one or more of the qualities of ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste materials if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, which tend to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Nonrecyclables means that portion of the wastestream not included under recyclables, and not treated separately as: 
(1)  Hazardous waste under Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0903; 
(2)  Source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined in the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954; or 
(3)  Low level radioactive waste as defined in Environmental Conservation Law § 29-0101. 
    Nonrecyclables includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Cardboard. Woodpulp-based material which is usually smooth on both sides with a corrugated center; commonly used for boxes. 
(2)  Large appliances. Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing machines and other large appliances. 
(3)  Newsprint. Common, inexpensive machine finished paper made chiefly from woodpulp used for newspapers. The term "newsprint" excludes magazines, and may exclude glossy inserts. 
(4)  Other recyclables. The term "other recyclables" may include vehicle tires, auto batteries, waste motor oil and others. 
(5)  Plastic containers. Containers used primarily for laundry products, dishwashing detergents, milk, water and similar items. Most commonly being PET (polyethylene terephthalate) and HDPE (high density polyethylene), but may selectively include other common plastic resin types. 
(6)  Yard organics. Grass clippings, leaves, branches up to inches in diameter, and other organic garden materials. 
The village board of trustees will, by resolution, designate from time to time, which materials will be defined as recyclable. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding and similar materials. 
    Solid or liquid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes including garbage, human sewage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, street and building demolition and construction debris, metals, abandoned vehicles, offal, commercial and industrial wastes, and hazardous and toxic wastes as defined by D.E.C. and E.P.A. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or can be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
    Waste material includes all recyclables and nonrecylables which make up the wastestream eligible for curbside pickup under this law. 
    Waste material does not include material treated separately as: 
(1)  Hazardous waste under Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0903; 
(2)  Source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined in the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954; or 
(3)  Low level radioactive waste as defined in Environmental Conservation Law § 29-0101. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each offense or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  The village board shall also have the power to bring civil action to restrain any violation of this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense which shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $10.00 for a first offense. A second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $25.00. 
(d)  Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. When a violation of this chapter is continuous, each 24 hours thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1978, § 9-2; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-3. - Enforcement; notice to clear private property of litter and refuse; removal by village; collection of costs. 
(a)  Notice to remove. The building inspector and/or director of public works is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private property within the village or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of refuse and litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by mail, registered or certified, addressed to such owner at his last known address. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent to properly dispose of refuse or litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten days after receipt of written notice as provided for in subsection (a) of this section or within 15 days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the village because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the director of public works is authorized and empowered to order its disposal by the village. 
(c)  Charge included in tax bill. When the village has effected the removal of litter or refuse pursuant to subsection (b) of this section or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the village and such charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the village is not paid by an owner within 30 days after the disposal of litter or refuse, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, then and in that case, the building inspector and/or director of public works shall cause to be recorded in the village clerk-treasurer's office, a sworn statement showing the cost and expenses incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which such work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, and further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of six percent in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof, shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible by law. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-4. - Village requirements. 
(a)  The village shall not be required to collect any waste material which has not been separated and secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or the applicable regulations of the village. 
(b)  The village shall have no obligation to pick up and remove any waste material nor prepared for collection in accordance with this law. 
(c)  The village shall have no obligation to pick up and remove any waste material which was not used in the residence or business placing such waste material at the curbside for pickup. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Secs. 9-5-9-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUMPING 

Sec. 9-30. - Legislative intent. 
    The intent of this article is to regulate, control or prohibit the dumping, storing, or placing of certain kinds of solid or liquid waste material originating from inside or outside the boundaries of the village , or creating a dump or dumping ground of such materials within the village . 
(Code 1978, § 9-10; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-31. - Prohibition. 
(a)  The dumping, storing, or placing of any kind of solid or liquid waste material within the village which is picked up, brought or transported from inside or outside the village is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  The creation and/or operation of sanitary landfills, dumps or dumping grounds within the village for solid or liquid waste coming from inside or outside the boundaries of the village is hereby prohibited. 
(c)  There shall be no prohibition against the normal garbage and refuse collection and disposal currently regulated under article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 9-11; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Secs. 9-32-9-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 9-57. - Legislative intent. 
    It is hereby declared and found that solid waste carelessly deposited in the village is a health, fire and safety hazard and a pollutant; that solid waste management, collection and resource recovery are matters affecting the public interest and subsequently should be subject to supervision and administrative control for the purpose of safeguarding the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 9-17; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-58. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people of the village by controlling the storage, collection and/or resource recovery and disposal of solid waste within the village. 
(Code 1978, § 9-18; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-59. - Accumulations restricted. 
    No person shall accumulate or permit accumulation of refuse on any premises owned or occupied by him within the village except for the purpose of collection. This provision is not intended to restrict any person from accumulating any grass cuttings, leaves and other materials in heaps or piles contained within barriers constructed of boards, slots or wires for reduction to compost for use on the premises; provided, that no garbage is deposited in such piles and that no offensive odors are permitted to emanate therefrom and that such storage is not unsanitary or unsightly and that such storage does not create a health hazard. 
(Code 1978, § 9-19; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-60. - Storage of refuse. 
(a)  Every owner or person in control of private or commercial premises shall provide or cause to be provided at all times suitable and sufficient receptacles as determined by the director of public works for receiving and containing garbage and refuse that may be accumulated upon such premises. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible to have the container emptied in a manner as to prevent such container to expose refuse or excessive odor to the public. If such container is not controlled by the owner, the superintendent of public works shall have the right to have the container removed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1978, § 9-20; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3; L.L. No. 1-2000) 
Sec. 9-61. - Collection of refuse. 
(a)  Receptacles, etc. The village shall provide for regular collections of refuse. Such collection shall be made during specified days to be determined from time to time by the village board of trustees, and shall be made from receptacles as hereinafter described. 
(1)  All refuse (except recyclables) placed for collection shall be wrapped or bagged in a closed container. Garbage shall be wrapped or bagged separately from all other refuse. Such container shall be thoroughly sealed or closed and shall be of metal or plastic and shall have a capacity of not less than ten nor more than 30 gallons but in any event shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight when sealed. 
(2)  Any refuse other than garbage which cannot be readily deposited or stored in any receptacle may be compactly and securely tied, bundled or otherwise secured so as to be easily handled, but shall weigh no more than 50 pounds in weight and shall not exceed six feet in length, and shall be contained so as to make it unlikely that such refuse shall be scattered. 
(3)  Containers used by commercial premises shall be regulated by resolution of the board of trustees and when so regulated shall not be limited to the sizes and weight referred to in this section. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, contruction debris shall not be collected by the village. 
(b)  Time and place of collection. 
(1)  Refuse described in subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section and containers containing same shall be placed for collection not earlier than 5:00 p.m. prior to the designated day of collection, except as provided in subsection (b)(1)d of this section. 
a.  In the area of the village bounded by the Niagara River, N. 5th Street, Center Street, S. 3rd Street and the south village line, the day of collection is every Monday. 
b.  In the area of the village bounded by the north village line, N. 5th Street, Center Street and the Robert Moses Parkway, the day of collection is every Thursday. 
c.  In the area of the village bounded by the south village line, S. 3rd Street, Center Street and the east village line, the day of collection is every Friday. 
d.  In addition to the foregoing days of collection, the village has a village-wide general pickup once per month of refuse described in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section whether or not containerized or secured and whether or not exceeding the weight and length limitations and the day of collection for such general village-wide pickup is the first Monday of every month. Any such refuse shall not be placed for collection earlier than 24 hours prior to the day of collection. 
(2)  All containered and noncontainered refuse and newspapers to be collected shall be placed three feet from the paved surface of the street, fronting the premises from which said refuse and newspapers originate, to facilitate snow removal and collection. Places of collection from commercial premises shall be individually determined by the director of public works on the basis of accessibility and such other considerations that he deems necessary. 
(3)  All containers shall be removed from the place of collection not later than 12 hours after they are emptied. 
(Code 1978, § 9-21; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-62. - Solid waste not acceptable for collection. 
    The following materials shall not be considered acceptable for collection: 
(1)  Materials resulting from the repair, construction, alteration or excavation of buildings, structures, streets and sidewalks, such as earth, plaster, concrete, brick, lath and roofing materials. 
(2)  Hazardous waste. 
(3)  Materials which have not been prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Solid waste resulting from industrial process. 
(5)  Such other material or items that from time to time shall, in the opinion of the board of trustees, be deemed to be dangerous, obnoxious, etc., or impossible for collection, and others specifically excluded. 
(6)  Any device including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners, which contain chlorinated fluorocarbons or hydrochlorinated fluorocarbons, unless a certificate, issued by a licensed technician, accompanies such device confirming that the chlorinated fluorocarbons or hydrochlorinated fluorocarbons have been removed using proper equipment and techniques applicable to the device and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(7)  Any work done by a contractor, i.e., tree removal, trimming, brush, etc., must be taken away by the contractor and will not be considered acceptable for collection. 
(Code 1978, § 9-22; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1992, § 1; L.L. 03-2013) 
Sec. 9-63. - Limitations on amount of refuse collectible. 
    The amount of refuse, excluding materials determined to be recyclable and recoverable per section 9-65, shall be limited at each place of collection, per week as follows: 
(1)  Private premises. One- or two-family residences, limit to be determined by resolution of the board of trustees; three or more family residences, two containers or two noncontainered bundles or combination thereof per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Commercial premises. 12 containers or 12 noncontainered bundles or a combination thereof or its equivalent. 
(Code 1978, § 9-23; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-64. - Fees for collection of excess refuse. 
    Where, at the time of collection, there is placed for collection refuse, in excess of the limitations as provided in section 9-23, such refuse shall be collected and an excess collection fee shall be charged to the person placing such refuse for collection in the following amounts: $0.30 per container or noncontainered bundle or any part or portion thereof, plus a monthly charge of $20.00. 
(Code 1978, § 9-24; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3; L.L. No. 01-2006) 
Sec. 9-65. - Resource recovery of recyclable solid waste. 
(a)  The village board of trustees is hereby authorized to determine by resolution what solid waste placed for collection is required to be and capable of resource recovery and to make such regulations as they deem necessary to facilitate the collection of such solid waste for recovery. 
(b)  The director of public works, when directed by the village board of trustees, shall cause reasonable notice of the requirements regarding resource recovery of solid waste to be given persons in the village and shall secure the proper and effective collection of such materials. 
(c)  Recyclable material shall be prepared for collection in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Recyclable aluminum cans and items, glass bottles, and plastic items shall be separated from nonrecyclables and placed in separate collection containers. 
(2)  Recyclable metal cans, aluminum cans, glass and plastic containers and other items, so separated shall be rinsed of contents and placed in the recyclable collection container. 
(3)  Newsprint shall be separated from all other refuse and properly secured into bundles not to exceed 25 pounds in weight with rope or cord sufficient in strength to facilitate handling and placed at curbside for collection. Effort is to be made to keep the newsprint clean and dry and contamination free. 
(4)  Other items to be included for recycling are to be prepared as set forth by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 9-25; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-66. - Ownership of recyclables placed for collection. 
(a)  From the time any person places any recyclable materials at or near any curb, sidewalk or street for purposes of collection by the village , those recyclable materials shall become the property of the village or its authorized agent. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for the private collection of recyclables provided that recyclables to be privately collected shall not be placed curbside on or immediately preceding the day for municipal collection of such recyclables. 
(Code 1978, § 9-26; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-67. - Authorized collectors. 
(a)  No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the village shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed, any recyclable materials so placed for collection. Each such unauthorized collection, pick up or removal shall constitute a separate violation of this article, provided, however, where the village has refused to collect certain recyclables because they have not been placed or treated in accordance with the provisions of this article, the person responsible for initially placing those materials for collection may and shall remove those materials from any curb, sidewalk or street side. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to recognized charitable institutions or the agents of such institutions when acting within the scope of their authority for the purpose of collecting recyclables, provided that such institutions make written application to the board of trustees of the village for permission to collect recyclables and the board of trustees grants a permit therefor, upon such conditions as they deem necessary. 
(Code 1978, § 9-27; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-68. - Fees for collection. 
    The following fees for collection will be charged by the village in addition to any other fees as may be applicable: for each vehicle tire, $3.00. 
(Code 1978, § 9-28; L.L. No. 7-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 9-69. - Tax levy for unpaid charges. 
(a)  Any unpaid charges shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the item was collected. The lien shall be prior and superior to every other lien or claim except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful charge imposed by or for the state or a political subdivision or district thereof. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall annually cause a statement to be prepared setting forth each amount of fees and/or charges in arrears, a brief description of the property for which or in connection with which such services were provided, and the name and address of the person or corporation liable to pay such amount. Upon completion of such a statement, the board of trustees shall levy such amounts remaining unpaid on the date taxes are levied against real property for which or in connection with which such services were provided. 
(c)  All unpaid fees or charges under section this section, including penalties or interest, due but not paid by the date for levy of taxes in the village each year shall be added to the annual village tax levy. 
(Code 1978, § 9-29; L.L. No. 7-1992, § 1) 
Secs. 9-70-9-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Littering, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1220. 

Sec. 9-96. - In public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any public place within the village except in public receptacles. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the public place by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Code 1978, § 9-36; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-97. - On private and commercial premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private or commercial premises within the village, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of such private or commercial premises may maintain authorized private receptacles in such a manner that litter would be prevented from being carried or deposited upon any street, or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1978, § 9-36; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-98. - Commercial premises to be maintained free from litter. 
    Each owner or person in control of any commercial premises including shopping centers, and plazas, and delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep such places, parking fields, parking areas, or delivery area or other open areas which are part of such commercial premises free from litter. Such owner or person in control of any commercial premises shall keep all sidewalks in front of the premises free of litter. 
(Code 1978, § 9-36; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-99. - Private premises to be maintained free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles. 
(Code 1978, § 9-36; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 9-100. - Placement of litter and refuse in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner so as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or any other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1978, § 9-37; L.L. No. 8-1991, § 3) 
Chapter 10 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Board of health's and health officer's powers and duties transferred to county. 
    The powers and duties of the village board of health and health officer shall devolve upon the commissioner of health and the board of health of the county after March 1, 1965. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1; Res. of 3-1-1965) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, Public Health Law § 341(3). 
Sec. 10-2. - Birth and death certificate fees. 
    The fees for birth and death certificates shall be $5.00 each. The registrar and deputy registrars shall be paid fees as established pursuant to the most recently enacted budget of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 10-2; Res. of 5-27-1976; Ord. of 6-18-1984) 
State Law reference- Birth and death certificate fees, Public Health Law § 4173 et seq. 
Secs. 10-3-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POTABLE WATER 

Sec. 10-25. - Cross connection control; general policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public potable water supply of the village from the possibility of contamination by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system or its private water system such contaminations or pollutants which could backflow into the public water supply system; and to comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code 5-1.31, as amended. 
(b)  Responsibility. The village's superintendent of public works shall be responsible for the protection of the village's distribution system from contamination due to the backflow of contaminators through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said superintendent, an acceptable backflow prevention device is required at the village's water service connection to any customer's premises, for the safety of the water system, the superintendent or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an acceptable backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device at his own expense; and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device has been properly installed. 
(Code 1978, § 10-25; L.L. No. 7-1984, § 1) 
State Law reference- Sanitary code, Public Health Law § 225. 
Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable backflow prevention device means an acceptable air gap, reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly as used to contain potential contamination within a facility. In order for the reduced pressure zone device or the double check valve assembly to be acceptable it must be listed on the most current version of the state department of health list of acceptable devices. 
    Aesthetically objectionable facility means a facility in which substances are present which, if introduced into the public water supply system, could be a nuisance to other water customers, but would not adversely affect human health. Typical examples of such substances are food-grade dyes, hot water, stagnant water from fire lines in which no chemical additives are used, etc. 
    Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tap, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch. 
    Approved means accepted by the superintendent as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the village's approved public water supply. These auxiliary water supplies may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters. These waters may be contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow means a flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids and/or gases into the distribution pipes of the village's supply system from any source other than its intended source. 
    Certified tester means that individual or firm approved to accomplish the necessary inspections and operational tests of backflow prevention devices. 
    Contamination means the presence in water of a substance that tends to degrade its quality. 
    Customer means a water user served by the village's supply system. 
    Customer's water system means the piping used to convey water supplied by the village's supply system throughout a customer's facility. The system shall include all those parts of the piping beyond the control point of the village. The control point is either the curb valve or the main valve located in the public right-of-way that isolates the customer's facilities from the village's distribution system. 
    Degree of hazard means whether a facility is rated as hazardous, aesthetically objectionable or nonhazardous. 
    Double check valve assembly, acceptable, means an assembly composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Hazardous facility means a facility in which substances may be present which if introduced into the public water system would or may endanger or have any adverse effect on the health of other water customers. Typical examples: laboratories, sewage treatment plants, chemical plants, hospitals, mortuaries. 
    Nonhazardous facility means a facility which does not require the installation of an acceptable backflow prevention device. 
    Public water supply system means the village's system including the source, transmission mains, and distribution system serving the public. This includes the distribution system up to its connection with the customer's water system. 
    Reduced pressure zone device, acceptable, means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. During normal flow the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the upstream (supply) pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the village . 
(Code 1978, § 10-26; L.L. No. 7-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 10-27. - Requirements. 
(a)  The customer's water system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to an authorized representative of the village. 
(b)  The village shall rate a customer's water system according to its degree of hazard to the public water supply system. Some of the factors to be considered are the use and availability of contaminants, the availability of an auxiliary water supply and the type of firefighting system in use. 
(c)  An acceptable backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line, as follows: 
(1)  Whenever a customer's water system is rated hazardous, an acceptable reduced pressure zone device or air gap shall be installed. 
(2)  Whenever a customer's water system is rated aesthetically objectionable, as a minimum, an acceptable double check valve assembly shall be installed. 
(d)  The design of the installation of an acceptable backflow prevention device must be prepared in accordance with state laws and regulations. The design must be approved by the superintendent and all agencies required by the applicable state laws and regulations. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a year. In those instances where the superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. Certified inspections and operational tests must also be made when any backflow prevention device is to be installed, repaired, overhauled, or replaced, in addition to the requirement of an annual certified inspection and operational test. All inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative, village personnel, or by a certified test approved by the superintendent. The village shall make available the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of those persons who are certified as testers for backflow prevention devices. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to see that certified inspection and operational tests of the backflow prevention devices are made. The customer shall notify the superintendent in advance, in writing, when the tests are to be undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the tests if it is so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said devices are found to be defective. Copies of all testing and maintenance records shall be sent to the superintendent immediately after the work is performed. 
(f)  All presently installed prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection (e) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the superintendent is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the village's system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. 
(g)  No water service connection to any customer's water system shall be installed or maintained by the village unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the village if a backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(Code 1978, § 10-27; L.L. No. 7-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 10-28. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  A violation of the provisions of section 10-27 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In lieu of, or in addition to, such fine and imprisonment or both, each such violation shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.00 for any one case, to be recovered in an action or proceeding brought by the village attorney in a court of competent jurisdiction. Each day of a continuing violation shall be subject to a separate such fine, imprisonment or civil penalty. 
(b)  The village attorney may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the village in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this article or restrain by injunction any violation of this article, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section for a penalty or other punishment. 
(c)  Where any violation of this article causes expense to the village, such violation may also be punishable by a civil suit against the violator, brought by the village attorney in the name of the village in a court of competent jurisdiction, to recover such additional cost. 
(Code 1978, § 10-28; L.L. No. 7-1984, § 1) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Obedience to traffic regulations, police officers and flagpersons required, Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 1101, 1102; applicability of traffic uniformity of traffic regulations, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1600; restrictions upon municipality to regulate traffic, Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 1600, 1604; municipal regulation of traffic, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Signs to conform to uniform manual. 
    Signs erected pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformity with the manual of uniform traffic control devices. 
(Code 1978, § 11-1; L.L. No. 2-1975, § 2) 
Secs. 11-2-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 11-16. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Maximum speed. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed, on or along highways within the corporate limits of this village. 
(b)  Specific streets. The maximum speed at which traffic may proceed along specific streets or portions thereof in the village is hereby established as follows: 
Creek Road extension , between the east village line and the south village line, 40 miles per hour. 
Garden Lane, 15 miles per hour. 
Historical Square Apartments, on or along the roadways on the premises, 920 Mohawk Street, 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1978, § 11-16; Ord. of 5-26-1966, §§ 1.00, 1.10; L.L. No. 12-1975, § 4; L.L. No. 2-1988, § 1; L.L. No. 3-2015) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish speed limits, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1643. 
Sec. 11-17. - One-way streets and areas. 
    Upon those streets and/or areas of the village described below it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in other than the direction indicated: 
721-735 Center Street Plaza parking lot, westerly driveway, from such parking lot into Center Street. 
721-735 Center Street Plaza parking lot, easterly driveway, into such parking lot from Center Street. 
On Niagara Street between Center Street and Plain Street in a southerly direction. 
(Code 1978, § 11-17; Ord. of 5-26-1966, §§ 2.00, 2.10; L.L. No. 6-1973, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1976, § 4; L.L. No. 3-1978, § 2) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate one-way streets, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)4. 
Sec. 11-18. - Bikeways. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Class I bikeway means a travelway exclusively for bicycles. Crossflows by pedestrians and motorists are minimized. It may be either within or outside the right-of-way (property boundaries) of a highway. 
    Class II bikeway means a travelway principally for bicycles. Motor vehicles or pedestrians are not allowed except to reach adjacent driveways or property. Vehicle parking or sidewalks may be adjacent to the bike lane, which itself is separated from adjacent lanes of motorized traffic by striping, cones or a physical barrier. 
    Class III bikeway means a travelway shared with motorized vehicles. It is designated on collector or local streets and has no physical separation from adjacent traffic. (Only streets with low speed limits and traffic volumes should be made class III routes.) 
(b)  Schedule. The following streets or portions thereof are designated bikeways, as indicated: 
Mohawk Street, from North Fifth Street to the east village line, class III. 
North Fifth Street, from Ridge to the north village line, class II. 
(Code 1978, § 11-18; Res. of 10-7-1974) 
Sec. 11-19. - Stop intersections established and enumerated. 
    The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be erected at appropriate places facing traffic on the stop street. All traffic on a stop street approaching a through street from the indicated direction, shall come to a full stop and yield to traffic on the through street before entering the through street. 
Through Streets Stop Streets Burt Circle, north lane Fifth Street, north Cayuga Street Eighth Street, north and south Cayuga Street Fifth Street, north and south Cayuga Street 721-735 Center Street Plaza, 
exiting driveways, north Cayuga Street Niagara Street, north and south Cayuga Street Second Street, north and south Cayuga Street Seventh Street, north and south Cayuga Street Sixth Street, north Cayuga Street Third Street, south Cayuga Street Village Green Plaza, exiting driveway, north Center Street Eighth Street, north and south Center Street Portage Road, south Center Street Fifth Street, north and south Center Street First Street, north and south Center Street 721-735 Center Street Plaza, westerly driveway, from the plaza Center Street Niagara Street, south Center Street Seventh Street, north and south Center Street Sixth Street, north and south Center Street Third Street, north and south Eighth Street Cayuga Street, east and west Eighth Street Fairchild Street, west Eighth Street Mohawk Street, east and west Eighth Street Oneida Street, east and west Eighth Street Onondaga Street, east and west Eighth Street Oxbow Lane, east and west Eighth Street Page Street, east and west Eighth Street Post office premises, exiting driveway, east Eighth Street Seneca Street, east and west Eighth Street Village Green Plaza, exiting driveway, west Fifth Street Burt Circle, west (both entrances) Fifth Street Cayuga Street, east and west Fifth Street Mohawk Street, east and west Fifth Street Oneida Street, east and west Fifth Street Onondaga Street, east and west Fifth Street Oxbow Lane, east Fifth Street Plain Street, west Fifth Street Ridge Street, west First Street Cayuga Street, east and west First Street Onondaga Street, west First Street Seneca Street, east and west First Street Tuscarora Street, east Fourth Street Cayuga Street, east and west Fourth Street Oneida Street, east and west Fourth Street Onondaga Street, east and west Fourth Street Plain Street, east Fourth Street Ridge Street, east and west Fourth Street Seneca Street, east and west Fourth Street Tuscarora Street, east and west Mohawk Street Garden Lane (north and south) Mohawk Street Baker Drive, north Mohawk Street East Lane, north Mohawk Street Eighth Street, north and south Mohawk Street Fifth Street, north and south Mohawk Street Fourth Street, north and south Mohawk Street Garden Lane Mohawk Street Historical Square Apartments, east and west driveways exiting from the north Mohawk Street Kerr Street, south Mohawk Street Merrie Road, south Mohawk Street Ninth Street, south Mohawk Street Oak Street, south Mohawk Street Rudlen Road, south Mohawk Street Seventh Street, south Mohawk Street Third Street, north and south Mohawk Street West Lane, north Mountain View Drive Forest Road, south Niagara Street Cayuga Street, east and west Niagara Street Plain Street, east and west Niagara Street Seneca Street, east and west Ninth Street Cayuga Street, east and west Ninth Street Mohawk Street, east and west Ninth Street Oneida Street, east and west Ninth Street Onondaga Street, east and west Ninth Street Page Street, west Ninth Street Seneca Street, east and west North Eighth Street Oxbow Lane, east and west Oneida Street Eighth Street, north and south Oneida Street Fifth Street, north and south Oneida Street Fourth Street, north and south Oneida Street Kerr Street, north Oneida Street Merrie Road, north Oneida Street Ninth Street, north and south Oneida Street Oak Street, north Oneida Street Rudlen Road, north Oneida Street Second Street, south and north with a stop ahead prior to the stop from the south Oneida Street Seventh Street, north and south Oneida Street Sixth Street, north and south Oneida Street Third Street, north and south Onondaga Street Second Street, north and south Onondaga Street Third Street, north Onondaga Street Sixth Street, north and south Onondaga Street Seventh Street, north and south Onondaga Street Eighth Street, north and south Onondaga Street Smith Street, south Oxbow Lane Baker Drive, south Oxbow Lane East Lane, south Oxbow Lane Eighth Street, south Oxbow Lane North Eighth Street, north and south Oxbow Lane West Lane, south Plain Street Niagara Street, south Portage Road Cayuga Street, east and west Portage Road Seneca Street, east and west Second Street Mohawk Street, east and west Second Street Oneida Street, east and west Seneca Street Eighth Street, north and south Seneca Street Fifth Street, north and south Seneca Street Second Street, north and south Seneca Street Seventh Street, north and south Seneca Street Third Street, north and south Seventh Street Cayuga Street, east and west Seventh Street Fairchild Street, east Seventh Street Onondaga Street, east and west Seventh Street Page Street, east Seventh Street Seneca Street, east and west South Seventh Tuscarora Third Street Cayuga Street, west Tuscarora Street Guard Street, south Tuscarora Street First Street, north Tuscarora Street Second Street, north Tuscarora Street Third Street, north Tuscarora Street Seventh Street, north Water Street Center Street, east and west Water Street Onondaga Street, west and east  
(Code 1978, § 11-19; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 7.00; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 13.05; L.L. No. 3-1971; L.L. No. 1-1972, § 4; L.L. No. 6-1973, § 5; L.L. No. 3-1974, §§ 2-4; L.L. No. 2-1975, § 3; L.L. No. 12-1975, §§ 1-3; L.L. No. 2-1976, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1978, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1979, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1981, § 1; L.L. No. 11-1983, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 7-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1986, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 10-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1988, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1990, § 1; L.L. No. 14-1990, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2015; L.L. No. 1-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop intersections, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)1. 
Sec. 11-20. - Flashing signal intersections. 
    Flashing signals shall be installed at the intersection of the below indicated streets with flashing red and yellow signals displayed on the streets indicated: 
Yellow Red Center Street Sixth Street  
(Code 1978, § 11-20; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 7.00) 
Sec. 11-21. - Truck route system. 
(a)  A truck route system, upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are permitted to travel and operate, shall consist of the following highways: 
Center Street, between the east village line and Fourth Street. 
Fourth Street, between Center Street and Oneida Street. 
Oneida Street, between Fourth Street and Second Street. 
Second Street, between Oneida Street and the north village line. 
(b)  All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all highways within this village, except from those highways listed in subsection (a) of this section, except that this exclusion shall not be construed to prevent the delivery or pick up of merchandise or other property along the highway from which such vehicles and combinations are excluded. 
(Code 1978, § 11-21; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 8.00; L.L. No. 1-1988, § 1) 
State Law reference- Truck routes authorized, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(20). 
Sec. 11-22. - Riding, driving on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No bicycle, tricycle, automobile or other vehicle propelled or moved by power carried by or upon the vehicle itself shall be allowed upon the sidewalks of the village. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 30; Code 1978, § 11-22; Code 1978, § 11-22) 
Sec. 11-23. - Prohibited turns. 
(a)  The turning of vehicles by means of a right-hand turn shall be prohibited at the following locations: 
South-bound traffic from North First Street onto Onondaga Street. 
(b)  The turning of vehicles by means of a left-hand turn shall be prohibited at the following locations: 
East-bound traffic from Onondaga Street onto North First Street. 
Traffic exiting from the drive-way onto Center Street at 905 Center Street at Tops Supermarket parking lot. 
(Code 1978, § 11-23; L.L. No. 3-1979, § 4; L.L. No. 8-1989, § 1) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit turns, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(2). 
Secs. 11-24-11-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking generally, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(a)(6). 

Sec. 11-35. - Parking-Prohibited at all times. 
    The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby prohibited: 
Cayuga Street, on the north side, between Fifth Street and Sixth Street, and on the south side, between Eighth Street and Portage Road. 
Cayuga Street, on the north side between a point 105.6 feet east of Seventh Street and its intersection with the east line of Seventh Street. 
Cayuga Street, on the south side between a point 40 feet east of the east line of Seventh Street and its intersection with the east line of Seventh Street. 
Center Street, on the north side from the center line of Smith Street to a point 100 feet east of the center line of Smith Street to a point 33 feet west of the westerly edge of Smith Street; on the south side between Ninth Street and the east village line, and from the east edge of Seventh Street to a point 70 feet east of the center line of the westerly driveway to the 721-735 Center Street Plaza, and between South Eighth Street and Portage Road; and, on the north side, from 9th Street to a point 250 feet westerly from the center line of 9th Street. 
Lewiston Landing Park, in all areas of the park except as specifically permitted as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the part adjacent to and abutting Water Street and Center Street being an area of land 40 feet in depth and 170 feet in length commencing at the center line of Center Street running northerly therefrom. 
(2)  Parking for the handicapped having duly issued parking permits as authorized by Section 1203A of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
Niagara Street, on the west side, between Plain Street and Tuscarora Street; on the east side between Center Street and Plain Street. 
Ninth Street, on both sides between a point 50 feet north and a point 50 feet south of the intersection of Center Street. 
North First Street, on the west side, between Oak Street and Onondaga Street. 
North Seventh Street, on the west side, between Center Street and Onondaga Street. 
Oneida Street, on the north side of the south lane and on the south side of the north lane, between Ninth Street and the east village line. 
Onondaga Street, on the north side, between North Third Street and North Fourth Street. 
Portage Road, on the west side from Center Street to a point 143 feet and four inches south from the intersection of Center Street and the westerly line of Portage Road, measured along the westerly line of Portage Road; on the east side from the intersection of Center Street to a point 96 feet south of the intersection of Center Street with the easterly line of Portage Road measured along the easterly line of Portage Road. 
Ridge Street, on the south side, from the east line of North Fourth Street easterly to a point 160 feet from the east side of the Fourth Street sidewalk (as the sidewalk area is so marked upon pavement). 
Ridge Street, on the south side, from a point 220 feet easterly from the east side of the Fourth Street sidewalk (as the sidewalk area is so marked upon pavement), easterly to a point 15 feet east of the McDonald's restaurant driveway entrance. 
Ridge Street, on the south side, from the west line of Fifth Street westerly to a point 106 feet west of the west side of the Fifth Street sidewalk. 
South Seventh Street, on the east and west side between a point 80 feet south of Cayuga Street and its intersection with the south line of Cayuga Street. 
South Third Street, on the northeast side, 152 feet in a southerly direction from Center Street. 
Water Street, on the east side from the center line of Onondaga Street southerly 40 feet; on the east side from a point 340 feet south from its intersection with Onondaga Street southerly to the intersection of Center Street; on the west side from a point 170 feet north of the center line of Center Street, southerly to the center line of Center Street. 
(Code 1978, § 11-35; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 3.00; L.L. No. 6-1968, §§ 13.02, 13.03; L.L. No. 1-1972, § 2; L.L. No. 6-1973, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 3-1975, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 7-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1978, §§ 1, 4; L.L. No. 3-1979, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 10-1983, §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 2-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1988, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1993, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1997, § A; L.L. No. 2-1998) 
Sec. 11-36. - Same-Emergencies. 
(a)  When traffic conditions in the village, in the judgment of the mayor, acting mayor or chief of police, create or are likely to create hazardous road conditions or road conditions impeding or likely to impede the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vehicular traffic vital to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the mayor, acting mayor or chief of police may declare that an emergency exists in the village, or in a section thereof and prohibit parking in the areas so designated. 
(b)  Upon the declaration of an emergency, appropriate signs shall be posted with the following legend: 
EMERGENCY 
NO PARKING 
POLICE ORDER 
VILLAGE OF LEWISTON 
(c)  No owner or driver of any motor vehicle shall cause, permit or allow any motor vehicle owned or driven by him to be parked or left unattended on any portion of any street in a section of the village designated as an emergency section. 
(Code 1978, § 11-36; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 7.10; L.L. No. 3-1974, § 1) 
Sec. 11-37. - Same-Two hour limit between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., excluding Sundays and holidays. 
    The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations for a period of longer than two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. is hereby prohibited, except on Sundays and holidays: 
Center Street, between Third Street and Ninth Street, except on the south side from the east edge of Seventh Street to a point 70 feet east of the center line of the westerly driveway to Center Street Plaza. 
(Code 1978, § 11-37; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 4.00; L.L. No. 6-1973, § 3) 
Sec. 11-38. - Same-Prohibited between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during winter months. 
    The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all highways within the village between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from December 1 to April 1. 
(Code 1978, § 11-38; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 5.00) 
Sec. 11-39. - Same-Parallel and angle. 
(a)  Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked wholly upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped, standing, or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked wholly upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped, standing, or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(c)  Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked partly upon a roadway shall be so stopped, standing, or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway. On a one-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway on which the vehicle rests. 
(d)  Diagonal parking or angle parking is hereby directed and authorized on the following streets and at the following places: 
Cayuga Street, on the north side, between South Ninth Street and Portage Street. 
Ninth Street, on the south side, between Center Street and Cayuga Street. 
North Seventh Street, on the east side, between Center Street and Onondaga Street. 
Water Street, on the west side, from the south end of such street to Onondaga Street. 
(Code 1978, § 11-39; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 6.00; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 13.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203. 
Sec. 11-40. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to any authority granted by statute, this section empowers and directs the collection of penalties in the following amounts for illegal standing and parking: 
(1)  A fine of $15.00 for illegal standing and parking if the fine is paid within three business days. 
(2)  A fine of $25.00 for illegal standing and parking if the fine is paid after three business days. 
(3)  A fine of $35.00 for illegal standing and parking if the fine is paid after 20 business days. 
(b)  In addition to any authority granted by statute, this section empowers and directs the collection of penalties in the following amounts for illegal parking or standing in fire lanes as set forth in section 8-24 and parking areas established for the handicapped as provided for in Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-c: 
(1)  A fine of $20.00 for illegal parking or standing if the fine is paid within three business days. 
(2)  A fine of $25.00 for illegal parking or standing if the fine is paid after three business days. 
(3)  A fine of $40.00 for illegal parking or standing if the fine is paid after 20 business days. 
(c)  In addition to any authority granted by statute, this section empowers and directs the collection of penalties in the following amount for illegal parking as set forth in section 11-36: 
(1)  A fine of $50.00 for illegal parking if the fine is paid within 72 hours for a first offense and $100.00 for every offense thereafter. 
(2)  A fine of $100.00 for illegal parking if the fine is paid after 72 hours and prior to the issuance of a warrant, summons or other paper for the collection thereof. 
(3)  A fine of $150.00 for illegal parking if the fine is paid after the issuance of a warrant, summons or other paper for the collection thereof. 
(d)  It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any area designated as a place for handicapped parking unless the vehicle bears a handicap parking permit and such vehicle is being used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person per the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(1)  A fine of $50.00 for illegal parking or standing if the fine is paid within three business days. 
(2)  A fine of $60.00 for illegal parking or standing if paid after three business days. 
(3)  A fine of $75.00 for illegal parking or standing if paid after 20 business days. 
(Code 1978, § 11-40; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 13.06; L.L. No. 11-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1983, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1990, § 1; L.L. No. 02-2006, § 11-40; L.L. No. 02-2007) 
Sec. 11-41. - Clerk-treasurer authorized to collect fines. 
    The village clerk-treasurer is hereby authorized to collect and receive all fines imposed for violation of any provisions pertaining to parking. 
(Code 1978, § 11-41; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(f); L.L. No. 3-1974, § 5) 
Sec. 11-42. - Standing-Prohibited at all times. 
    Standing of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby prohibited: 
Center Street, on the north side from the intersection with the east line of Ninth Street to a point 77 feet, four inches east as measured along the north edge of Center Street. 
(Code 1978, § 11-42; L.L. No. 1-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 11-43. - Same-Applicability of penalties and authorizations. 
    Penalties and provisions of section 11-40 and the authorizations contained in section 11-41 shall be applicable to a violation of section 11-42. 
(Code 1978, § 11-43; L.L. No. 1-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 11-44. - Parking of boat trailers-Prohibited at all times. 
    The parking of boat trailers in any of the following locations is hereby prohibited: 
Center Street, on the north and south side, between Water Street and First Street. 
First Street, on the east and west side, between Center Street and Onondaga Street. 
Lewiston Landing Park, in any area of the park not specifically authorized in this article. 
Onondaga Street, on the north and south side, between Water Street and First Street. 
Water Street, on the east side from the center line of Onondaga Street to a point 40 feet south and from a point 340 feet south of the center line of Onondaga Street to its intersection with Cayuga Street; on the west side of Water Street from a point 170 feet north of its intersection with the center line of Center Street, to its intersection with Onondaga Street and also from its intersection with Center Street to its intersection with Cayuga Street. 
(Code 1978, § 11-44; L.L. No. 10-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 11-45. - Same-Attached to vehicles. 
    The parking of vehicles with boat trailers attached shall be prohibited in the following locations: 
Center Street, on the north and south side, between Water Street and First Street. 
First Street, on the east and west side, between Onondaga Street and Center Street. 
Lewiston Landing Park, all areas of the park except as specifically authorized in this article, further excepting such temporary parking not to exceed one hour by an owner of property abutting any of the aforementioned streets where vehicle with boat trailer attached parking is prohibited. 
Onondaga Street, on the north and south side, between Water Street and First Street. 
Water Street, on the east and west side between Onondaga Street and Cayuga Street, except for an area along the east side of Water Street commencing at a point 40 feet south of its intersection with Onondaga Street southerly 300 feet and on the west side of Water Street commencing at a point 170 feet north of the center line of Center Street, southerly to the center line of Center Street. 
(Code 1978, § 11-45; L.L. No. 10-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 11-46. - 15-minute parking. 
    The parking in any of the following areas for a period exceeding 15 minutes is prohibited: 
Center Street, between a beginning point 235.16 feet west of the western line of 7th Street, thence 40.0 feet west to an ending point (said area being the Center Street line of the premises commonly known as 732 Center Street). 
(Code 1978, § 11-46; L.L. No. 1-1997, § B) 
Sec. 11-47. - Parking areas and parking lots. 
    No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any public or privately-owned premises or property, parking areas or parking lot without the consent and permission of the owner or lessee of such premises. 
    To effectuate the prohibition on such premises as above described, a conspicuous sign or signs shall be posted at the entrance to such parking area or parking lot informing the public as to the permitted conditions of parking on such parking area or parking lot. 
(L.L. No. 01-2011) 
Secs. 11-48-11-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 11-73. - Removal authorized. 
    The removal of vehicles by police officers, or fire-policemen in case of subsection (1) of this section, is authorized in the following instances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned; 
(2)  When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(3)  When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this village where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited; 
(4)  When any vehicle is abandoned, parked, or standing in any area within this village, as referred to in Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640-a, where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited where a written request has been received as set forth in said section. 
(Code 1978, § 11-53; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(a)-(c); L.L. No. 5-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 11-74. - Storage authorized. 
    After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the peace officer or fire-policeman may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1978, § 11-54; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(d)) 
Sec. 11-75. - Report to chief of police. 
    The peace officer or fire-policeman shall without delay report the removal and the disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article to the chief of police. 
(Code 1978, § 11-55; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(e)) 
Sec. 11-76. - Notification of owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of a vehicle removed pursuant to this article or the person having charge of the same, and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to redeem same. 
(Code 1978, § 11-56; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(e)) 
Sec. 11-77. - Redemption by owner; fees and charges. 
    The owner or person in charge of a vehicle which has been removed and stored pursuant to this article may redeem the same upon the payment of reasonable and customary charges for such removal and storage. Such charges for removal shall not exceed $25.00 when such removal takes place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., nor $20.00 between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. together with any charges for storage, such charge not to exceed $2.00 per day, or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 11-57; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9.00(d); L.L. No. 13-1975, § 1) 
Sec. 11-78. - Reports required as to receipt of redemption fees and charges. 
    Any person receiving a payment for removal and/or storage of a motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this article shall file a report with the village clerk-treasurer not later than ten days succeeding the month in which such sums were received indicating the number and make of vehicles removed and/or stored, the dates when such vehicles were removed and/or stored, dates payments were received, amounts of payments, and names of individuals redeeming the vehicles. 
(Code 1978, § 11-58; Ord. of 5-26-1966, § 9(f); L.L. No. 13-1975, § 2) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Creating a hazard. 
(a)  A person is guilty of creating a hazard when: 
(1)  Having discarded in any place where it might attract children, a container which has a compartment of more than 11/2 cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot easily be opened from the inside, such person fails to remove the door, lid, locking or fastening device; or 
(2)  Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon which an abandoned well or cesspool is located, such person fails to cover the same with suitable protective construction. 
(b)  Creating a hazard is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 12-1; Res. of 11-16-1953) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Penal Law § 270.10. 
Sec. 12-2. - Clinging to, climbing upon trains or vehicles. 
    No person shall seize, hold, or hang onto or get upon any railroad car, locomotive, or other vehicle for the transportation of passengers or freight while the same shall be in motion, within the limits of the village, nor shall any person within the limits of the village get upon any such car, locomotive or vehicle at any time without permission of the person in charge of such car, locomotive or vehicle. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 11; Code 1978, § 12-1) 
Sec. 12-3. - Throwing stones, etc., across streets. 
    No person shall in any street, or upon any public ground, throw stones, snowballs, or other missiles, or play ball, or shoot with, or use a bow and arrow, or slingshot. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 13; Code 1978, § 12-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Carrying of weapons restricted. 
    No person shall carry upon his person any dirk, bowie knife, sword, or spear cane, pistol, revolver or slingshot, jimmy brass knuckles or other dangerous or unlawful weapon. This section shall not prohibit police officers or persons authorized by law from carrying dangerous weapons. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 19; Code 1978, § 12-4) 
State Law reference- Firearms and other dangerous weapon, Penal Law § 265.00 et seq. 
Sec. 12-5. - Interfering with, damaging property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, deface, damage, injure or remove any public or private property within the village, without the consent of the owner. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, §§ 18, 23-25; Code 1978, § 12-5) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief and related offenses, Penal Law § 145.00 et seq. 
Sec. 12-6. - Discharge of firearms prohibited. 
    The discharge of firearms within the village is prohibited except by police officers in the discharge of their duties. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 30; Code 1978, § 12-6; Ord. of 8-7-1918) 
State Law reference- Firearms and other dangerous weapon, Penal Law § 265.00 et seq. 
Sec. 12-7. - Prohibitions as to trailers, etc. 
(a)  No person shall construct, erect, place or cause to be constructed, erected or placed upon real property in the village, including roads, highways and public places located therein, any trailer, car, vehicle of any description, tent, shed, barrack, construction camp, steamer, boat, barge or any other similar structure intended to be used, or used, temporarily or permanently, for the housing, shelter, feeding or entertainment of any person. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the use by tourists of trailers or vehicles for such purposes for a period not exceeding 48 hours at places within the village specifically designated by the village board for such uses. 
(b)  No steamer, boat, barge or other similar structure intended to be used, or used, temporarily or permanently, for the housing, shelter, feeding or entertainment of any person shall be attached to any real property, including streets or other public places, within the limits of the village, except as such use shall be incidental to the transportation of persons or property upon regular or scheduled trips between the village and other places. 
(c)  No owner, lessee or occupant of real property shall lease or permit the use of premises owned, leased or occupied by him for the purposes prohibited by subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 12-7; Res. of 3-2-1942) 
Secs. 12-8-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 12-19. - Intent. 
    The board of trustees determines that the creation of unreasonable noise within the village limits of Lewiston is detrimental to the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare and to the quality of life of the citizens of the village. Therefore, it intends hereby to prohibit all unreasonable noise from all sources, subject to its police power, in order to preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare and the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of all persons within the village. 
(Code 1978, § 12-19; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, business, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other form of association or organization. 
    Property being used for nonresidential purposes means the imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel or real property from another, or the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit located within a multiple dwelling unit building. 
    Property being used for residential purposes means property which contains one or more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, single-family attached or detached dwelling units, multiple dwellings, hotels, motels, senior citizen housing, adult residential care facilities, nursing homes, dormitories, sororities and fraternities. 
    Sound reproduction devices means any devices, instrument, mechanism, equipment or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument, television, loudspeaker, or other sound-making or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sound used for entertainment purposes. 
    Unreasonable noise means any noise defined in section 12-23. 
(Code 1978, § 12-20; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-21. - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause to be made or permit to be made any unreasonable noise within the geographic boundaries of the village , or within those areas over which the village has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1978, § 12-21; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-22. - Determination of unreasonable noise. 
    A determination as to the existence of unreasonable noise may be established by the specific acts enumerated within section 12-23. 
(Code 1978, § 12-22; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-23. - Specific acts prohibited. 
    The following acts and the causes thereof are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  The use of any sound reproduction device outside of a structure, whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on property being used for residential purposes at a point more than 100 feet from the real property boundary line of the property from which said noise emanates, excluding Monday through Thursday from 2:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.; Friday and Saturday from 2:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and on Sunday from 2:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device inside a structure so as to result in the sound, or any part thereof, emitted from such device to be projected therefrom outside the structure, whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on property being used for residential purposes at a point more than 100 feet from the real property boundary line of the property from which said noise emanates, excluding Monday through Thursday from 2:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.; Friday and Saturday from 2:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and on Sunday from 2:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device in a vehicle which would constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle operators. 
(4)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device within 500 feet of any school, church or courthouse while the same is in session so as to interfere with the function of such facility, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the location of such facility. 
(5)  The use or operation of any sound reproduction device within 500 feet of any hospital, nursing home or medical facility so as to interfere with the function of such facility or so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities while confined to or being treated at such facility, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the location of such facility. 
(6)  Powered equipment. 
a.  The outdoor use or operation of any powered tool or equipment, including, but not limited to, saws, drills, grinders, lawn mowers or tractors, leaf blowers or any other garden tools or equipment on property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
b.  The outdoor use or operation of any of the aforementioned tools or equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on property being used for residential purposes and at any time on property being used for nonresidential purposes so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(7)  The use or operation of any audible burglar alarm or motor vehicle burglar alarm, unless such burglar alarm shall be capable of and shall automatically terminate its operation within 15 minutes of being activated. If a burglar alarm, whether residential, business or motor vehicle, activates on two or more occasions within a one-year period, and such activation was not due to an actual attempt at entry into the residence, business or motor vehicle, such that it was a false alarm, then the owner of said alarm is required to have the alarm repaired or calibrated so as to eliminate the false alarm and attendance disturbance. 
(8)  The operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such motor vehicles, for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, so that the sound emanated therefrom is audible on property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to public utility vehicles actually engaged in emergency operations. 
(9)  The operation, repair, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, go-cart or minibike on property being used for residential purposes so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(10)  The use or operation of a refuse-collecting vehicle anywhere which, when collecting or compacting, projects sound which is audible on property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(11)  The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal or bird which shall make sounds which are audible on property being used for residential purposes for a continued or intermittent duration in excess of 30 minutes, or which shall disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(12)  The conduct of any construction activities, including, but not limited to, the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, public or private roadways, roads, premises, parks, utility lines or other property, including related activities such as land clearing, grading, earthmoving, excavating, blasting, filling or landscaping, so as to project a noise therefrom which is audible on a property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1978, § 12-23; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-24. - Exceptions. 
    The following sounds shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  The sound created by bells or chimes associated with a church, synagogue or any other place of public worship. 
(2)  The sound created by any governmental agency or by the use of public warning devices. 
(3)  The sound created by public utilities in carrying out the operation of their function. 
(4)  The sound created by any parade, fair, sporting event, entertainment or other event sponsored by any public organization or private school, provided that such event shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  The sound created by animals in a kennel when the kennel owner has taken all reasonable steps to temper that sound. 
(6)  The sound emanating from any tractors, trucks, combines or any other machinery used for agricultural purposes while planting, harvesting or tending to crops being grown on land zoned for such agricultural purposes. 
(7)  Snow-removal equipment. 
(8)  The sound emanating from a reproduction device situate outside at any public outings, private clubs, restaurants and taverns on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.; on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and Mondays through Thursdays between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that in no event shall such sound production violate the provisions of Penal Law § 240.20(2). 
(9)  The sound emanating from a reproduction device situate inside a permanent closed structure at any public outing, private club, restaurant and tavern between 2:00 p.m. and one hour before the last hour authorized by the state liquor authority for the service of alcoholic beverages in licensed facilities except that in no event shall such sound production violate the provisions of Penal Law § 240.20(2). 
(Code 1978, § 12-24; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Sec. 12-25. - Penalties for offenses. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day that such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense punishable as such. This article shall be enforced by the Lewiston consolidated police department as well as any other police agency with authority to enforce same. 
(Code 1978, § 12-25; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-20006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 12-26. - Authority to grant exception and variances. 
    The board of trustees or its duly authorized representatives shall have the authority to grant special variances, issue temporary permits and suspend any of the provisions of this local law upon such conditions and for such time as it shall deem fit to best serve the public health and welfare and the quality of life in the village. 
(Code 1978, § 12-26; L.L. No. 2-2001) 
Secs. 12-27-12-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 12-44. - Established. 
(a)  No person under the age of 16 years shall be or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places of the village at night after the hours of 10:00 p.m. during the months from May 1 to November 1 and after the hours of 9:00 p.m. from November 1 to May 1 unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having charge or custody of such minor person or unless such minor person is in the performance of any errand or duty directed by such parent, guardian or other person having charge or custody of such minor person. 
(b)  The hours specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be standard time or daylight saving time, whichever shall be legally in effect. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 10; Code 1978, § 12-34; Res. of 8-5-1946) 
Sec. 12-45. - Minors not to engage in vocations requiring presence on streets during prohibited hours. 
    No person under the age of 16 years shall engage in any vocation such as peddling or selling upon the streets, alleys or public places of the village after the hours specified in section 12-44, or in any other vocation which requires the presence of such minor upon the streets, alleys or public places of the village after such hours. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 10; Code 1978, § 12-35; Res. of 8-5-1946) 
Sec. 12-46. - Parents, guardians not to permit article violations; exception. 
    No parent, guardian or other person having charge, care and custody of any person under the age of 16 years shall allow or permit any child, ward or other person under such age to go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places of the village during the time prohibited in this article. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 3, § 10; Code 1978, § 12-36; Res. of 8-5-1946) 
Sec. 12-47. - Defenses to prosecution. 
    It is a defense to a prosecution under this article that the person under 16 years of age was: 
(1)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(2)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(3)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(4)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection, the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(5)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(6)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(7)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
Secs. 12-48-12-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 12-70. - Possession of alcoholic beverage containers. 
    No person shall drink from, or have in his possession with intent to drink from, any open bottle, can or container, containing liquor, beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage while such person is on any public highway, public street, public parking area, public place or in any vehicle in any public place, excepting those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises, whatsoever in said village except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1978, § 12-40; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2; L.L. No. 6-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-71. - Consumption of alcoholic beverage in public places. 
    No person shall consume liquor, beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage while such person is on any public highway, public street, public parking area, or in any vehicle or public place, excepting those premises duly licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, whatsoever in the village except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1978, § 12-41; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 12-72. - Open container as evidence. 
    Any open bottle, can or container, containing or having contained liquor, beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage, found in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of all the occupants thereof and in violation of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 12-42; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 12-73. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, hard cider and every liquid containing alcohol capable of being consumed by a human being. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways in any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, buildings and parking lots all to which the general public has access. 
(Code 1978, § 12-43; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 12-74. - Exceptions. 
    This article, except for section 12-76, shall not apply to: 
(1)  The village parks designated as Academy Park and Lewiston Landing. 
(2)  Such specific public places as shall be made specifically exempt and for such times and upon such conditions as, by resolution of the board of trustees, they shall determine from time to time. 
(Code 1978, § 12-44; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 12-75. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250.00. 
(Code 1978, § 12-45; L.L. No. 5-1980, § 2) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 12-76. - Possession of alcoholic beverages. 
    No person under 21 years of age shall possess any alcoholic beverage in a public place, and any alcoholic beverage found to be in the possession of a person under 21 years of age in any such public place shall be confiscated. 
(Code 1978, § 12-46; L.L. No. 5-1988, § 1) 
State Law reference- Alcohol and underage persons, Alcoholic Beverage Control Law § 65 et seq. 
Secs. 12-77-12-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALARMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire alarm or security alarm installers, General Business Law § 69-l et seq. 

Sec. 12-100. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Village of Lewiston False Alarm Law." 
(Code 1978, § 12-50; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the village by reducing the number of false alarms of fire, intrusion, holdup or other emergencies which contribute to the ineffective use of emergency response agencies, require emergency responses which are susceptible to high accident rates, interfere with genuine emergencies (responses) and produce unnecessary alarm noises to the surrounding community. 
(Code 1978, § 12-51; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm business means any person engaged in the sale, leasing, installation, maintenance or service of alarm systems or who, in any manner, causes the sale, systems in or on any building, structure or facility within the village. An alarm business shall be licensed through the state. 
    Alarm information notice means a notice or decal posted in a prominent location on a building at which an alarm is operational, which shall contain an assigned identification number. 
    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment or devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention which is directly or indirectly connected to police, fire or emergency medical services and to which police, fire and emergency medical services agencies are expected to respond. An alarm system shall include automatic dialing devices. 
    Alarm user means any person using an alarm, including the owner or lessee of real property where an alarm is located. 
    Automatic dialer means any device that automatically dials and relays a prerecorded message to an emergency agency. 
    False alarm means activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, no auxiliary power supply, or the negligence of the owner, user, custodian or lessee of any alarm system or of his employees, requiring an emergency response when, in fact, an emergency does not exist, or the intentional activation of an alarm system when the activator knows an emergency situation does not exist. A false alarm does not include alarms activated by violent conditions of nature or similar causes beyond the control of the user, owner or operator of the alarm system. The activation of an alarm system under any circumstances in which the activator reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists shall not be deemed to be a false alarm. 
(Code 1978, § 12-52; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-103. - Registration of alarms. 
(a)  All alarm system users or their designees may register said alarm system with the chief of police of the village police department, on forms by the village police department. 
(b)  Whenever there occurs any change in the information provided on said registration, the alarm system user or his designee shall provide said changes to the village police department. 
(Code 1978, § 12-53; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-104. - False alarm fees. 
(a)  It is hereby found and determined that false alarms requiring the police and/or fire department to respond constitutes a public safety hazard and nuisance. 
(b)  An owner or lessee of real property to which an emergency agency responds as a result of a false alarm shall pay a fee for each such response in each calendar year as follows: 
(1)  Police department response. 
a.  First false alarm       no charge 
b.  Second false alarm       $25.00 
c.  Third and over false alarm, each        50.00 
(2)  Fire department response. 
a.  First false alarm response       no charge 
b.  Second false alarm response       $ 50.00 
c.  Third and over false alarm, each        100.00 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "calendar year" for 2002 shall commence on the effective date of the local law from which this article is derived. 
(d)  Notice of excessive use. The owner or lessee of real property which received an emergency response by reason of a false alarm shall be notified, in writing, by means of first-class mail of all avoidable alarms up to five police alarms and/or one fire alarm in a calendar year. The letter shall inform the owner or lessee of real property of the times and types of emergency responses provided to the address location and shall contain a copy of this article. 
(e)  The failure to pay service fees assessed pursuant to this section within 30 days of written notice from the village clerk-treasurer's office of the imposition of the fee is a violation of this article. 
(f)  Payment of charges. False alarm fees shall be paid to the: 
Village Clerk of the Village of Lewiston 
145 N. Fourth Street 
Lewiston, New York 14092. 
(Code 1978, § 12-54; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-105. - Administrative review. 
    An owner of real property or lessee thereof on which an alarm system has been installed and who has been notified of a false alarm may present evidence as to why any such alarm should not be classified as a false alarm to the village code enforcement officer. The police chief and/or fire chiefs shall designate three members of their departments, not to exceed three in total, to receive such evidence and make recommendations and findings of fact concerning such classification. All burglar alarm calls shall be referred to the police chief and/or his designee for a determination and recommendation to the code enforcement officer. All fire alarm calls shall be referred to the fire bureau or its designee for a determination concerning a classification, which determination shall be reviewable only pursuant to procedures under Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 (Civil Practice Law and Rules § 7801 et seq.). To challenge the classification of an alarm as a false alarm, the real property owner or lessee thereof, or the alarm business responsible for maintenance of the alarm, shall, in writing, notify the code enforcement officer at the: 
Village of Lewiston 
145 N. Fourth Street 
Lewiston, New York 14092 
within 20 days after the receipt of notice of a false alarm. The failure to give timely notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to review the determination. 
(Code 1978, § 12-55; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-106. - Alarm information notice; failure to post. 
(a)  Alarm users shall be subject to a service fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the village board for each occurrence which the police or fire departments respond to an alarm at a building in which an alarm is operational, but the alarm information notice required by section 12-103 is not posted. This fee shall be in addition to the service fees and charges imposed pursuant to section 12-103. 
(b)  The failure to pay service fees assessed pursuant to this section within 30 days of written notice from the village clerk-treasurer's office of the imposition of the fee shall result in an additional charge as set forth from time to time by resolution of the village board for each occurrence for which a service fee has been assessed. The failure to pay service fees assessed pursuant to this section within 30 days of written notice from the village clerk-treasurer's office of the imposition of the fee is a violation of this article. Service charges shall be paid to the: 
Village Clerk of the Village of Lewiston 
145 N. Fourth Street 
Lewiston, New York 14092. 
(c)  Inspection for displaying of the alarm information notice shall be conducted by the village code enforcement officer during periodic fire inspections. The code enforcement officer shall notify, in writing, by first class mail, any property owner or lessee where an alarm information notice is not properly posted. The property owner or lessee shall properly post the required alarm information notice within 15 days of the receipt of notice. Failure to properly post the alarm information notice within 15 days shall be an occurrence, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 12-56; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-107. - Restrictions on alarm systems. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm device which does not contain an operational automatic cutoff system which turns off the external audible alarms after a period not to exceed ten minutes after activation. 
(b)  An automatic dialer shall be connected directly to the county sheriff's department or state police dispatcher and shall automatically disconnect and/or terminate its message after the message has been transmitted a maximum of two times. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total transmission time of all messages shall not exceed five minutes. 
(Code 1978, § 12-57; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-108. - Connection to emergency agencies. 
(a)  No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of alarm alert which connects automatically to enhanced 911 or the 911 emergency telephone system. 
(b)  There shall be no automatic alarm systems with direct communication of any type to an emergency agency without prior written authorization from the emergency agency where the alarms terminate. 
(Code 1978, § 12-58; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-109. - Enforcement. 
    The village police department and code enforcement officer or designee shall enforce this article. For that purpose, the police department and the code enforcement officer and designee are authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets. The building inspector for the village shall be the code enforcement officer for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 12-59; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-110. - Limitation of ability. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted to place the village or any of its officers or agents under any obligation or duty to an alarm user or to any person hereunder by reason of this article. The village specifically disclaims any and all liability for any and all damages which may be in any way related to the failure or inability to respond to any alarm. 
(Code 1978, § 12-60; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-111. - Compliance. 
    The owners and lessees of premises having alarm systems shall comply with sections 12-107 and 12-108 on or before January 31, 2003. 
(Code 1978, § 12-61; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Sec. 12-112. - Penalties for offenses. 
    Any person or other entity that does not pay the fees as established in this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not less than twice the amount of such unpaid fees, but not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense. Any person or other entity that violates any other provisions of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not less than twice the amount of such unpaid fees, but not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs, continues or is permitted. 
(Code 1978, § 12-62; L.L. No. 03-2002) 
Secs. 12-113-12-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sex offender registration, Corrections Law § 168 et seq. 

Sec. 12-135. - Legislative intent. 
    The village recognizes that the county legislature by resolution of March 21, 2006, has urged municipalities throughout the county to adopt legislation concerning the registration of sex offenders in order to protect the citizen of each municipality. The village board believes it to be the utmost concern and priority to protect its citizens from certain types of sex offenders who have been deemed by their risk assessment level to pose a significant risk for re-offending. The village acknowledges the existence of Correction Law art. 6-C (Corrections Law § 168 et seq.) o referred to as the "Sex Offender Registration Act" but believes that this article is allowed by the Municipal Home Rule Law and is necessary in furtherance of the safety of the community. 
(Code 1978, § 12-65; L.L. 03-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 12-136. - Definitions. 
    The definitions as contained in Correction Law § 168-a are adopted as the definitions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 12-66; L.L. 03-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 12-137. - Registration content. 
    Such registration with the village police department shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Legal name of the level II or level III sex offender (registrant), including any nicknames or aliases, which may have been used or applied for. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Social security number. 
(4)  Current address and proposed address where such person has resided or intends to reside within the village. Additionally, any residences owned, purchased, leased, rented or to which such registrant may in any way be entitled in law or equity. 
(5)  Any address where such registrant stays or intends to stay within the village. 
(6)  The current and/or prospective place of employment as well as the address and telephone number and immediate supervisor of such registrant. Additionally, the hours which such registrant is assigned to work. 
(7)  Drivers' license identification number, as well as the vehicle identification number and license plate number of any vehicle owned, leased, utilized or otherwise driven by such registrant either during the course of employment or otherwise. 
(Code 1978, § 12-67; L.L. 03-2006, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 12-138. - Additional registration requirements. 
(a)  Should the registrant intend or desire to change his place of residence or employment, such change must be reported to the village police department before the same occurs. The information previously required of the registrant shall similarly be required for any prospective change. 
(b)  In the discretion of the village police department, any level II or level III sex offender who is registering pursuant to this local law shall submit to fingerprinting, photographing of his person, a DNA sample, dental imprints, a description of other indemnifying features or marks, shoe size and any other identifying information that the village police department deems necessary. 
(c)  Such registration shall occur at least annually thereafter for a period of 20 years. Any sex offender who is convicted of two or more separate level II or level III sex offenses must register for life. 
(d)  In the event of any change in registration information, or the addition of new or different information from the item of the initial or subsequent registration, such change shall be provided within three days of the time such new information is available to or otherwise know or within ability of the registrant to know. 
(Code 1978, § 12-68; L.L. 03-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 12-139. - Local registry. 
(a)  The village police department shall maintain a local registry of the particular sex offenders required to register under this article separate and distinct from the registry maintained pursuant to the Corrections Law. It shall specifically state that the registration is required under the Corrections Law. The village police department and/or the village may make available and disseminate such registration information as authorized by state law. 
(b)  In the event that any conviction of a level II or level III sex offender is reversed or set aside by appellant process or order of any court of competent jurisdiction, such data and/or order of the court shall be supplied by the sex offender to the village police department by way of certified copy and the village shall then strike from such registry such reversed or set-aside conviction. 
(c)  The village and the police department make no determination regarding the probability of recidivism the current propensity for criminal activity for any registrant purpose. The purpose of such data in registry is so that information is generally available and accessible rather than to constitute a specific warning about any specific registrant. 
(Code 1978, § 12-69; L.L. 03-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 12-140. - Residency and restrictions. 
    Level II and level III sex offenders shall not reside permanently or temporarily, or acquire any real property by purchase, lease, land contract, rental agreement of or tenancy or otherwise, or establish any place of lodging within a radius of 1,000 feet of all schools, playgrounds, parks, daycare centers, nursing homes, assisted living facilities or fire hall. 
(Code 1978, § 12-70; L.L. 03-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 12-141. - Village contracts. 
    All entities or persons entering into agreements with the village shall conduct background checks of all of its agents, servants or employees to determine whether or not such person may be a level II or level III sex offender as defined in the Corrections Law. Immediate notification shall be provided to the village of any such person. The proposed contractor shall then verify that such person shall not perform work within any of the afforested restricted areas unless specifically supervised by a designated superior of such entity or person. Failure by any contractor to comply with this provision shall be deemed to be a material breach of the contract, allowing the village to negate such contract without penalty. 
(Code 1978, § 12-71; L.L. 03-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 12-142. - Indemnification of village. 
    This article will not be deemed to create or have created any cause of action against the village, which may not be authorized under any other existing law. The village is not liable to any person who may hereafter be harmed who claims or may claim that notice under this article may have or would have prevented such harm. 
(Code 1978, § 12-72; L.L. 03-2006, § 9) 
Sec. 12-143. - Penalties for offenses. 
    Any violation of this article including the providing of inaccurate information is hereby deemed to be an offense separate and distinct from any violation of the Corrections Law. Violations of this article shall be punishable by maximum of 15 days in the county jail or a fine of $250.00 or both. Every day in which a level II or level III sex offender fails to register or is in any way in violation of this article shall be considered and constitute a separate offense. For purposes of any separate criminal prosecution or Corrections Law prosecution, jeopardy shall not be deemed to have attached by a way of violation of this local law should a conviction occur hereunder. Similarly, a conviction of any violation of the Corrections Law of criminal law shall not be deemed to exonerate such convicted party from prosecution under this article. It is the specific intent of the village that any violation of this article is a separate and distinct offense from any violation of the New York State Corrections Law or Penal Law. 
(Code 1978, § 12-72; L.L. 03-2006, § 10) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to dedicate property as playground or recreation center, General Municipal Law § 241. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Park defined. 
    The term "park" shall mean places so designated by resolution of the board of trustees from time to time and located within the village; places owned or leased by the village and operated by the village for parks and recreation purposes. Parks shall be deemed public places so as to make applicable to such parks and recreation areas those portions of the Code applicable to public places. 
(Code 1978, § 13-1; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Management of parks. 
(a)  The supervision, use and management of all public parks within the village shall be under the director of public works, subject to the direction of the board of trustees of the village and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is authorized to be issued as provided by sections 13-4 and 13-5, every person claiming to have such permit or permission shall produce and exhibit the same upon the request of any authorized person. All permits shall be subject to the provisions of this article, and the holders thereof must strictly observe the conditions thereof and the provisions of the laws of the village relating to the same. Any permit may be peremptorily revoked by the board of trustees, director of public works or chief of police in case of any violation of the terms on which the same was issued or of any law relating to the same by the holder thereof. 
(c)  No person shall refuse to obey any orders or requests of the director of public works or any policeman having for their objects, the preservation of the parks within the village, their contents or maintenance of order or decorum therein. 
(Code 1978, § 13-2; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 7) 
Sec. 13-3. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be fined not more than $250.00 for each offense, and in addition thereto, shall be subject to a civil action for any damages sustained by the village because of such violation. 
(Code 1978, § 13-3; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 8) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 13-4. - Permits required for certain activities. 
    A permit shall be obtained from the board of trustees by persons conducting, operating, presenting or managing any of the following activities: 
(1)  Picnics, outings or gatherings sponsored by an organization or individuals numbering 25 or more persons. 
(2)  Contests, exhibits, dramatic performances, spectacles, plays, motion pictures, radio or television broadcasts, fairs, circuses, shows, musical events or any similar events. 
(3)  The sale of articles or things as a regularly licensed concessionaire. 
(4)  Announcing, advertising or calling to the public's attention articles or services for hire. 
(5)  The reservation of any park facilities for a certain person or group of persons to the exclusion of others. 
(6)  All activities requiring written permission of the board of trustees as hereinbefore specified. 
(Code 1978, § 13-4; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 8A) 
Sec. 13-5. - Standards for issuance of permits. 
    The board of trustees may issue a permit when it finds that: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park or cause annoyance or the disturbance of any other person's reasonable use of park facilities, or cause annoyance or disturb the peace of persons residing near the park, or interfere with the maintenance of the park or its facilities. 
(2)  The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  The proposed activity and use is not unreasonably anticipated to cause violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police supervision by the village. 
(5)  The facilities desired have not been reserved for another use at the date and hour required in the application. 
(Code 1978, § 13-5; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 9) 
Sec. 13-6. - Prohibited activities-Generally. 
    No person shall permit any activity to occur in the village park which is prohibited by chapter 5, chapter 9, chapter 11, chapter 12, chapter 14, section 17-42 and chapter 19. 
(Code 1978, § 13-6; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 13-7. - Same-Specific regulations. 
(a)  Advertising. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver or leave any place within a park any placards, tickets, handbills, circulars or advertisements of any kind or nature for advertising purposes, or operate any advertising devices for the purpose of attracting attention to any exhibition, show, performance or display or purpose or solicit passengers for hire. 
(b)  Dangerous behavior. No person shall throw stones or other missiles; annoy others; interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any task, driveway, walk or public place in such park, or climb upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat, structure or other improvement in the park, or enter or leave any park except at established entranceways or exists; introduce, carry or discharge any firearms, fireworks or other explosives within a park or throw or deposit on any walk, path, floor or platform any litter or refuse of any kind. 
(c)  Fires. No person shall kindle or maintain any fire within a park, excepting in places provided for that purpose. When any fire is maintained in such place so designated, by any person, then the fire shall be under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. 
(d)  Hours of operation. No person shall, between the hours of sunset and 9:00 p.m. remain at any place in any park in the village where there is no artificial light, nor between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. under any circumstances within any park in the village. 
(e)  Camping prohibited. No person shall lodge or camp in any park in the village, excepting at places designated by the board of trustees. 
(f)  Sleeping on benches prohibited. No person shall sleep upon, lie upon or overturn any seat or bench in any park in the village. 
(g)  Glass beverage containers-Prohibited. No person shall have in his possession any open glass beverage container while such person is in any public park or on any public highway, public street, public parking area or in any vehicle or public place adjacent to any public park. 
(h)  Same-Presumptive evidence. Any open glass beverage container found in any vehicle while in any public park or on any public highway, public street, public parking area or in any public place adjacent to any public park shall be presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of all the occupants thereof and in violation of subsection (g) of this section. 
(i)  Same-Beverage defined. For the purposes of subsections (g) and (h) of this section, the term "beverage" is defined as every liquid capable of being consumed by a human being. This would not include baby formula in a glass bottle. 
(Code 1978, § 13-7; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 3) 
Sec. 13-8. - Recreational regulations. 
(a)  Wading or swimming. No person shall wade or swim in any park waters or waters adjacent to any park in the village, except at such time and in such places as may be specifically designated with appropriate signs by the director of public works. 
(b)  Use of boats, etc. No person shall launch or recover any boat, canoe or raft from any park lands of the village, except at such time and in such places as may be specifically designated with appropriate signs by the director of public works. 
(c)  Coasting. No person shall coast with vehicles or sleds on wheels or runners at any place within any park within the village except at such places and at such times as may be designated therefor by the director of public works. 
(d)  Games; picnics. No person shall throw, kick or strike any ball or object or pass the same or any other object or play or engage in any games within any park in the village excepting at places designated therefor. Picnics may be had in such parks of the village as shall be designated therefor by the director of public works, and portions of parks may be set off for games, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the board of trustees. 
(e)  Construction of platforms, etc.; meetings, ceremonies, etc. No person shall, without the written permission of the board of trustees, erect any structure, stand or platform within any park of the village, for the purposes mentioned in this section, and no person shall hold any meeting, perform any ceremony, make any speech or address, exhibit to the public any performance in whole or in part or engage in any parade or other procession or run any race, without the written consent of the board of trustees. 
(f)  Skating. No person shall use skates of any kind within any village park excepting at such times and at such places as may be designated therefor by the director of public works; nor shall any person skate, slide, walk or go upon any ice, excepting at such times and at such places as may be designated therefor by the director of public works. 
(Code 1978, § 13-8; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 4) 
Sec. 13-9. - Property injury or damage. 
(a)  No person shall injure, write upon, deface, displace, remove, destroy or tamper with any drive, path, walk, bridge or approach thereto, or disturb or remove any asphalt, concrete, flagstone, rock, gravel, sand or earth or make any excavation of any kind, or injure or remove any ice, or injure, displace or remove any structure, building, post, bench, seat, telephone, telegraph, pipe, receiving basin, covers, manholes or vents or any appurtenances or appendages connected therewith, or any other property or equipment, real or personal, owned by the village or under the jurisdiction or control of the village appertaining to the use, management or maintenance of any park in the village, or injure or in any way interfere with any machine, instruments or contrivance used in the parks, or deface, remove or injure any signs, inscription, post or monument within any such park, or any lamps, lights, or apparatus connected therewith and used in any parks, without the written permission or direction of the director of public works. 
(b)  No person shall destroy, cut, injure or remove any plant, flower, shrub, tree or growing thing, or pile any material or debris against the same, or attach any rope, cable or any other contrivance thereto, or enter or walk upon planted place within any park of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 13-9; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 5) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief and related offenses, Penal Law § 145.00 et seq. 
Sec. 13-10. - Vehicle regulations. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon any walk, path or part of any park in the village not designated for vehicle use; no person shall ride any bicycle or similar vehicle on any walk or footpath within any park in the village; no person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle within any park outside of designated parking places. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer shall indicate or direct by gesture or otherwise, the speed or force of any vehicle within a park in the village, the driver thereof shall immediately obey such direction. 
(Code 1978, § 13-10; L.L. No. 3-1980, § 6) 
Sec. 13-11. - Speed on waterways. 
(a)  Watercraft defined. The term "watercraft" means all manner of devices, gasoline-powered or otherwise, submersible and/or floating and as also defined in the Navigation Law of the state. 
(b)  Speed limit established. There is hereby established a speed limit for watercraft on the waters of the Niagara River between the northerly line of Onondaga Street as extended into the river and the southerly line of Cayuga Street as extended into the Niagara River and for a distance of 100 feet from the shoreline. No watercraft in said area shall exceed five miles per hour and in any event shall not travel at a speed which creates a wake. 
(c)  Violations. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense, $50.00 for the second offense committed within 24 months and $500.00 for the third or any subsequent offense committed within 24 months. Calculations of time periods for determining successive violation periods shall be those violations occurring within an 18-month period. 
(d)  Enforcement. All police and peace officers and those officers as empowered by federal and state law shall be the enforcement officers of this provision. 
(Code 1978, § 13-11; L.L. No. 2-1989, § 1) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Secs. 13-12-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION BOARD 

Sec. 13-36. - Created. 
    The village board of trustees hereby creates a board which shall be known as the Village of Lewiston Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board. 
(Code 1978, § 13-16; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-37. - Membership. 
(a)  The board created under this article shall consist of seven members who are residents of the village, and shall include by qualifications of interest at least one person in each of the fields of parks, recreation and conservation, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of trustees, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  Successors to the members of the board shall be appointed to hold office for a term of two years and vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. Vacancies in such board occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled only for the unexpired term. The mayor is authorized to appoint up to two members to the board who are between the ages of 16 and 21 years. 
(Code 1978, § 13-17; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 13-38. - Officers. 
    The mayor, subject to the approval of the village board of trustees, shall designate a member of the board created by this article to act as chairman thereof. At the first meeting of the board, the members thereof shall elect from among themselves a recording secretary. 
(Code 1978, § 13-18; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-39. - Meetings. 
    The board created by this article shall adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate records of the meetings and activities and shall file an annual report with the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 13-19; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-40. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the board created by this article shall be to: 
(1)  Be responsible for the formulation and development of policies which govern the regulation and use of all village parks, recreation and conservation programs and related facilities and submitting same for approval by the board of trustees. 
(2)  Ascertain and evaluate recreation and conservation needs and recommend from time to time the establishment, operation and expansion or retrenchment of parks, recreation services and conservation programs with respect to these needs. 
(3)  Develop and recommend long-range plans for future park, recreation and conservation programs and facilities, capital projects and improvements. 
(4)  Advise the village board of trustees on matters affecting the preservation, development and use of natural and manmade features and conditions of the village, in so far as beauty, quality, biological integrity and other environmental qualities are concerned so as to enhance the long-range value of the environment to the inhabitants of the village. 
(5)  Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the village board of trustees, conduct a program of public information in the community which shall be designed to foster increased understanding of recreational programs and park facilities available, and of environmental problems and issues existing in the community. 
(6)  Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in public or private ownership within the municipality; and of the ownership, present use and proposed use of such open areas, so as to provide a base of information for recommendations by the commission for their preservation and/or use; maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all public parks within the municipality and of the facilities available and programs conducted at said parks; maintain an up-to-date inventory of recreational programs conducted under the auspices of the village, including such information as may be necessary to carry out the general purposes of this article. 
(7)  Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups, institutions and individuals within the village in accord with the purposes of this article. 
(8)  Maintain liaison and communications with public and private agencies and organizations of local, state and national scope, whose programs and activities have an impact in the areas of concern of the board or who can be of assistance to the board. 
(9)  Work in cooperation with the planning commission and zoning board of appeals, recommend from time to time to the village board of trustees, appropriate and desirable changes in existing local laws and ordinances or recommend new local laws relating to parks, recreation and conservation. 
(10)  Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in accord with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Conduct studies, surveys and inventories as may be necessary to carry out the general purposes of this article. 
(12)  Obtain and maintain in an orderly fashion, maps, reports, books and other publications to support the necessary researches of the board in their area of concern. 
(13)  When authorized by resolution of the village board of trustees, accept by gift, grant, devise, bequest or otherwise property, both real and personal, in the name of the village, as may be necessary to conserve and otherwise properly utilize open spaces and other land and water resources within the boundaries of the village and to carry out the programs of the village in the acquisition and development of parks and recreation programs. Such real property may be accepted in fee for land and water rights, or as any lesser interest, development rights, easement including conveyance with limitations or reversions. 
(14)  Review each application received by the board of trustees or by the building inspector, planning commission or zoning board of appeals where the same may seek approval for the use and development of any open area listed in the open space index or designated for future parks, development or acquisition and development. The board shall submit a written report to the referral body within 45 days of the receipt of such application, or earlier if so ordered by the board of trustees. Such report shall evaluate the proposed use or development in terms of the planning objectives developed as a result of this article. The report shall make recommendations as to the most appropriate use or development and include preferable alternative use proposals consistent with village plans. A copy of every report shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer. 
(15)  Perform any duties assigned to it by resolution by the board of trustees. 
(16)  Upon approval by the board of trustees, request the assistance of any state department in the preparation of any report. 
(Code 1978, § 13-20; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-41. - Reports. 
    The board created by this article shall submit an annual report to the village board of trustees not later than April 1 of each year concerning the activities and work of the board and from time to time shall submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary or requested by the board of trustees to fulfill the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 13-21; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 13-42. - Compensation; expenses. 
    The members of the board created by this article shall receive no compensation for their services as members thereof, but may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties within the appropriations made available therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 13-22; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1) 
Chapter 14 - PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Peddlers, General Business Law § 32 et seq.; local regulation of peddlers, General Business Law § 35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Exemption from licensing and registration. 
    Where state and/or federal legislation has been enacted licensing or regulating a particular activity so as to preempt the village from enforcing article II of this chapter the clerk, upon submission of proper documentation evidencing such preemption, and the receipt and filing of copies of permits or licenses issued pursuant to such legislation, may determine that article II of this chapter has sufficiently been preempted from enforcement with respect to an individual and waive the requirements as set forth under article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 14-1; L.L. No. 8-1985, § 1) 
Secs. 14-2-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-16. - Persons deemed to be engaged in hawking, peddling or soliciting. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, any person who, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of any residence or other place solicited, by means of telephone, by going from door-to-door, by standing in any street or public place: 
(1)  Offers to sell merchandise, wares or goods; 
(2)  Takes orders for the future delivery of merchandise, wares or other goods; 
(3)  Offers to purchase goods, wares or other goods; 
(4)  Offers to perform services immediately, or at a future date, or offers to make, manufacture or repair any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery; 
(5)  Offers to make a future appointment for any of the above purposes; 
shall be deemed to be engaged in hawking, peddling or soliciting. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be considered synonymous: solicitor, hawker, peddler, itinerant merchant, transient vendor, purveyor, door-to-door salesman. 
(Code 1978, § 14-16; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-1) 
Sec. 14-17. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hawk, peddle or solicit as defined in this article within the village without first having registered with the village clerk-treasurer and having received, and having in force and effect, a license to do so, if such is required by the village clerk-treasurer. 
(b)  A separate license or registration card shall be required for each vehicle or conveyance used and shall contain the state motor vehicle plate number and shall be displayed on the vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 14-17; L.L. No. 1-1968, §§ 20-2, 20-5) 
Sec. 14-18. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to procure a license or to register to hawk, peddle or solicit within the corporate limits of the village shall file with the village clerk-treasurer a written application, together with an employer's authorization if required, sworn to before a notary public, upon a form approved by the village board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 14-18; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-19. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    No license or registration card required by this article shall be issued to a person: 
(1)  A person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  A person who has been refused a license within the past 12 months, or who has had a license revoked within the last 12 months, unless he can show that the reasons for the rejection or revocation no longer exist. 
(Code 1978, § 14-19; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-20. - Annual fees. 
    An annual fee of $25.00 shall be paid before a license or registration card required by this article is issued. 
(Code 1978, § 14-20; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-5) 
Sec. 14-21. - Exemptions from fees. 
    The following persons or organizations shall be required to obtain a license, but will not be required to pay any registration fee: 
(1)  Merchants or solicitors having an established place of business within the village for their employees while acting within the scope of their employment. For purposes of this subsection an established place of business shall mean a building or commercial residence in which a person transacts business and deals in goods, wares, merchandise or services which shall have been in operation for at least 90 days. 
(2)  Farmers or truck gardeners or their employees who sell or deliver products of their farm or garden. 
(3)  Religious, charitable and nonprofit educational institutions or organizations. 
(4)  Every licensee, while conducting business, shall carry the license and exhibit the same upon demand. 
(Code 1978, § 14-21; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-22. - Bond. 
    Every applicant under this article who is not a resident of the county, or who represents anyone whose principal place of business is outside of the state, shall file with the village clerk-treasurer a surety bond running to the village in the amount of $1,000.00, such surety given by an insurance carrier licensed by the state insurance department and conditioned upon the application that the applicant shall comply with this article and the laws of the state and guaranteeing to any resident of the village that all monies paid down will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, hawker, solicitor, or his agent, and that any property delivered or services rendered will be in compliance with representations made by the one so making any such representations. Such bond shall provide that action upon such bond may be brought by any person to whom a judgment has been awarded because of loss caused by such licensee's failure or default. 
(Code 1978, § 14-22; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-5) 
Sec. 14-23. - Issuance; assignability. 
    If the village clerk-treasurer approves an application for a license or registration under this article, the clerk-treasurer shall within five days issue a license or registration card signed by such clerk, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct business under the terms of this article. Such license is not assignable and anyone that permits it to be used by any person, and any other person who uses it, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 14-23; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-24. - Denial; appeal. 
    In the event the village clerk-treasurer denies an application under this article, the clerk-treasurer shall state the reasons therefor. All appeals shall be to the village board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 14-24; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-4) 
Sec. 14-25. - Expiration. 
    The license or registration card required by this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1978, § 14-25; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-5) 
Sec. 14-26. - Forfeiture. 
    Conviction of any violations of this article shall also constitute and effect an immediate forfeiture of any license or registration card issued pursuant hereto. 
(Code 1978, § 14-26; L.L. No. 1-1968, § 20-6) 
Chapter 15 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Preservation of fresh water wetlands. 
(a)  Definitions. The definitions contained in Environmental Conservation Law § 24-0107 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. The term "local government" shall mean the village. 
(b)  Declaration of policy. It is declared to be the public policy of the village to preserve, protect and conserve the fresh water wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the despoliation of fresh water wetlands and to regulate the use and development of such wetlands to secure the natural benefits of fresh water wetlands, consistent with the general welfare and beneficial economic and social development of the village. 
(c)  Statement of findings. The statement of findings as set forth in Environmental Conservation Law § 24-0105 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference wherever such findings are or may be applicable to the village. 
(d)  Regulations. The provisions for activities requiring a permit, the application procedures and the method for granting permits and other considerations required in Environmental Conservation Law §§ 24-0701, 24-0703 and 24-0705 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(e)  Implementation. Wherever a provision is contained in Environmental Conservation Law art. 24 which has not been adopted through the enactment of the provisions hereinbefore provided, which are required to be adopted to comply with the provisions contained in Environmental Conservation Law § 24-0501, such provisions are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1978, § 15-1; L.L. No. 5-1976, §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 15-2. - Planning fees. 
    The following planning fees are hereby established: 
(1)  Major subdivision application       $100.00 
(2)  Minor subdivision application         50.00 
(3)  Request for special planning meeting         30.00 
(4)  Application for development plan approval         50.00 
(5)  Subdivision application package          2.00 
(6)  State environmental quality review environmental assessment form         50.00 
(SEQREAF) 
(Code 1978, § 15-2; Res. of 5-3-1976; L.L. No. 9-1992, § 1) 
Secs. 15-3-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Village planning commission, General Municipal Law § 234 et seq. 

Sec. 15-16. - Authorized. 
    The village is hereby authorized to create a planning commission pursuant to General Municipal Law § 234, which commission shall be known as the village planning commission. 
(Code 1978, § 15-16; Ord. No. 8.2, § 1, 10-3-1966) 
Sec. 15-17. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The village planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the village, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of trustees. Successors to the members of the commission first appointed shall be appointed to hold office for terms of two years and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(b)  The term of office of a member appointed to such commission shall commence on June 1 in the year of appointment and expire in the year of expiration of such term. 
(c)  Vacancies in such commission occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled only for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(d)  Requirements of General Municipal Law § 234 , as the same provides for members and terms of office of the planning commission, are hereby superseded within the village for all matters and things which may properly be the subject of control by a local law herein and hereafter adopted by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 15-17; Ord. No. 8.2, § 2, 10-3-1966; L.L. No. 8-1975, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 15-18. - Organization. 
    The village planning commission shall annually elect a chairman from its own members. It shall have the power and authority to employ experts, clerks and a secretary and to pay for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all, the annual appropriation made by the board of trustees. The commission shall also adopt rules and regulations in respect to procedure before it and in respect to any subject matter over which it has jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law art. 12-A (General Municipal Law § 234 et seq.). 
(Code 1978, § 15-18; Ord. No. 8.2, § 3, 10-3-1966) 
Sec. 15-19. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board of trustees may, at any time by resolution, provide that the following matters, or any one or more of them, shall be referred for report thereon, to the village planning commission by the board of trustees, zoning board of appeals, building inspector or other public officer of the village which is the final authority thereon before final action thereon by such authority: 
(1)  The adoption of any map or plan of the village or part thereof including drainage and sewer or water system plans or maps for any such public waterfront, or marginal street, or public structure upon, in or in connection with such front or street, or for any dredging, filling or fixing of lines with relation to said front. 
(2)  Any change in any such maps or plans. 
(3)  The location of any public structure upon, in or in connection with, or fixing lines with relation to said front. 
(4)  The location of any public building, bridge, statue or monument, highway, park, parkway, square, playground or recreation ground, or public open place of the village. 
(b)  Such report upon any matter or class of matters referred to the commission shall be returned to the board of trustees within 30 days from the time such report was requested or the planning commission shall be in default and shall forfeit the right further to suspend action unless the time limitation for the return of the report is otherwise stated by the board of trustees when the report is initially requested. 
(c)  The planning commission shall have full powers and authority to make such investigations, maps, reports and recommendations in connection therewith relating to the planning and development of the village as to it seems desirable or which have been requested by any public body or officer. 
(d)  Such planning commission may cause to be made a map of the village or any portion thereof, or of any land outside the limits of the village so near or so related thereto, that in the opinion of the planning commission it should be so mapped. Such plans may show not only such matters as by law have been or may be referred to the planning commission, but also any and all matters and things with relation to the plan of the village which to the planning commission seem necessary and proper, including recommendations and changes suggested by it; and any report at any time made may include any of the above. Such planning commission may obtain expert assistance in the making of any such maps or reports, or in the investigations necessary and proper with relation thereto, not exceeding in all, the annual appropriation made by the board of trustees. 
(e)  The planning commission shall have power to approve plans showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, and to approve the development of plats, entirely or partially undeveloped and which have been filed in the office of the clerk of the county prior to the appointment of such planning commission and the grant to such board of the power to approve plats. 
(f)  In addition, the planning commission shall have all other powers and duties given and prescribed by General Municipal Law art. 12-A (General Municipal Law § 234 et seq.). 
(g)  The planning commission shall be responsible for the review and evaluation of proposed actions in the coastal area of the village in accordance with article IV of this chapter. The planning commission shall evaluate the consistency of the proposed action with the policies and purposes of the adopted local waterfront revitalization program (LWRP) for the village and shall provide its considerations and recommendations to the village board of trustees for final determination and certification of consistency with the LWRP. 
(Code 1978, § 15-19; Ord. No. 8.2, §§ 4-6, 10-3-1966; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 1) 
State Law reference- General powers of planning commission, General Municipal Law § 234 et seq. 
Secs. 15-20-15-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW OF CERTAIN ACTIONS 

Sec. 15-43. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words and their derivatives used in this article shall have the same meanings as those defined in Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0105 and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR. 
    County, city, town, or village means the Village of Lewiston. 
    Local waterfront revitalization area (LWRA) means that portion of the state coastal area within the village, as delineated in the village waterfront revitalization program. 
    Local waterfront revitalization program (LWRP) means the local program to implement the state coastal management program within the village, as adopted by the village board of trustees and as approved by the secretary of state pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of 1981. 
    WAF means waterfront assessment form. 
(Code 1978, § 15-73; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 15-44. - Compliance with article required; exceptions. 
    No decision to carry out or approve an action other than an action listed in section 15-75(b) or Section 617.12 of Title 6 NYCRR as a Type II action, shall be made by the board of trustees or by any department, board, commission, officer or employee of the village until there has been full compliance with all requirements of this article and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting: 
(1)  The conducting of contemporaneous environmental, engineering, economic feasibility or other studies and preliminary planning and budgetary processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal for action which do not commit the village to approve, commence or engage in such action; or 
(2)  The granting of any part of an application which relates only to technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such partial approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence the action until all requirements of this article and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR have been fulfilled. 
(Code 1978, § 15-74; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 2) 
Sec. 15-45. - Classification of actions. 
(a)  Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR and the criteria therein, the actions listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 NYCRR as Type I actions are likely to have a significant effect on the environment. 
(b)  Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR and the criteria therein, the actions listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 NYCRR as Type II actions are deemed not to have a significant effect on the environment. 
(c)  Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR and the criteria therein, those actions similar to the actions listed in Section 617.4 of Title 6 NYCRR as Type I actions, but not specifically identified are classified as unlisted actions and may have a significant effect on the environment as determined in accordance with Section 617.11 of the Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-75; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 3; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 15-46. - Application and statement. 
(a)  For the purpose of assisting in the determination of whether an action may or will not have a significant effect on the environment, applicants for permits or other approvals shall file a written statement with the board of trustees setting forth the name of the applicant; the location of the real property affected, if any; a description of the nature of the proposed action; and the effect it may have on the environment. In addition, applicants may include a detailed statement of the reasons why, in their view, a proposed action may or will not have a significant effect on the environment. Where the action involves an application, the statement shall be filed simultaneously with the application for the action. The statement provided herein shall be upon a form prescribed by resolution by the board of trustees and shall contain such additional relevant information as shall be required in the prescribed form. Such statement shall be accompanied by drawings, sketches and maps, if any, together with any other relevant explanatory material required by the board of trustees. 
(b)  In the event that an action will occur within or will impact the LWRA a WAF shall be completed and filed with the board of trustees. The WAF, and any additional material as may be necessary to explain the nature and extent of the action, shall be required prior to the board of trustees determination of significance pursuant to Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-76; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 4; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 15-47. - Application fee. 
    Every application for determination under this article shall be accompanied by a reasonable fee as set forth in this section to defray the expenses incurred in rendering such determination. The fee shall be the sum of $25.00 for each application. 
(Code 1978, § 15-77; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 7) 
Sec. 15-48. - Notice of proposed action to be posted. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application and a statement, the board of trustees shall cause a notice thereof to be posted on the signboard, if any, of the village maintained by the village and may also cause such notice to be published in the official newspaper of the village, if any, or in a newspaper having general circulation within the village, describing the nature of the proposed action and stating that written views thereon of any person shall be received by the board of trustees no later than a date specified in such notice. 
(Code 1978, § 15-78; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 5) 
Sec. 15-49. - Determination on application. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall render a written determination on the application filed under section 15-46 within 15 days following receipt of a complete application and statement; provided, however, that, such period may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the board of trustees. The determination shall state whether such proposed action may or will not have a significant effect on the environment or the coastal resources of the village. The board of trustees may hold informal meetings with the applicant and may meet with and consult any other person for the purpose of aiding it in making a determination on the application. 
(b)  If the board of trustees determines that the proposed action is not an exempt action, or an action listed in section 15-45(b) or Section 617.13 of Title 6 NYCRR as a Type II action and that it will not have a significant effect on the environment, the board of trustees shall prepare, file and circulate such determination as provided in Section 617.10(b) of Title 6 NYCRR and thereafter the proposed action may be processed without further regard to this article. The determination shall include certification as to consistency with the policies and purposes of the LWRP for those actions subject to a WAF. Certification shall include a review and evaluation of the action in accordance with article II of this chapter and a determination that the proposed action is consistent with the policies and purposes of the LWRP based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The action will not substantially hinder the achievement of any of the policies and purposes of the LWRP and whenever practicable will advance one or more such policies; or 
(2)  If the action will substantially hinder the achievement of any policy or purpose of the LWRP, then the action may be determined to be consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the LWRP provided that: 
a.  No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action to be undertaken in a manner which would not substantially hinder the achievement of such policy or purpose; 
b.  The action will minimize all adverse effects on such policy or purpose to the maximum extent practicable; 
c.  The action will advance one or more of the LWRP policies and purposes; and 
d.  The action will result in an overriding local, regional or statewide public benefit. 
The action shall not be directly undertaken, funded, or approved by the village board or any department, office, other body or officer of the village, unless the action has been determined to be consistent with the policies and purposes of the LWRP. 
(c)  If the board of trustees determines that the proposed action may have a significant effect on the environment or the coastal area, the board of trustees shall prepare, file and circulate such determination as provided in Section 617.10(c) of Title 6 NYCRR; and thereafter the proposed action shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the provisions of this article and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-79; L.L. No. 2-1977, §§ 6(a), 8; L.L. No. 7-1989, §§ 6, 7) 
Sec. 15-50. - Draft environmental impact statement-Preparation. 
(a)  Following a determination pursuant to section 15-49 that a proposed action may have a significant effect on the environment, the board of trustees shall, in accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR: 
(1)  In the case of an action involving an applicant, immediately notify the applicant of the determination and shall request that the applicant prepare an environmental impact report in the form of a draft environmental impact statement. 
(2)  In the case of an action not involving an applicant, shall prepare a draft environmental impact statement. 
(b)  If the applicant decides not to submit an environmental impact report, the board of trustees shall prepare or cause to be prepared the draft environmental impact statement or, in its discretion, notify the applicant that the processing of the application will cease and that no approval will be issued. The board of trustees may require an applicant to submit a fee to defray the expense to it of preparing a draft environmental impact statement or reviewing same if it is prepared by the applicant. Such fees shall be determined as follows: An amount equal to one-half of one percent of the action's total cost unless otherwise reduced by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(c)  When an action will occur within or will impact the LWRA, the draft environmental impact statement shall include an identification of the applicable policies and purposes of the LWRP and a discussion of the effects of the action on such policies and purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 15-80; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 9; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 15-51. - Same-Notice of completion. 
    Upon completion of a draft environmental impact statement prepared by or at the request of the village, a notice of completion containing the information specified in Section 617.7(d) of Title 6 NYCRR shall be prepared, filed and circulated as provided in Section 617.7(e) and (f) of Title 6 NYCRR. In addition, it will be published in the official newspaper, if any, of the village or if none, a newspaper having general circulation within the village, and a copy thereof shall also be posted on a signboard of the village. Copies of the draft environmental impact statement and the notice of completion shall be filed, sent and made available as provided in Section 617.9 of Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-81; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 10) 
Sec. 15-52. - Same-Hearing; notice. 
    If the board of trustees determines to hold a public hearing on a draft environmental impact statement, notice thereof shall be filed, circulated and sent in the same manner as the notice of completion and shall be published in the official newspaper of the village, if any, or if none, in a newspaper having general circulation within the village at least ten days prior to such public hearing. Such notice shall also state the place where substantive written comments on the draft environmental impact statement may be sent and the date before which such comments shall be received. The hearing shall commence no less than 15 calendar days nor more than 60 calendar days of the filing of the draft environmental impact statement, except as otherwise provided where the board of trustees determines that additional time is necessary for the public or other agency review of the draft environmental impact statement or where a different hearing date is required as appropriate under other applicable law. 
(Code 1978, § 15-82; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 10) 
Sec. 15-53. - Effect of determination that proposed action will not have significant effect on environment. 
    If, on the basis of a draft environmental impact statement or a public hearing thereon, the board of trustees determines that an action will not have a significant effect on the environment, the proposed action may be processed without further regard to this article, except that for actions subject to a WAF, a certification of the consistency of the action with the policies and purposes of the LWRP shall be made in the manner and according to the criteria provided in section 15-49(b). 
(Code 1978, § 15-83; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 11; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 9) 
Sec. 15-54. - Final environmental impact statement-Preparation. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the board of trustees shall prepare or cause to be prepared a final environmental impact statement in accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR; provided, further, that, if the action involves an application, the board of trustees may direct the applicant to prepare the final environmental impact statement. Such final environmental impact statement shall be prepared within 45 days after the close of any hearing or within 60 days after the filing of the draft environmental impact statement, whichever last occurs; provided, however, the board of trustees may extend this time as necessary to complete the statement adequately or where problems identified with the proposed action require material reconsideration or modification. Where the action involves an application, such final environmental impact statement shall be accompanied by the fee specified in this section to defray the expenses of the village in preparing and/or evaluating same. The fee shall be determined as follows: An amount equal to one-half of one percent of the action's total cost unless otherwise reduced by resolution of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 15-84; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 12) 
Sec. 15-55. - Same-Notice of completion. 
    A notice of completion of a final environmental impact statement shall be prepared, filed and sent to all persons to whom the notice of completion of the draft environmental impact statement was sent. Copies of the final environmental impact statement shall be filed and made available for review in the same manner as the draft environmental impact statement. 
(Code 1978, § 15-85; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 13) 
Sec. 15-56. - Same-Filing and consideration prerequisite to decision to carry out or approve actions subject to article. 
    No decision to carry out or approve an action which has been the subject of a final environmental impact statement by the board of trustees or by any other agency shall be made until after the filing and consideration of the final environmental impact statement. Where the board of trustees has been the lead agency for an action, it shall make a decision whether or not to approve the action, within 30 days of the filing of the final environmental impact statement. 
(Code 1978, § 15-86; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 14) 
Sec. 15-57. - Findings to be made upon decision to carry out or approve actions; filing of copy. 
(a)  When the board of trustees decides to carry out or approve an action which may have a significant effect on the environment it shall make the following findings in a written determination: 
(1)  Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations of state policy, to the maximum extent practicable, from among the reasonable alternatives thereto, the action to be carried out or approved is one which minimizes or avoids adverse environmental effects, including the effects disclosed in the relevant environmental impact statements; and 
(2)  All practicable means will be taken in carrying out or approving the action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental effects. 
(b)  For actions subject to a WAF, the written determination shall include a certification of the consistency of the action with the policies and purposes of the LWRP made in a manner and according to the criteria provided in section 15-49(b). 
(c)  For public information purposes, a copy of the determination shall be filed and made available as provided in Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-87; L.L. No. 2-1977, §§ 15, 16; L.L. No. 7-1989, §§ 10, 11) 
Sec. 15-58. - Maintenance of files of notices, statements, certificates and written determinations required. 
    The village shall maintain files open for public inspection of all notices of completion, draft and final environmental impact statements, certifications of consistency with local waterfront revitalization program policies and written determinations prepared or caused to be prepared by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 15-88; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 17; L.L. No. 7-1989, § 12) 
Sec. 15-59. - Procedure when more than one agency is involved in an action. 
    Where more than one agency is involved in an action, the procedures of Sections 617.4 and 617.8 of Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR shall be followed. 
(Code 1978, § 15-89; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 18) 
Sec. 15-60. - Coordination of time limitations. 
    The time limitations provided in this article shall be coordinated with, to the extent practicable, other time limitations provided by statute or local law, ordinance or regulation of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 15-90; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 6(b)) 
Sec. 15-61. - Exemption of actions undertaken or approved prior to certain dates. 
    Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Environmental Conservation Law art. 8 for local agencies shall be exempt from this article and the provisions of Article 8 of the environmental conservation law and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR; provided, however, that, if, after such dates the board of trustees or a department, board, commission, officer or employee having jurisdiction modifies an action undertaken or approved prior to that date and the board of trustees determines that the modification may have a significant adverse effect on the environment, such modification shall be an action subject to this article and Part 617 of Title 6 NYCRR. 
(Code 1978, § 15-91; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 19) 
Secs. 15-62-15-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Historic preservation, General Municipal Law § 119-aa et seq. 

Sec. 15-100. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as and may be cited as the Village of Lewiston Historic Preservation Law. 
(Code 1978, § 15-100; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 1) 
Sec. 15-101. - Legislative intent. 
    The village finds that many buildings, structures and sites, or districts of such buildings, structures and sites within its borders, have a unique character and special aesthetic interest and represent fine architectural products of distinct periods in the area's history. The village also finds that such buildings, structures, sites, or districts of such may be damaged without adequate consideration of the irreplaceable loss to the citizens of the village. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be a matter of public policy and a valid exercise of the inherent police powers of the village to protect, enhance and perpetuate such buildings, structures, sites or districts as is necessary to: 
(1)  Promote the health, prosperity and safety of village citizens; 
(2)  Safeguard the area's heritage by preserving elements of its cultural, political, economic and aesthetic history; 
(3)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past; and 
(4)  Promote the use of such buildings, structures, sites, or districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the area. 
(Code 1978, § 15-101; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 2; L.L. No. 6-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 15-102. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in appendix B, the zoning code of the village , shall be applicable to this article. In addition thereto, the following definitions are deemed controlling regarding terms utilized in this article: 
    Alteration means any act or process which changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a building, structure or site designated as historically significant or any such building, structure of site in an historic district. The term "alteration" includes relocation of property and new construction. 
    Certificate of approval means that document issued by the historic preservation commission which entitles the applicant for such to alter or demolish a designated property. 
    Demolish means to raise, remove, destroy, obliterate or contribute to substantial deterioration of any portion of a designated property or exterior architectural feature thereof. 
    Designated property means a building, structure or site determined to be historically significant and all buildings, structures and sites within an historical district. 
    Exterior architectural feature means the architectural style, design, general arrangement, and components of a designated property, including, but not limited to, color of paint, type of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such portion and all buildings, structures, outbuildings, walls, fences, steps, topographical features, earthworks, paving and signs located on the designated property. 
    Historic district means any area which: 
(1)  Has a special character or special historic, architectural, archeological or cultural value; or 
(2)  Represents one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more areas; and 
(3)  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a distinct section. 
    Relocation means moving a building to another site within the historic district or moving designated historic properties from or to other areas in the village. 
    Styles of architecture means styles recognized by one of the following organizations: 
(1)  The National Register of Historic Places. 
(2)  The Historic American Buildings Survey. 
(3)  The Historic American Engineering Record, U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service. 
(4)  The Division for Historic Preservation, New York State Office of Parks and Recreation. 
(5)  The National Trust for Historic Preservation. 
(6)  The Society of Architectural Historians. 
(Code 1978, § 15-102; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 3; L.L. No. 7-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1990, §§ 2-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, General Municipal Law § 119-bb. 
Sec. 15-103. - Historic preservation commission-Established; composition; term of office; officers; meetings. 
(a)  There shall be created by the village board an historic preservation commission which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the village board. The village historian shall be a nonvoting and ex officio member of the commission. 
(b)  Said members shall be residents of the village and shall include, if available, two architects, one of whom shall be a landscape architect, and one a municipal planner. Other appointees shall be qualified by reason of training, experience, or demonstrated interest in law, local law, business or the history or historical preservation of the village. A vacancy occurring in the membership for any cause shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the village board of trustees. 
(c)  The term of office shall be five years, provided that of those five members initially appointed by the village board, one shall be for a term of five years, one for a term of four years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. 
(d)  The commission shall elect one member as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and shall submit an annual report in the last week of May to the village board of trustees encapsulating its activities of the past year and listing goals and objectives for the ensuing year. Such report shall also include recommendations that the commission deems necessary to carry out the principles of this local law and to enhance the historic and aesthetic qualities of the village. 
(e)  Meetings of the commission shall be held at such times as the commission may determine or at the call of the chairman or at the call of at least two commission members, and must be held within 30 days of receipt of complete application for a certificate of appropriateness by the village building inspector. All commission meetings shall be open to the public and notice of such shall be posted on the municipal bulletin board at the municipal building at least five days prior to the meeting. 
(f)  The commission shall keep regular minutes of its proceedings and show the vote of each member upon any question. It shall also keep records of its examinations and official actions. 
(g)  The commission shall also constitute the architectural review board and act as such board when reviewing and submitting recommendations pursuant to section 15-104(f). 
(h)  During such time as there are less than four members constituting the historic preservation commission, the duties of the historic preservation commission shall be performed by the village planning commission. 
(Code 1978, § 15-103; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 4; L.L. No. 8-1979, § 5; L.L. No. 7-1980, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1990, §§ 5, 6; L.L. No. 5-1993; L.L. No. 6-1993, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 15-104. - Same-Duties and powers. 
(a)  The commission shall inventory and designate all historically significant buildings, structures, sites or districts of such within the village enlisting the voluntary assistance of interested civic and social organizations. The initial inventory shall be completed within one year of the effective date of this local law or the date of first appointment of members to the commission created hereunder, whichever is later, or such other extended times as adopted by resolution of the board of trustees and such inventory shall be reviewed, updated or revised where necessary each year thereafter before the submission of the annual report. Such initial inventory and annual alterations shall be distributed to the village building inspector, clerk, historian and assessor. 
(b)  The commission shall determine the acceptability of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(c)  In addition to the aforementioned powers, the commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Retain or employ professional consultants, secretaries, clerks or other such personnel as may be necessary to assist the commission in carrying out its duties and with budgetary limitations; 
(2)  Formulate recommendations concerning the preparation of maps, brochures and historical markers for selected historic sites and buildings or districts; 
(3)  Advise owners of historic buildings on problems of preservation and restoration. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as authorizing the commission, in acting with respect to any designated property, to amend the existing zoning requirements or grant any variance from those requirements. 
(e)  In reviewing the construction, alteration or demolition of designated properties, the commission may impose conditions or determinations that are more restrictive than those prescribed in the zoning law, building code and other provisions of law applicable to such activities. 
(f)  The commission shall review and submit its recommendations to the planning commission upon matters referred to them for their review by said commission. Such review shall concern the appropriateness of exterior architectural features, as defined in section 15-102, of buildings and structures, plans for the preservation, drives, parking and circulation, and other appropriate features. In reviewing a matter so referred, the commission shall apply the standards as set forth in section 10R of the zoning law (appendix B to this Code). 
(Code 1978, § 15-104; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 5; L.L. No. 4-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 8-18-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1989, § 2; L.L. No. 6-1990, § 7) 
Sec. 15-105. - Criteria and procedure for designation of buildings, structures, sites, or districts. 
(a)  Buildings, structures, sites and historic districts may be designated as historically significant if, by virtue of association with historic personages or events or as representative examples of historic styles or methods of construction, they are important in the chronological record of the village , its neighborhoods, the state or the nation and/or such entity's cultural, political, economic, or aesthetic heritage. 
(b)  When evaluating historic significance, the commission shall consider date of erection and period of historic significance, architectural style, scarcity of the type or period in the village, quality of design, integrity of the original design, present condition and appearance and, in the case of historic districts, the collective merits and interrelationship of neighboring properties. 
(c)  Procedure for designation. 
(1)  Notice of the fact that the commission is considering designation of a building, structure, site or district as historically significant shall be served upon the owner of such building, structure, site or district. 
(2)  Said notice shall contain the date, time and place of the meeting at which the proposed designation will be considered, and shall invite owners to comment upon the proposal in person or by providing written comments. 
(3)  The notice shall be given at least ten days, but not more than 20 days prior to the date of the scheduled meeting. 
(4)  Such notice shall be served personally upon said owner if the owner is a resident of the village; or if the owner is not a resident of the village, said notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address as set forth on the latest tax rolls of the village. 
(5)  The commission may at its discretion call a public hearing to receive comments concerning a proposed designation. Notice of such hearing shall be served on owners as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section and shall be announced by public notice at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
(6)  Designation shall be made by resolution of the historic preservation commission and notification of such designation shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. 
(Code 1978, § 15-105; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 6; L.L. No. 7-1980, §§ 3, 4; L.L. No. 6-1990, §§ 8-10) 
Sec. 15-106. - Criteria and procedure for certificate of approval. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any inconsistent ordinance, local law, code, rule or regulation concerning the issuance of building permits, no alteration to a designated property shall be commenced without first obtaining a certificate of approval from the commission, nor shall any building permit to demolish, alter, initiate new construction on a designated property be issued without such a certificate of approval having first been issued. The certificate of approval required by this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any ordinance, local law, code, rule or regulation of the village. 
(b)  Application for a certificate of approval shall be made to the commission, in writing, in duplicate and upon forms prescribed by the commission. The application shall be sufficiently detailed for the commission to evaluate whether the proposed changes will be in harmony with the historic building, structure or site and shall be accompanied, unless their necessities are waived by the commission, by plans illustrating the designated property, the proposed changes and the relationship of such to adjacent property and in addition, unless waived, shall include: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of the building, structure or land the exterior architectural features of which are proposed to be changed; 
(3)  Elevations of the proposed change; 
(4)  Perspective drawing; 
(5)  Samples of the color or materials to be used in the proposed change; 
(6)  Where the proposed change includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering, all dimensions and colors; a description of the materials to be used and the method of illumination, if any; and a plan showing the location on the building or property. 
(c)  Within a reasonable time after the application if filed, but in all events within 30 days (Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excluded), unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the commission, the commission shall invite the owner or the owner's representative to attend a meeting when the commission reviews the application. If it approves the application, the commission shall attach a certificate of approval to the building permit, if applicable, or give the certificate of approval to the applicant if no building permit is required. If the commission approves the application, it shall issue a certificate of approval which shall be attached to the building permit, if applicable, and immediately transmitted to the building inspector, or applicant if no building permit is required. The commission shall also stamp all submitted plans. If the commission disapproves an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons therefor to the applicant and building inspector. The commission may advise what it considers proper if the application is denied, and the applicant, if he so desires, may modify his plans and resubmit his application after doing so. 
(d)  In approving or denying an application, the commission shall be guided by the secretary of the interior's standards for historic preservation projects. The commission shall consider the historical and architectural importance of the property, the site in relation to its surroundings, the value to the community, the condition of the property at the time of application, the severity of the change in exterior design and the degree of harmony and integration of the proposed changes with the original property. Also to be considered is whether denial of a certificate will cause economic hardship to the applicant, and if so, to what extent. 
(e)  An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness has been denied may within ten days of such denial apply for relief from the strict application of the historic preservation local law on the grounds of economic hardship. The commission shall meet within 30 days of the application for relief. At the meeting, proponents and opponents of the application will be provided the opportunity to present their views. 
(f)  The commission may solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant make submissions concerning any or all of the following information before it makes a determination on the application: 
(1)  Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the commission for changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
(2)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
(3)  Any listing of the property for sale or the rent price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years; 
(4)  Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent assessments; 
(5)  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
(6)  Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether a sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other; 
(7)  In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility or rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property; 
(8)  If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period; and 
(9)  Any other information considered necessary by the commission for a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
(g)  For all applications, except those involving demolition or removals, the applicant shall, in order to prove the existence of economic hardship, establish that: 
(1)  a.  He will suffer significant and unreasonable economic or financial injury if required to comply with the commission's decision as applied to his property; and 
b.  The character of the landmark and/or historic district will be preserved and not substantially changed by the proposed alteration; or 
(2)  The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return. 
(h)  For applications involving demolition or removal of a landmark or structure within a historic district, the applicant shall, in order to prove the existence of economic hardship, establish that: 
(1)  The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 
(2)  The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; 
(3)  Reasonable efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property for rehabilitation and preservation have been made and have failed; and 
(4)  The owner has not created his own hardship through waste and neglect, thereby permitting the structure to fall into a serious state of disrepair. 
(i)  Throughout the hardship procedures, the applicant shall consult in good faith with the commission, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. 
(j)  Failure of the commission to approve or disapprove an application within 30 days after its filing or within the time period mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the commission shall be deemed to constitute approval by the commission. 
(Code 1978, § 15-106; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 7; L.L. No. 7-1980, § 5; L.L. No. 6-1990, §§ 11-14) 
Sec. 15-107. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeal from designation. Any owner whose building, structure, site or district has been designated pursuant to section 15-105 shall have ten days after the adoption of the resolution designating the building, structure, site or district to file an appeal with the village board. 
(b)  Appeal from disapproval of application. Upon a disapproval of an application for a certificate of approval, if the applicant refuses to modify the application to meet the commission's recommendations, he shall have ten days after the issuance of the commission's decision pursuant to section 15-106, to file an appeal with the village board. 
(c)  Review. The village board shall use the same criteria as the commission in reviewing an appeal under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and shall consider no other facts beyond those contained in the application, the proceedings before the commission and the commission decision, and shall render a decision within 30 days after the filing of said appeal. 
(d)  Deadline for appeal. All properties heretofore designated by the historic preservation commission shall be entitled to file an appeal from such designation pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the board of trustees provided such appeal is filed within 20 days from the adoption of the local law from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1978, § 15-107; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 8; L.L. No. 3-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1990, § 15) 
Sec. 15-108. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Nothing in this law shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance and repair using material that duplicates the original in design, color, texture and other visual qualities. 
(b)  Interior changes. The commission shall have no control over interior changes in any building or structure unless evidence of such change is apparent on the exterior of such building or structure. 
(c)  Materials and methods. Upon approval of an application and subsequent issuance of a certificate of approval, applicant will use materials and methods specified in the approval. 
(d)  Exterior design or appearance. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as to require the owner of any presently existing building or structure if designated historically significant pursuant to this law to make any change in the exterior design or appearance of such building. 
(Code 1978, § 15-108; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 9; L.L. No. 6-1990, § 16) 
Sec. 15-109. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this local law is hereby declared to be an offense, as defined in the New York State Criminal Procedure Law, punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(b)  Each and every week that a violation of this local law is allowed to continue shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent further prosecution under other local laws of the village or under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 15-110; L.L. No. 1-1978, § 11) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 15-110. - Maintenance and repair required. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district, which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outward appearance. 
    No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the historic preservation commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. 
Examples of such deterioration include: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports. 
(2)  Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members. 
(3)  Deterioration, of exterior chimneys. 
(4)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar. 
(5)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(6)  Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety. 
    Violations. 
(1)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a violation and the violator shall be liable to a fine up to $250.00/day for each day the violation continues. 
(2)  Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs, or peraiits a designated property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this section shall be required to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the village/town/city attorney. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty. 
(L.L. No. 2-2010, § 15-101) 
Chapter 16 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-1. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  Findings. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species; 
(3)  Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat; 
(4)  Improper design and construction of stormwater management practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation; 
(5)  Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow; 
(6)  Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the waters of the municipality; 
(7)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from land development activities; 
(8)  The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety; 
(9)  Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards governing stormwater management and site design will produce development compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in subsection (a) of this section. This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives: 
(1)  Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised; 
(2)  Require land development activities to conform to the substantive requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities, Permit No. GP-02-01 or as amended or revised; 
(3)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
(4)  Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land development activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(5)  Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(6)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and ensure that these management practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-1; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-1)) 
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural activity means the activity of an active farm including grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities. 
    Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a land development activity. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
    Department means the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
    Design manual means the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most recent version or its successor, including applicable updates, which serves as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and practices. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Erosion control manual means the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004), most current version or its successor, commonly known as the Blue Book. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Impervious cover means those surfaces, improvements and structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavements, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development activity means construction activity including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or more in the aggregate, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
    Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Licensed professional means a person or entity licensed to practice their profession in the state. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Pollutant of concern means sediment or a water quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development activity. 
    Project means land development activity. 
    Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Sensitive areas means cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species. 
    SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01 means a permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land. 
    SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems GP-02-02 means a permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Stormwater means rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage. 
    Stormwater hotspot means a land use or activity that generates higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies. 
    Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment. 
    Stormwater management facility means one of a series of stormwater management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of controlling stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management officer (SMO) means the superintendent of public works of the village who shall accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs), forward the plans to such employee, agency or board of the village which may be reviewing any application for a construction activity requiring submission of an SWPPP, and inspect stormwater management practices. 
    Stormwater management practices (SMPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan for controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction activities. 
    Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Surface waters of the state means lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the state and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of the state. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-2; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-2)) 
Sec. 16-3. - Applicability of chapter, exemptions, conflict. 
(a)  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities within the Village of Lewiston. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review under this chapter: 
(1)  Agricultural activity; 
(2)  Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject to this chapter; 
(3)  Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility; 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary by the stormwater management officer (SMO); 
(5)  Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the village on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(6)  Land development activities for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(7)  Cemetery graves; 
(8)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(9)  Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or natural resources; 
(10)  Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing flowers, vegetables or other plants primarily for use by that person and his family; and 
(11)  Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing structure. 
(c)  Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-3; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-3)) 
Sec. 16-4. - Procedure. 
(a)  The village shall designate an SMO who shall accept and review all SWPPPs. The SMO may: 
(1)  Review the SWPPPs; 
(2)  Upon approval by the board of trustees, engage the services of a registered professional engineer to review the SWPPPs, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by the board of trustees; or 
(3)  Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the SWPPPs conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  For all land development activities subject to review and approval by the planning commission, board of trustees, zoning officer or building inspector of the village under the development plan, flood hazard zone A zoning permit, or subdivision regulations, the applicant or developer shall be required to submit an SWPPP that complies with the requirements in this chapter to the SMO, and the land development activity shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this chapter. 
(1)  Review by SMO. Within 45 days of receipt of an SWPPP, the SMO shall forward the SWPPP, together with his written recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP, to such employee, officer, commission or board of the village which is reviewing an application for approval of a land development activity requiring submission of an SWPPP. A recommendation of approval shall only be given if the SWPPP complies with the requirements of this chapter. In making a recommendation to approve with modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in writing. 
(2)  Review by final reviewing body. The employee, officer, commission or board of the village reviewing the application for approval of a land development activity shall review the SWPPP and recommendation of the SMO and shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP. Such reviewing body shall not act to approve the SWPPP unless it complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the reviewing body acts to approve with modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the reasons for the decision shall be stated in writing. In order to be approved, the applicant shall revise an SWPPP that has been approved with modifications or disapproved in accordance with the recommendations of the reviewing body and shall submit the revised SWPPP to such body for review. 
(c)  For all land development activities not subject to review by the planning commission, board of trustees, zoning officer or building inspector of the village as stated in subsection (b) of this section, the applicant or developer shall be required to submit an SWPPP prepared in accordance with the standards contained in this chapter to the SMO. Within 45 days of receipt of an SWPPP, the SMO shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP. Approval shall only be given if the SWPPP complies with the requirements of this chapter. In approving with modifications or disapproving the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in writing. In order to be approved, an applicant shall revise an SWPPP that has been approved with modifications or disapproved in accordance with the recommendations of the SMO and shall submit the revised SWPPP to the SMO for review. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-4; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-4)) 
Sec. 16-5. - Stormwater pollution prevention plans. 
(a)  Requirement. No application for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the SMO or such employee, officer, commission or board of the village reviewing any application for approval of a land development activity requiring submission of an SWPPP has received an SWPPP that complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Contents. 
(1)  All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and erosion and sediment controls: 
a.  Background information about the scope of the project, including the location, type and size of the project; 
b.  Site map/construction drawings for the project, including a general location map. The site map should be at a scale of no smaller than one inch to 100 feet. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface waters; wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the land development activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and location of the stormwater discharges; 
c.  Description of the soils present at the site; 
d.  Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the erosion control manual, not more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP; 
e.  Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff; 
f.  Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill-prevention and response; 
g.  Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project close-out; 
h.  A site map/construction drawing specifying the location, size and length of each erosion and sediment control practice; 
i.  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins; 
j.  Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control measures; 
k.  Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment control practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration that each practice should remain in place; 
l.  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the erosion and sediment control practice; 
m.  Names of the receiving waters; 
n.  Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of the site; 
o.  Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable; and 
p.  Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site. 
(2)  Land development activities meeting condition A, B or C, set out in subsections (b)(2)a through c of this section, shall also include water quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in section 16-6(c), as applicable: 
a.  Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development activity discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on the department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the impairment. 
b.  Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development activity disturbing five or more acres. 
c.  Condition C. Stormwater runoff from land development activity disturbing between one and five acres of land during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family residences and construction activities at agricultural properties. 
(3)  SWPPP requirements for condition A, B or C (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls): 
a.  All information in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
b.  Description of each postconstruction stormwater management practice; 
c.  Site map/construction drawing showing the specific location and size of each postconstruction stormwater management practice; 
d.  Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the stormwater management system for the applicable design storms; 
e.  Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with predevelopment conditions; 
f.  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each postconstruction stormwater management practice; 
g.  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each postconstruction stormwater management practice; 
h.  Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer of title to the property; 
i.  Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with section 16-7. 
(4)  The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, professional engineer, or other licensed professional and must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the requirements in this chapter. 
(c)  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. Any notice of intent (NOI) submitted to the department pursuant to the SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01 shall be submitted to the SMO concurrently therewith. 
(d)  Contractor certification. 
(1)  Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification statement before undertaking any land development activity: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards." 
(2)  The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. 
(3)  The certification statement shall be included with and become part of the SWPPP for the land development activity. 
(e)  A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-5; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-5)) 
Sec. 16-6. - Performance and design criteria for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control. 
    All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance and design criteria: 
(1)  Technical standards. For the purposes of this chapter, the following documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this chapter: 
a.  The design manual; and 
b.  The erosion control manual. 
(2)  Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-6; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-6)) 
Sec. 16-7. - Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater facilities. 
(a)  Maintenance and inspection during construction. 
(1)  The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50 percent. 
(2)  For land development activities meeting condition A, B or C in section 16-5(b)(2), the applicant shall have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing one-half inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site log book. 
(3)  The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices. 
(b)  Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the county clerk after approval by the counsel for the village. 
(c)  Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this chapter. 
(2)  Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new maintenance personnel. 
(3)  Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with section 16-6. 
(d)  Maintenance agreements. The village shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the county clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the sample stormwater control facility maintenance agreement on file with the village clerk. The village, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-7; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-7)) 
Sec. 16-8. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Construction inspection. 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control inspection. The SMO may require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter and the SWPPP as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the SMO at least 48 hours before any of the following, as required by the SMO: 
a.  Start of construction; 
b.  Installation of sediment and erosion control measures; 
c.  Completion of site clearing; 
d.  Completion of rough grading; 
e.  Completion of final grading; 
f.  Close of the construction season; 
g.  Completion of final landscaping; or 
h.  Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas. 
If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the SMO. 
(2)  Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is responsible for conducting inspections of SMPs. All applicants are required to submit "as-built" plans for any SMPs located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(3)  Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater management practices. 
(4)  Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(5)  Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is made between private property and the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village of Lewiston the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(b)  Performance guarantee. 
(1)  Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development activities related to compliance with all conditions set forth by the village in its approval of the SWPPP, the village may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the village as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the village based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the village, provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that the facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to village. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from liability. 
(2)  Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the village with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the village may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs. 
(3)  Recordkeeping. The village may require entities subject to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Notice of violation. When the village determines that a land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Stop work orders. The village may issue a stop work order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop work order shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stop work order. The stop work order shall be in effect until the village confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(3)  Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(4)  Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350.00 nor more than $700.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(5)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this chapter, the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said building or land. 
(6)  Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the village may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(d)  Fees for services. The village may require any person undertaking land development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by the village or performed by a third party for the village. Any such fee may be set from time to time by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1978, § 16.5-8; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 2(16-8)) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Streets, sidewalks and public grounds, Village Law § 6-600 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Names. 
    Names shall be given to the streets, alleys, lanes, highways, grounds, and market places of the village and may be changed as the board of trustees may by resolution declare. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 1; Code 1978, § 17-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Permitted use. 
    The public streets, avenues, and alleys within the village shall be used solely for the purpose of persons on foot and of vehicles of all kinds, drawn by hand, animal or other motive power, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or local law. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 2; Code 1978, § 17-2) 
Sec. 17-3. - Digging up, carrying away materials prohibited. 
    No person shall dig up in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk or carry away dirt, soil, planks, paving or flagging stone or other material of which any street, lane, alley or sidewalk may be constructed, or take up any such plank or flagging stone except as provided by ordinance, local law or by resolution of the board of trustees, or to repair or rebuild sidewalks. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 4; Code 1978, § 17-3) 
Sec. 17-4. - Reports of dangerous and defective areas. 
    It shall be the duty of any peace officer to report to the superintendent of public works any defective or dangerous place in any sidewalk or the traveled portion of any street and notice shall be given at once to the board of trustees of such defect. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 7; Code 1978, § 17-10) 
Sec. 17-5. - Displacement, removal of markers and boundaries restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to displace or remove any rock, post or other monument which has been erected and marked for the purpose of designating a point or landmark in the boundary of any street, tract or lot of land in the village without first obtaining the consent of the board of trustees. 
(b)  Any person obtaining the consent of the board of trustees to temporarily displace or remove any village monument or landmark shall, before he displaces or removes the same, procure the superintendent of public works to determine its location from other well-known fixed points so that it may be accurately replaced in the same location as it had theretofore occupied, and shall file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer an affidavit that the same has been replaced in its original position. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 28; Code 1978, § 17-11) 
Sec. 17-6. - Erection of utility poles restricted. 
    No telegraph, telephone, cable company AKA Adelphia or electric light company, or any person shall in or upon any of the public streets or alleys of the village erect any poles or string any wires without the permission of the board of trustees. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 29; Code 1978, § 17-12) 
Sec. 17-7. - Trees on village right-of-way. 
    Trees located in the village right-of-way shall not be removed without permission of the village board of trustees. In considering applications for such tree removal the board shall consider: 
(1)  The immediate danger, if any, of personal injury or property damage posed by the subject tree to the public at large; 
(2)  The immediate danger of personal injury or property damage posed by the subject tree to the contiguous property and those thereon; 
(3)  The burden on the village due to the cost of the tree removal and replacement thereof; and 
(4)  The aesthetic effect on the streetscape and surrounding properties. 
All trees in or upon the village right-of-way shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest parts of the limbs or branches thereof shall be at least nine feet above the surface of the adjoining street. No liability attaches to the village for damages caused by the tree or limbs falling on the village right-of-way or adjacent property unless there is actual or constructive notice of the defective condition. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 11; Code 1978, § 17-13; L.L. No. 2-2009) 
Sec. 17-7A. - Trees on village right-of-way-Penalties. 
    Any person, as that term is defined in section 1-3, definitions and rules of construction, of this Code, who removes a tree located in the village right-of-way without permission of the village board of trustees shall be presumed to have done so willfully and shall have committed an offense punishable by a fine of at least $1,000.00 or three times the value of such tree or both. Section 1-9 of this Code, penalties not exclusive, remains in full effect and is applicable to this local law. 
(L.L. No. 1-2018) 
Sec. 17-8. - Division of streets, etc., into sidewalks. 
    The public streets, avenues and alleys shall be divided into sidewalks on either side. The board of trustees may designate the width of the sidewalk, and place at the crossings on such street or alley, stakes indicating the location of the curblines. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 3; Code 1978, § 17-14) 
Sec. 17-9. - Written notice of defects required. 
    No civil action shall be maintained against the village, village superintendent of public works or any other employee or official acting in their capacity, for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or for damages or injuries to person or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert unless written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition or of the existence of the snow or ice, relating to the particular place, was actually given to the village clerk, and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of or to cause the snow or ice to be removed, or the place otherwise made reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the actual receipt of such notice. 
(L.L. No. 2-2018) 
Sec. 17-10. - Contents of written notice/transmittal of notice. 
    The written notice of defect required by section 17-9 of the Village Code of the Village of Lewiston, New York shall contain the following information at a minimum: 
(1)  The name and mailing address of the person giving such notice. 
(2)  A precise statement as to the nature and extent of any defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition or the existence of snow or ice upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk within the village. 
(3)  The date, or approximate date, that such condition first became known to the person providing the notice. 
(L.L. No. 2-2018) 
Secs. 17-11-17-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPOSITS 

Sec. 17-35. - Prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall deposit in or upon any public street or grounds any substance or material whatsoever, or erect or maintain any obstruction thereon, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 5; Code 1978, § 17-4) 
Sec. 17-36. - Building materials, etc. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person shall use any part of a public street or alley, or any public grounds for the deposit of any building, paving or sewer materials, or any other materials except for immediate transfer of the same to the premises fronting on the portion of said street so occupied; nor shall such substances be allowed to remain on such street, alley, or ground, longer than sundown of the same day. 
(b)  The board of trustees may permit any owner or contractor, in case there is no space on such lot, to deposit such substances, to use not more than one-third of the street for such deposit for a period to be designated by it. 
(c)  In all such cases, the person holding such permit shall keep such materials so piled that they shall not encumber any other portion of road, street or sidewalk, and shall, if required by the board of trustees or street commissioner, guard against accidents at night by reason of such material being in the street by displaying lanterns at such piles of material during the night. 
(d)  In case any person violated the directions of the board of trustees or superintendent of public works with reference to such materials, it shall work a forfeiture of all rights and privileges of such permit and the superintendent of public works shall cause such material to be removed. The person so offending shall be liable to a penalty equal to the cost of such removal. 
(e)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any building, paving or sewer materials, or any other materials into any storm sewer or storm drain, except as provided in article IV of chapter 20. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 6; Code 1978, § 17-5; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 17-37. - Sweepings from premises. 
    No person shall sweep or permit any person in his employ to sweep from any building or lot owned or occupied by him, or from the sidewalk in front of such building or lot, any dirt, paper or rubbish of any kind, nor shall any person throw, scatter or place within the limits of any public street, alley or ground any paper, rags, dirt, garbage, ashes or any refuse whatsoever except as otherwise provided. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 15; Code 1978, § 17-6) 
Sec. 17-38. - Delivered goods. 
    No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, leave or deposit any goods, wares and merchandise upon any sidewalk, except such articles may be so deposited for not more than two hours while receiving such original packages or when in packages for delivery after the actual sale thereof. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 16; Code 1978, § 17-7) 
Sec. 17-39. - Plowing of snow, ice into piles unlawful. 
    No person shall plow, shovel or brush, sweep or heap up any snow, ice or other material into piles or ridges, in or upon any street, crosswalk or other public place, and in all instances where snow or ice is plowed, shoveled, brushed, swept or moved about, it shall be uniformly leveled off in front of residences and places of business by the person so plowing, shoveling, brushing or sweeping, or moving about in such manner as not to interfere with the public travel, or prevent the safe approach to any residence or place of business. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 24; Code 1978, § 17-8) 
Sec. 17-40. - Goods placed for sale. 
    Goods, wares and merchandise, for which the keeping, manufacturing of or dealing of or dealing in is not prohibited by law or ordinance, may be placed upon the sidewalk for exhibition within 21/2 feet of the building in which they are kept for sale. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 26; Code 1978, § 17-9) 
Secs. 17-41-17-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 17-69. - Construction, alteration and repair-Permitted; required after notice. 
    The owners or occupants of premises may, and after notice by the village shall, construct, repair, relay, grade or level sidewalks in front of their premises pursuant to specifications established by the board of trustees from time to time. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, §§ 8, 10; Code 1978, § 17-26) 
Sec. 17-70. - Same-Performance of work by village after owner's or occupant's failure to comply with notice of section 17-69; collection of costs. 
    The village may perform or cause to be performed any work not performed or cause to be performed by the owner or occupant of premises as required in the notice provided for in section 17-69 and the costs thereof may be assessed against the premises and collected as provided in Village Law § 5-518. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 9; Code 1978, § 17-27) 
Sec. 17-71. - Planting of shade trees restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises fronting upon any public right-of-way to plant shade trees in the sidewalk in front of such premises except by permission of the board of trustees. Trees may be so planted by permission of the board of trustees. The number and location of such trees shall be determined by the superintendent of public works. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 11; Code 1978, § 17-28) 
Sec. 17-72. - Snow and ice-Duty of owners, occupants, etc., to remove from sidewalks. 
(a)  Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any building or lot of ground in the village abutting upon any street, avenue or public place shall, within four hours after the cessation of every fall of snow or the formation of any ice on the sidewalk or public way abutting such building or lot of ground, remove or cause the snow or ice to be removed or cleaned entirely from the sidewalk or public way abutting such building or lot of ground; provided however, that the time between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall not be included in the period of four hours and also provided that in case the snow or ice on any sidewalk abutting such building or lot of ground shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge thereof, shall, within the times and places hereinabove specified, cover or cause such abutting sidewalk to be covered and strewn with either fine sifted hard coal ashes or sand or some similar material and shall, as soon thereafter as the weather permits, thoroughly clean such sidewalk and remove the ice and snow therefrom. 
(b)  Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any building or lot of ground abutting upon any street, avenue or public place for a continuous linear distance of 500 feet or more, shall be considered to have complied with this section if such person shall have begun to remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk or public way before the expiration of the time hereinabove mentioned and shall without suspending work, thereon, continue such removal and shall complete the same within a reasonable time. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, §§ 13, 34; Code 1978, § 17-29) 
Sec. 17-73. - Same-Removal by village upon owners', occupants', etc., failure to comply with section 17-72. 
    In case the snow or ice on the sidewalk or public way abutting any building or lot of ground as described in section 17-72 shall not be cleared or cleaned of ice or snow or covered with sand or some suitable material as provided in such section after the expiration of the time provided in such section for cleaning or covering the same, then and in that event, the superintendent of public works of the village shall forthwith proceed to clean or cover the sidewalk or public way as provided by such section, and the cost or expense of doing such work on the sidewalk or public way abutting any building or lot of ground shall be ascertained by the superintendent of public works and a report thereof shall be forthwith filed in the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 14; Code 1978, § 17-30) 
Sec. 17-74. - Same-Recovery of cost of removal. 
    The cost of work and materials furnished pursuant to section 17-73, as the same shall appear from the report of the superintendent of public works, on file in the office of the village clerk-treasurer, may be sued for and recovered from the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of the building or lot of ground abutting a sidewalk or public way from which snow or ice has been removed pursuant to such section by the village, and shall be a lien upon the premises reported to have been cleaned or covered pursuant to such section and may be assessed against the same in the village tax roll. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, § 14; Code 1978, § 17-31) 
Sec. 17-75. - Vehicles and livestock prohibited on sidewalks. 
    No bicycle, tricycle, automobile, or other vehicle propelled or moved by power carried by or upon the vehicle itself or any livestock shall be allowed upon the sidewalks in this village except to cross at driveway entrances. 
(Ords. 1904, ch. 1, §§ 3, 30; Code 1978, § 17-32) 
Secs. 17-76-17-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 17-94. - Required. 
    The owner of each building used for dwelling or commercial purposes shall identify the same by the street number assigned to the building or lot as shown on the maps attached hereto and made a part thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 17-44; Ord. of 8-5-1957, § 1.00) 
Editor's note- The maps referred to in this section are not printed in this volume but are on file in the village offices. 
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, Tax Law § 1 et seq.; village finances, Village Law § 5-500 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Service charge on tax exempt property. 
(a)  A service charge is hereby levied on tax exempt property to offset the cost of providing municipal services, including police protection, fire protection, street and highway maintenance, street lighting, water and sanitation services. 
(b)  The service charge to be levied on any specific property shall be an amount as ascertained by considering the benefit to the property to be in the same proportion to the total cost of all services provided for the entire village as the assessed evaluation of the specific property bears to the total assessed valuation of all property located within the village and receiving like services. 
(c)  The town assessor shall assess and separately list state owned real property or other tax exempt property using the same standards and procedures as used in the assessment of other real property within the village. 
(d)  Real Property Tax Law article 14, title 1 (Real Property Tax Law §§ 1400-1412) relative to status date, preparation of assessment roll, information supplied to nonresidents, tentative completion of assessment roll, notice thereof, hearing of complaints, verification of assessment roll, correction of errors and other provisions relating to assessments, not in conflict with this section, shall be used in connection with subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  In any proceedings by the real estate owner to reduce the real estate assessment on which the liability for the service charge is based; or to reduce the service charge attributable thereto; or to reduce the total service charge used in computing that specific property's charges, the owner has the burden of establishing by clear and convincing proof that the assessments and charges were erroneous. 
(f)  Article 14, Title 2, of the Real Property Tax Law (Real Property Tax Law §§ 1420-1442), relative to the levying and collection of taxes is incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section except that wherever those sections recite or concern themselves with "taxes," the phrase "service charge," is to be substituted. 
(g)  A further exception to the above incorporation as indicated in subsection (f) of this section is that Real Property Tax Law § 1420(1) shall, for the purposes of this section, read as follows: On or before May 15 or such other date that may be applicable pursuant to Village Law § 5-510, the board of trustees shall levy the service charge for the prior fiscal year. 
(Code 1978, § 18-1; L.L. No. 4-1971, §§ 1-7) 
Sec. 18-2. - Collection of property taxes to continue. 
    Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by chapter 531 of the Laws of 1994, the village hereby acts by local law, not subject to referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law (former Real Property Tax Law §§ 1450-1464). 
(Code 1978, § 18-1.1; L.L. No. 5-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 18-3. - Status of village as an assessing unit terminated. 
(a)  Legislative intent. The intent of the board of trustees of the village is to implement Real Property Tax Law § 1402(3.), providing for the voluntary termination of the village's status as an assessing unit, as provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the intent of this local law to abolish the position of assessor and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review of the assessments of real property located within the village. 
(b)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the village shall cease to be an assessing unit. 
(c)  The position of assessor in the village is hereby abolished. 
(d)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, taxes in the village shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the Town of Lewiston with the taxable status date of such town controlling for village purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 18-2; L.L. No. 3-1990, §§ 1-4) 
Secs. 18-4-18-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY INCOME TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Utility tax, Village Law § 5-530; Tax Law § 186-a. 

Sec. 18-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross income means and includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser in the village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the cost of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends and royalties, derived from sources within the village other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of those voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the village whatsoever; provided, however, that the term "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated within the village and in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the village. 
    Gross operating income means and includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in the village including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
    Person means persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock associations, co-partnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees, leases, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality and public districts. 
    Utility includes every person subject to the supervision of the state department of public service, except persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets. 
(Code 1978, § 18-32; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 2) 
Sec. 18-26. - Imposition of tax. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Village Law § 5-530, from on and after August 20, 1968, there is hereby imposed a tax equal to one per centum of its gross income from and after August 20, 1968, upon every utility doing business in the village which is subject to the supervision of the state department of public service, which has a gross income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500.00, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Public Service Law art. 3-B; and a tax equal to one per centum of its gross operating income from and after August 20, 1968, is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in the village which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500.00. 
(Code 1978, § 18-33; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 1) 
Sec. 18-27. - Application. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall: 
(1)  Apply only within the territorial limits of the village; 
(2)  Not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the village notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits; and 
(3)  Be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provisions of law. 
(Code 1978, § 18-34; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 1) 
Sec. 18-28. - Records. 
    Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its business in such form as the village clerk-treasurer may require and such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the village clerk-treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(Code 1978, § 18-35; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 3) 
Sec. 18-29. - Returns, filing contents. 
    Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file on or before August 25, November 25, February 25 and May 25 a return for the three calendar months preceding each such return date, and in the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he may require to be included therein. The village clerk-treasurer, in order to insure payment of the tax imposed, may require, at any time, a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the village to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true. 
(Code 1978, § 18-36; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 4) 
Sec. 18-30. - Payment. 
    At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the village clerk-treasurer the tax imposed hereby for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of the return or if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the return is required to be filed. 
(Code 1978, § 18-37; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 5) 
Sec. 18-31. - Determination of tax by clerk-treasurer upon filing of incomplete or unsatisfactory returns; review; limitation. 
(a)  In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the village clerk-treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from him, or if no return is made for any period, the village clerk-treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is able to obtain and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He/she shall give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person upon whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the village clerk-treasurer for a hearing, or unless the village clerk-treasurer shall, of his/her own motion, reduce the same. 
(b)  After such hearing, the village clerk-treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 , if application therefor is made within 90 days, after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the village clerk-treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of the application, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such order. 
(c)  Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as required by this article the tax may be assessed at any time. 
(Code 1978, § 18-38; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 6) 
Sec. 18-32. - Notice. 
    Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him in the last return filed by him under this article, or if no return has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the provisions of this section by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice. 
(Code 1978, § 18-39; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 7) 
Sec. 18-33. - Penalties and interest. 
    Any person failing to file a return or a corrected return, or to pay any tax or any portion thereof within the time required by this article, shall be subject to a penalty of five per centum of the amount of tax due, plus one per centum of such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the village clerk-treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such penalty. 
(Code 1978, § 18-40; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 8) 
Sec. 18-34. - Refunds. 
    If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make application for a refund thereof and the village clerk-treasurer or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the village clerk-treasurer shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the village clerk-treasurer. However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the village clerk-treasurer as provided in this article unless the village clerk-treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding in the manner provided in Civil Practice Law and Rules art. 78 that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the village clerk-treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination the village clerk-treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to commence a proceeding to review such determination, in accordance with the provisions of section 18-31. 
(Code 1978, § 18-41; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 9) 
Sec. 18-35. - Tax as operating cost. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility. 
(Code 1978, § 18-42; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 10) 
Sec. 18-36. - Enforcement. 
    Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the village clerk-treasurer shall be forward same to the county treasurer for collection. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the village treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty imposed by Tax Law § 186-a is made a lien. 
(Code 1978, § 18-43; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 11) 
Sec. 18-37. - Powers of village clerk-treasurer. 
    In the administration of this article, the village clerk-treasurer shall have the power to: 
(1)  Make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties; 
(2)  Prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax; 
(3)  Take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his official duty under this article; and 
(4)  Subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents. 
(Code 1978, § 18-44; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 12) 
Sec. 18-38. - Confidentiality of returns. 
(a)  Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the village clerk-treasurer, or any agent, clerk or employee of the village to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. 
(b)  The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the village in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the state tax commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the tax law of the state, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence so much of such returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the village clerk-treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the village attorney or other legal representative of the village of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year or both, and if the offender is an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the village he shall be dismissed from office, and shall be ineligible to hold any office or employment in the village for a period of five years thereafter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the village clerk-treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other village in the state information contained in returns filed under this article, provided such city or other village grants similar privileges to the village, and provided such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the village clerk-treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the state tax commission with any information contained in such returns. 
(Code 1978, § 18-45; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 13) 
Sec. 18-39. - Disposition of revenues. 
    All taxes and penalties received by the village clerk-treasurer under this article shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 18-46; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 14) 
Chapter 19 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate taxicabs and limousines, General Municipal Law § 181. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets of the village in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by such driver showing the time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and amount of fare of each trip. 
    Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street in the village which has been designated by the village as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
    Owner means any person owning or having control of the use of a taxicab upon the streets of the village. 
    Rate card means a card issued for display in each taxicab which contains the rate of fare then enforced. 
    Street means and includes any street, avenue, alley, court, bridge or public thoroughfare within the village. 
    Taxicab, taxi or cab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than seven persons and not operated on a fixed route. 
    Taxicab driver's license means the permission granted by the village to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the village. 
    Taxicab permit or owner's permit means the permission granted to the owner of such permit by the village to keep and use for hire a taxicab in the village. 
    Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of the passenger. 
(Code 1978, § 19-16; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(1)) 
Sec. 19-20. - Compliance with City of Niagara Falls rate schedule required; exception. 
    No person shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than the maximum rates applicable from time to time in the City of Niagara Falls except that any person desiring to charge taxicab rates less than the rates from time to time in effect in the City of Niagara Falls shall be permitted to do so, but before charging such lesser rates the schedule to be charged shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer and the chief of police at least 15 days before such rates are put into effect. No taxicab may be operated upon the streets of the village at a rate of fare other than the rate provided in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 19-17; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(29)) 
Sec. 19-21. - Display of certain information required. 
    There shall be displayed in the passenger's compartment of each taxicab in full view of the passengers, a card not less than four inches by six inches in size, which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which such owner operates the business, the address and telephone number of such owner and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in such vehicle. Such card shall be approved as to form by the chief of police before being so displayed. A true and correct copy of the card as approved shall be filed with the chief of police and the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 19-18; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(13), (29)) 
Sec. 19-22. - Color schemes; insignia. 
(a)  The taxicabs of every owner operating a taxicab in the village shall be of a color scheme and bear the owner's trade name, monogram or insignia which is clearly and easily distinguishable from the color scheme, owner's trade name, monogram or insignia used on the taxicabs of any other owner already operating under this article. No change whatsoever in the color scheme or distinguishing characteristics of any taxicab shall be made without written permission from the chief of police, and it shall be unlawful for any person soliciting patronage from any vehicle described in this article to represent by word, sign or insignia that the vehicle for which he is soliciting such patronage is a vehicle owned or operated by other than the actual owners. 
(b)  Every taxicab operated within the village shall bear the following identification: The owner's trade name, monogram or insignia, together with a cab number and the owner's telephone number painted upon the metal portion of the outside of each side of the taxicab and the cab number and owner's telephone number painted on the outside rear panel of the taxicab. All lettering mentioned in this subsection shall be not less than 21/4 inches in height and not less than 5/16 -inch stroke. 
(Code 1978, § 19-19; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(27)) 
Sec. 19-23. - Taximeters-Generally. 
(a)  All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. 
(b)  Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. No taximeter shall be operated from any wheel from which power is applied. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. It shall be unlawful to change the size of the front wheels or tires of a taxicab or the gears operating the taximeters, or to transfer such instrument from one vehicle to another without reinspection and approval. 
(c)  Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to note when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. 
(d)  Taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police department. Any inspector or other officer of the police department is hereby authorized either upon complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any meter, and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating such taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon, such taxicab shall be kept off the streets until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition. No taximeter shall be operated unless such taximeter and the speedometer are in proper working condition and accurate. 
(Code 1978, § 19-20; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(28)) 
Sec. 19-24. - Same-Periodic inspections required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person holding the owner's permit for a taxicab to present to the chief of police, at least once in every six months, evidence of the inspection, approval and seal of the taximeter installed in such taxicab, by an approved testing agency. The seal to be attached to the taximeter shall be displayed in the taxicab so that it may be easily read by the public. 
(b)  No owner or driver of any taxicab operated in the village shall interfere with or prohibit the police department from inspecting or thoroughly examining any taxicab or any taximeter used upon any taxicab. 
(Code 1978, § 19-21; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(31)) 
Sec. 19-25. - Open stands. 
(a)  The director of public works, in coordination with the chief of police, is hereby authorized and empowered to establish open taxistands for the exclusive use of taxicabs in such places upon the streets of the village, as he deems necessary. In creating an open stand, the director of public works shall take into consideration the need for such stands by the taxicab owners and the convenience of the general public. He shall prescribe the number of taxicabs that shall occupy such open stand. The director of public works shall not create an open stand in front of any place of business where such open stand would tend to create a traffic hazard. Such open stand shall be designated by appropriate signs or curb markings as the director of public works shall determine. 
(b)  Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come, first served basis. The driver shall pull into the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the vehicles ahead drive away. A driver shall be in attendance at every taxicab parked in an open taxistand. Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding a vehicle of his choice that is parked at an open stand. 
(c)  No owner or driver of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle at any place on a public street other than an open stand, except for the purpose of discharging or receiving passengers. 
(d)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle other than a taxicab in an open taxistand. 
(Code 1978, § 19-22; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(30)) 
Sec. 19-26. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except while sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than ten consecutive minutes, and provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or disturbing tone of voice or by sign or signal or in any manner disturb any person or obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any persons for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(c)  Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand walk as closely as possible or in the absence of the sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets where passengers may be discharged to the right- or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(d)  No driver shall cruise in search of passengers, except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the director of public works and/or the chief of police. Such areas and times shall only be designated when the director of public works and/or the chief of police finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians or any other vehicles. 
(e)  No driver, owner or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any other intermediate points along any established route of any other common carrier. 
(f)  No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of the additional passenger. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination, and then only for the additional distance so traveled. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab, as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his taxicab, as stated in the permit for such vehicle. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions by this article to do so. 
(g)  It shall be a violation of this article for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, or attempt to divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors or soliciting business for any unlawful purpose or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers and passengers' personal property. 
(Code 1978, § 19-23; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(32)) 
Sec. 19-27. - Receipts. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand from the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically prepared receipt or a specially prepared receipt on which there shall be the name, the owner, license number or motor number, amount of meter reading or charges, and date of transaction. 
(Code 1978, § 19-24; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(33)) 
Sec. 19-28. - Refusal to pay legal fare. 
    No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare for any of the vehicles mentioned in this article after hiring the same, and no person shall hire any vehicle herein defined with the attempt to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Code 1978, § 19-25; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(34)) 
Sec. 19-29. - Use of direct routes. 
    Any driver employed to carry any passenger to a definite point shall take the most direct route which shall carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to the point of destination. 
(Code 1978, § 19-26; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(35)) 
Sec. 19-30. - Duty to provide service. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the village, operating under the provisions of this article, shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Owners of permits shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open 24 hours of each day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs, unless otherwise stated in the application and approved by the committee referred to in section 19-63. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the village as soon as they can do so, and if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered, and give the reason therefor. Any owner who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the village at any time when such owner has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed in violation of this article and the permit granted to such owner shall be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the chief of police, in accordance with the severity and frequency of violations. 
(Code 1978, § 19-27; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(36)) 
Sec. 19-31. - Manifests. 
(a)  Every driver shall maintain daily manifests upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin, the destination of each trip and the amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner, and shall be of a character approved by the chief of police. 
(b)  Every owner of a permit shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least the fiscal year next preceding the current fiscal year, and such manifests shall be available for inspection by the chief of police. 
(Code 1978, § 19-28; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(37)) 
Sec. 19-32. - Service contract reports. 
    It shall be mandatory for all owners to file with the chief of police copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda, or other writings relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel, theatre, hall or other place of public gathering, whether or not such arrangement is made with the owner or any corporation, firm or association with which the owner may be interested or connected. Failure to file such copies within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of a permit of any offending owner or cancellation of any cabstand privileges. 
(Code 1978, § 19-29; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(38)) 
Sec. 19-33. - Notice to police of change in state registration number. 
    In the event the state registration number of any vehicle for which a taxicab owner's permit has been issued pursuant to this division shall be changed during the time when such permit for such vehicle is licensed by the village, the owner shall immediately report to the chief of police the change and the new registration number. 
(Code 1978, § 19-30; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 19-34. - Appeals. 
(a)  If any person is aggrieved by any act or failure to act on the part of an employee of the village, either in issuing, failure to issue, suspending or revoking any owner's permit, or driver's license, such aggrieved person may file with the village clerk-treasurer a statement addressed to the board of trustees, setting forth the full facts and circumstances in connection with the action or failure of action on the part of such employee. Such appeal must be filed within ten days after commission of the act or the omission by which the appellant claims to be aggrieved. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall call a meeting not less than 15 days from the date on which such appeal shall have been filed with the village clerk-treasurer, and shall hear the appellant and his witness and determine the merits of the appeal, and the ruling of the board of trustees thereon shall be final. 
(Code 1978, § 19-31; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(39)) 
Sec. 19-35. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-7 and, in addition, such violation shall constitute a violation pursuant to the penal law of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 19-32; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(40)) 
Secs. 19-36-19-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OWNER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 19-59. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the village without having first obtaining an owner's permit from the village. 
(Code 1978, § 19-39; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(2)) 
Sec. 19-60. - Application; contents. 
    An application for a taxicab owner's permit shall be filed with the village clerk-treasurer upon forms provided by the village, and such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, age and citizenship of applicant. 
(2)  Experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(3)  Number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant: 
a.  Make, model, type and serial numbers of vehicles to be used. 
b.  Year of manufacture and the seating capacity of vehicles to be used. 
c.  State license numbers of the vehicles to be used, if available. 
(4)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the applicant. 
(5)  The financial status of the applicant, including the amount of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transactions or acts giving rise to such judgments. 
(6)  The names of persons not an applicant, or, if a corporate applicant, any person not an officer, director or stockholder of such corporation, having an interest, financial, proprietary or other, direct or indirect, in the taxicab or business to be licensed, or having made any loan to any applicant for such taxicab or having any lien or mortgage on such taxicab setting forth the names and addresses of such persons, the nature of the interest and the date required. 
(7)  The name of any person not an applicant herein, or, if a corporate applicant, any person not an officer, director or stockholder of such corporation, who shares or will share on a percentage basis, or in any way, in the receipts, losses or deficiencies of the operation of the taxicab, to any extent whatsoever, other than by fixed salary, setting forth the names and addresses of such persons, the nature and percentage of the share and the date acquired. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has previously held a taxicab permit and if such permit has ever been revoked, and if so, for what cause. 
(9)  Such further information as the chief of police of the village may require. 
(Code 1978, § 19-40; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(5)) 
Sec. 19-61. - Inspection as prerequisite to issuance, retention. 
(a)  Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle and the issuance of an owner's permit under the provisions of this division, such vehicle shall be carefully examined and inspected by the police department and must be found to comply with the reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief of police. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the chief of police shall deem necessary therefor. 
(b)  Every vehicle operating under this article shall be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by the chief of police to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. 
(c)  Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(d)  The chief of police shall refuse an owner's permit or revoke or suspend an owner's permit previously issued, for any vehicle found to be not fit or suited for public use. Failure of the owner of such vehicle to present it for inspection shall be sufficient cause for a revocation of the owner's permit. 
(e)  A record of the inspection of the vehicle shall be made upon the owner's permit. Before any owner's permit is issued for a vehicle to be used as a taxicab, the taximeter attached to the taxicab shall be tested and a certificate issued by an approved testing agency certifying that such meter is in working condition and accurate, shall be submitted to the chief of police and the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 19-41; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(11)) 
Sec. 19-62. - Liability insurance as prerequisite to issuance, retention. 
    No taxicab permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, and approved by the village for each vehicle authorized in the minimum amount of $10,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person; and the minimum amount of $20,000.00 for injury to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $5,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his servants or agents. Such policy shall name the village as an additional insured and shall be filed in the office of the village clerk-treasurer and shall not be cancelled until the chief of police and the village clerk-treasurer shall have at least 15 days' written notice of such cancellation. 
(Code 1978, § 19-42; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(10); L.L. No. 1-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 19-63. - Consideration of application. 
    The application for a taxicab owner's permit shall be approved by a committee consisting of the mayor, chief of police, village attorney and village clerk-treasurer. The committee shall determine whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such transportation and has conformed to all of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 19-43; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 19-64. - Issuance, denial; contents. 
    Upon the approval of the application for a taxicab owner's permit by the committee as provided in section 19-63 and upon the payment of the permit fee and inspection of the vehicle, the mayor shall issue a taxicab permit stating the name and address of the applicant, a description of the vehicle and the date of issuance. Such permit shall be signed by the mayor and shall be issued in such size and form as may be prescribed by the mayor. Otherwise, the application shall be denied. The taxicab permit card shall contain blank spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of original inspection and every subsequent inspection of the vehicle. The permit card shall be of a distinctly different color each year. 
(Code 1978, § 19-44; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 19-65. - Fees. 
    No taxicab owner's permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the owner thereof has paid an annual fee of $20.00 each year for each vehicle for which a taxicab permit is issued. Such permit fees shall be for the fiscal year of the village and shall be in addition to any other fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to the holder of the vehicles under his operation and control. Any owner to whom a permit is issued during a permit year shall pay the full amount of the annual permit fee. 
(Code 1978, § 19-45; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(8), (9)) 
Sec. 19-66. - Number restricted. 
    The number of taxicab owners' permits which may be issued for the operation of taxicabs in the village may be limited by the board of trustees based upon their determination of need for such service in the village, taking into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants therein. 
(Code 1978, § 19-46; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(3)) 
Sec. 19-67. - Display of number. 
    The village clerk-treasurer shall assign a number to each taxicab owner's permit and the village shall furnish to the owner a plate or sticker bearing such number, which must be affixed in a conspicuous place adjacent to the rear license plate. 
(Code 1978, § 19-47; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(7)) 
Sec. 19-68. - Substitution of vehicles; issuance of new permit; fee. 
    In the event an owner's permit has been issued for a vehicle as a taxicab and the owner thereof removes the same from service and substitutes another vehicle therefor, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police and upon request and after inspection of the new vehicle to be used for taxicab purposes and after surrender of the owner's permit for such vehicle, a new owner's permit shall be issued for such vehicle for the remainder of the permit year at a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1978, § 19-48; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 19-69. - Transfer. 
(a)  The owner of any taxicab for which an owner's permit has been issued shall immediately notify the chief of police of any change in ownership of such vehicle and shall surrender his permit card in the event of such change. 
(b)  No owner's permit shall be transferred, sold or assigned without the written approval of the committee, as provided in section 19-63, which written approval shall not be granted until the committee has approved the transferee as if he were an original applicant for the permit. 
(Code 1978, § 19-49; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 19-70. - Register. 
    The village clerk-treasurer shall keep a register of the name of each person to whom an owner's permit for a taxicab is issued in accordance with this division. This register shall also contain the license number and a description of such vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 19-50; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(12)) 
Sec. 19-71. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  A taxicab owner's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be revoked or suspended at the discretion of the chief of police if the owner thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any provision of this article; 
(2)  Falsified any information on the application or failed to notify the chief of police of any material change in the application; 
(3)  Discontinued operations for more than 30 days; 
(4)  Violated any ordinances or local laws of the village or the laws of the state or of the United States; or 
(5)  Conducted himself in an unlawful manner that would indicate he is not a fit or proper person to hold such an owner's permit. 
(b)  Any taxicab owner who defaces, obliterates, or changes any official entry made upon his permit card shall be subject to the revocation of such permit. 
(c)  In the event any person to whom an owner's permit is issued has such permit suspended on three separate occasions, such owner's permit shall automatically thereupon be revoked. Whenever any owner's permit is revoked, the same shall be surrendered to the chief of police. If any owner's permit is suspended, the same shall be surrendered to the chief of police and retained by him until the suspension period expires. 
(d)  Prior to the suspension or revocation, the owner shall be given written notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1978, § 19-51; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(6), (14)) 
Sec. 19-72. - Term. 
    Owners' permits shall be issued as of June 1 of each year, and all such permits shall expire on May 30 of the following year, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1978, § 19-52; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(8)) 
Sec. 19-73. - Renewal. 
    Every person to whom a taxicab owner's permit is issued shall have the right to renew such permit 30 days prior to the date such permit expires, provided all other requirements in this article are complied with. 
(Code 1978, § 19-53; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(4)) 
Secs. 19-74-19-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 19-105. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the village and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the village shall be driven at any time for hire unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1978, § 19-59; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(15)) 
Sec. 19-106. - Application; accompanying documents; fee; effect of false statements. 
(a)  An application for taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the chief of police on forms provided by the village, and such application shall be verified under oath and contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, age and citizenship of the applicant; 
(2)  Experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; 
(3)  A concise history of the applicant's past employment; 
(4)  The names and addresses of four residents of the county who have known the applicant for two years and who will verify as to the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant; 
(5)  Convictions, if any, in the courts, including military courts, of the United States or of any state of the United States; 
(6)  Number and expiration date of the applicant's state driver's license; 
(7)  The endorsement of the owner by whom he is to be employed; 
(8)  Such other information as the chief of police may require regarding, but not limited to, the health, mentality and character of the applicant as may be necessary or desirable to enable the chief of police to ascertain the applicant's qualifications for a driver's license. 
(b)  Upon filing the application the applicant may, at the discretion of the chief of police, be fingerprinted by the police department. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate by a reputable physician, dated not more than 30 days preceding the date of the application, certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity such as, but not limited to, epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, eye diseases or any other disability of body or mind which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(d)  At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the village clerk-treasurer the sum of $5.00. 
(e)  Any false statements made by the applicant on the application for a taxicab driver's license shall be sufficient cause for the refusal of the issuance of a taxicab driver's license to such applicant, or shall be sufficient cause for the revocation or suspension of a taxicab driver's license after the issuance of same. 
(Code 1978, § 19-60; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(17)) 
Sec. 19-107. - Qualifications of applicants. 
    No person shall be issued a taxicab driver's license unless such person: 
(1)  Is over the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Has first obtained a state driver's license. 
(3)  Is able to read and write the English language. 
(4)  Is clean in dress and person, and is not addicted to or an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or drugs of any nature. 
(5)  Has not been convicted within five years preceding the date of the application, of a felony in any state of the United States or is not at any time of his application under an indictment for any felony in any state in the United States. 
(6)  Has not been convicted of a felony in any state of the United States between five and ten years preceding the date of his application unless the chief of police, in his discretion, approves the issuance of a taxicab driver's license. 
(7)  Has not been convicted of two misdemeanors within two years preceding the date of the application. 
(Code 1978, § 19-61; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(16)) 
Sec. 19-108. - Examination of applicant. 
    Before any application is finally passed upon by the chief of police, the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination given by the chief of police or a person designated by him, as to his knowledge of the geography of the village, the provisions of this article, the traffic regulations of the village and the motor vehicle and highway traffic laws of the state. If the results of such examination are not satisfactory to the chief of police, a report shall be attached to the application upon which a taxicab driver's license may be refused. 
(Code 1978, § 19-62; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(18)) 
Sec. 19-109. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The police department of the village shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for consideration of the chief of police. 
(Code 1978, § 19-63; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(19)) 
Sec. 19-110. - Consideration of application. 
    The chief of police shall, upon consideration of the applicant for a taxicab driver's license and the reports and certificates required to be attached thereto, in his discretion, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the chief of police to offer evidence as to why his application should be reconsidered. 
(Code 1978, § 19-64; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(20)) 
Sec. 19-111. - Issuance; no proration of fee. 
    Upon the approval for an application for taxicab driver's license, the mayor shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall bear the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant, issuance number, date of expiration and the name of the owner for which such driver is authorized to operate a vehicle. Any driver to whom a license is issued during the license year shall pay the full amount of the annual license fee. 
(Code 1978, § 19-65; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(21), (22)) 
Sec. 19-112. - Duplicates. 
    A duplicate taxicab driver's license, to replace a lost, stolen, destroyed or misplaced card, may be issued upon the payment of the sum of $1.00 to the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, § 19-66; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(21)) 
Sec. 19-113. - Display required. 
    Every taxicab driver licensed under this division shall post his taxicab driver's license in a place so as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1978, § 19-67; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(23)) 
Sec. 19-114. - Suspension and revocation-Generally. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby given the authority to suspend or revoke a taxicab driver's license, at any time, for the following reasons: 
(1)  The failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this article or other laws of this village or federal and state laws; 
(2)  A conviction in any state of the United States of a felony or misdemeanor; 
(3)  An indictment in any state of the United States for a felony; 
(4)  Having been twice convicted within period of six months of a violation of any of the traffic laws of the state or of the village; or 
(5)  The driver's conduct indicates that he is not a fit and/or proper person to hold such taxicab driver's license. 
(b)  Any suspension shall be noted on the taxicab driver's license, together with a statement of the reason therefor. No suspension shall last for more than a period of 30 days. Whenever a taxicab driver's license is suspended, the same shall be surrendered to the chief of police during the term of such suspension. A third suspension within a period of two years shall result in the automatic revocation of the taxicab driver's license. 
(c)  A taxicab driver's license may not be revoked unless the driver has received written notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf. Whenever a taxicab driver's license is revoked, such license shall be surrendered immediately to the chief of police. 
(d)  No driver or operator whose license has been revoked shall be again licensed as a taxicab driver in the village for a period of two years subsequent to the date of revocation. 
(Code 1978, § 19-68; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(24), (26)) 
Sec. 19-115. - Same-Notice to driver. 
    Where a written notice of suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver's license is not or cannot be served personally upon the driver, the taxicab driver's license shall be deemed to be suspended or revoked as of the third day after the chief of police shall cause to be deposited in the United States post office within the village a registered or certified letter giving notice of such revocation or suspension, and directed to the person named and to the address given on the application pursuant to which such license was issued. 
(Code 1978, § 19-69; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(25)) 
Sec. 19-116. - Duration. 
    A taxicab driver's license shall be issued as of June 1 of each year and shall be valid to and including May 30 next following, unless previously suspended or revoked. Such license shall be valid only so long as the driver continues in the employ of the owner for which the driver is authorized to drive by such license. Upon the termination of any driver's employment, the owner by whom such driver has been employed shall immediately give the chief of police written notice of such termination, the reasons therefor, and shall forthwith surrender the taxicab driver's license to the chief of police for cancellation. 
(Code 1978, § 19-70; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(21), (22)) 
Sec. 19-117. - Renewal; fee. 
    A taxicab driver's license for every fiscal year after the original issuance shall be issued upon the payment of $5.00 to the village clerk-treasurer unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. 
(Code 1978, § 19-71; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1(21)) 
Chapter 20 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sewers generally, Village Law § 14-1400 et seq.; water generally, Village Law § 11-1100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Appeal of water and/or sewer bill prior to termination of service. 
    Prior to the termination of water service as provided by sections 20-143 and 20-199, the following procedures will be followed: 
(1)  The user, defined as the persons appearing on the water and sewer bill, shall be notified that they may challenge the correctness of the water and sewer bill and the procedures to effect such challenge. 
(2)  Such notice may be contained with the water bill sent to the user. 
(3)  Alternatively, the village may send such notice at any other time by certified mail or by personal delivery to the user. 
(4)  If the user disagrees with the correctness of the water and/or sewer bill, such user may file with the village clerk-treasurer a statement addressed to the board of trustees setting forth the full facts and circumstances which constitute the basis of the user's disagreement with the bill. Such statement must be filed within ten days of the receipt of the notice. 
(5)  If such statement is filed challenging the water bill, the board of trustees shall call a meeting not less than 15 days from the date on which the statement was filed with the village clerk-treasurer and shall hear the user and the user's witnesses and such other evidence as may come before the board of trustees and to determine the merits of the challenge. The ruling of the board of trustees thereon shall be final. 
(6)  The determination of the board of trustees shall be provided to the user. 
(7)  If the board of trustees determines that the bill was correct, termination of the water service as provided in the aforementioned provisions shall be permitted ten days after notice of the determination of the board of trustees. 
(8)  If the board of trustees determines that the bill is incorrect, notice of that determination shall be given to the user of the corrected bill. If the user fails to pay the corrected bill within ten days after receipt of the determination, termination of the water service may occur thereafter. 
(9)  If no challenge to the bill is received within the time required, the village may terminate the water service. 
(Code 1978, § 20-1; L.L. No. 9-1986, § 1) 
Secs. 20-2-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abnormal pollutant means industrial waste, substance or wastewater characteristic in excess of that found in normal wastewater but which is otherwise acceptable for disposal into a public sewer under the terms of this article. 
    Abnormal pollutant discharge means the charge levied against any person for services rendered during treatment of abnormal pollutants or waste. This charge is intended to partially defray the added cost of transporting and treating abnormal pollutants or waste. This charge shall be in addition to the usual annual charge for sanitary sewer service. 
    Abnormal wastewater means any wastewater having suspended solids, BOD or phosphate content in excess of that found in normal wastewater but which is otherwise acceptable for disposal into a public sewer under the terms of this article. 
    Abnormal wastewater permit means a permit approved by and issued by the clerk, permitting the discharge or deposit of abnormal wastewater into a sanitary sewer system upon payment of a surcharge. 
    Abnormal wastewater surcharge means the charge levied against any person for services rendered during treatment of abnormal sanitary wastewater or waste. This charge is intended to partially defray the added cost of transporting and treating abnormal wastewater or waste. This charge shall be in addition to the usual charge for sanitary sewer service. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of contaminants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter, under standard laboratory procedure, in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    BOD strength index means the measure of the biochemical oxygen demand content of wastewater in parts per million (milligrams per liter). 
    Building means and includes houses, structures, establishments or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a sewerage system which receives discharge from sewerage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Clerk means the village clerk or such other person as from time to time may be designated by the village board. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. 
    Construction activity means any activity requiring authorization under the SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity, GP-02-01, as amended or revised, including construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Construction activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Contaminant means dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water, any of which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in contravention of water quality standards. 
    Contaminated water means water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with contaminants and has been or will be discarded. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any system such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, or from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any conveyance which allows any nonstormwater discharge including treated or untreated sewage, process contaminated water, and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connection to the storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in section 20-224. 
    Industrial activity means activities requiring the SPDES permit for discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as amended or revised. 
    Industrial waste permit means a permit to deposit or discharge industrial waste into any sanitary wastewater. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes derived from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, business and institutions, as distinct from sanitary wastewater. 
    Laboratory determination means the measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water," a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation (W.E.F.), or in accordance with any other method prescribed by the village by rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section. 
    MS4 means the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm sewers) means: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the Village of Lewiston; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Normal wastewater means wastewater which when analyzed, shows by weight a daily average of not more than 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 parts per million) of suspended solids, not more than 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 parts per million) of BOD and not more than 83 pounds per million gallons (ten parts per million) of phosphorus as P and which is otherwise acceptable for the public sewer under the terms of this article. 
    NYSDEC means the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
    Objectionable waste means any wastes which can harm either the sewers, sewer treatment process or equipment, or which have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or which can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. 
    Owner means the owner of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser of estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of a building. 
    P (denoting phosphorous) means the total phosphorous determined under standard laboratory procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, including municipal corporations, or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any substance or wastewater characteristic present in polluted water or waste. 
    Pollutant of concern means a contaminant identified as requiring control through the imposition of a TMDL or other strategy to attain and maintain water quality standards. 
    Polluted water or waste means any water or liquid waste containing any of the following: phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution, or noxious odorous gases; more than 10,000 parts per million, by weight of dissolved solids, of which more than 2,500 parts per million are chloride; more than ten parts per million of suspended solids and/or BOD; color exceeding 50 parts per million; or having a pH value of less than 5.5 or more than 9.5; and/or any water or waste not approved for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate state or federal authority. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharging into a publicly owned sewerage system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403-.6 general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Rules and regulations means any additional rules and regulations adopted by the village board of trustees. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries wastewater and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user means one in which any of the following are true: 
(1)  All industries subject to categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act; 
(2)  Industries having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries on the operation of the treatment works; 
(3)  Manufacturing industries using substances of concern as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act; or 
(4)  Those industries discharging more than 25,000 gallons per day (GPD) of process wastes. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in connection with any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Special conditions means: 
(1)  Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that applies where the village has been notified that the discharge of stormwater authorized under their MS4 permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the village must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards. 
(2)  303(d) listed waters. The condition in the village's MS4 permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water. 
(3)  Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the village's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the village was required to modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
(4)  The condition in the village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the village must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the village must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
    S.S. strength index means the measure of the suspended solids content of wastewater in parts per million (milligrams per liter). 
    Standard methods means the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. 
    State pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by NYSDEC that authorizes the discharge of contaminants to waters of the state. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage. 
    Stormwater management officer (SMO) means the superintendent of public works of the village who shall enforce this article. The SMO shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the state shall require for code enforcement personnel. 
    Strength index means both the biochemical oxygen demand index and the suspended solids strength index. 
    Superintendent means the director of public works or such person from time to time designated by the village board of trustees, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of water or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    System means the trunk sewers, interceptors, pumping stations, treatment plant, outfall conduits and so forth designed to collect, transmit, treat and dispose of estimated flows and loadings of participants and other users of the system. 
    TMDL means total maximum daily load. 
    Total maximum daily load means the maximum amount of a contaminant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that contaminant. 
    Unpolluted water or waste means any water or liquid waste containing none of the following: Phenols or other substances to an extent impairing taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution, or noxious or odorous gases; not more than 10,000 parts per million by weight of dissolved solids, of which not more than 2,500 parts per million may be a pH value of less than 5.5 nor higher than 9.5. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried wastes from buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Wastewater facilities means all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and sludge. 
    Water pollution control center means the village wastewater facilities for the treatment of wastewater and sludge. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1978, § 20-16; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1986, §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 20-22. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, when sewer and/or treatment facilities are available, to discharge into any natural outlet within the village any wastewater, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, unless specifically permitted by village rules and regulations, and except where a state pollutant discharge elimination systems (SPDES) permit has been duly issued and is currently valid for such discharge. A valid copy of such a permit and any modification thereof must be filed with the clerk-treasurer for an exception under this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy unit, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended to be used or used for the disposal of wastewater, unless specifically permitted by the village or as hereinafter provided. If application is made to the clerk-treasurer for a temporary-type toilet facility, and if said applicant has heretofore obtained the approval of the county health department, said clerk-treasurer may consent to the usage of the same for a temporary period not to exceed 180 days. 
(d)  Any property owner with any building being used as a dwelling situated within the village on property abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the village is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  All property owners of houses or any other structure containing toilet facilities therein within any sewer improvement area or district shall connect to the public sewer system if at any point such public sewer extends upon or meets the property or a private drive to such property. 
(Code 1978, § 20-17; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Sec. 20-23. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 20-17, the building sewer shall be connected to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided for in section 20-22, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use by cleaning of sludge and filling with suitable material. 
(c)  The owner shall operate and maintain said private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the village. 
(d)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed so as to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county water department or the village. 
(Code 1978, § 20-18; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Secs. 20-24-20-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 20-50. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereto without first obtaining a written permit from the clerk-treasurer or village board of trustees, as provided for herein or hereinafter established by resolution. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For normal-type wastewater service, which excludes any service having abnormal wastewater or any of those types of other discharge prescribed in section 20-53(a) and (b), the owner or his agent shall make application to the clerk-treasurer on a special form furnished by the clerk-treasurer. 
(2)  For any other wastewater service, the owner or his agent shall make application to the village board of trustees on a special form furnished by the clerk. 
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the clerk-treasurer or the village board of trustees and shall be accompanied by an application fee, as hereinafter established by resolution of the village board of trustees. Upon payment of the application fee and approval by the clerk-treasurer or village board of trustees as provided for above, a permit shall be issued allowing for the commencement of the installation and connection of the building sewer. 
(c)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation, connection, maintenance and, where necessary, pumping of the building sewer, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village for any loss or damage to the village sanitary sewer system or other municipal property, which may directly or indirectly have been occasioned by the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. However, in the situation where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard and driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building, and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with old or new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the superintendent, to meet all of the requirements of this article. 
(f)  All wyes installed in the village sanitary sewer system in front of the building shall have six-inch outlets. A private lateral connected thereto may have either a six-inch or a four-inch inside diameter and must consist of poly vinyl chloride plastic pipe (PVC) SRD35, and shall include a trap which shall be six-inch PVC with a four-inch solvent welded cement riser. Pipe shall be laid in a granular bed in accordance with typical building sewer details, exhibit A to the local law from which this article is derived. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle or other suitable bedding material approved by the superintendent. Infiltration of groundwater into any sewer shall not exceed 100 gallons per inch diameter per mile of sewer per day. The superintendent may require infiltration tests on any sewer. 
(g)  All building sewers shall be installed in accordance with all the applicable requirements of the village building code, general specifications, this article, and any other rules and regulations of the village or promulgated by the superintendent. 
(h)  Building sewers shall use gravity to carry wastewater from the building to the village sanitary sewer system. The slope of such building sewers must not be less than one-eighth-inch per foot of a six-inch building sewer, and not less than one-quarter-inch per foot of a four-inch building sewer. In some situations, due to buildings constructed below road level or constructed some distance from the road, gravity will not be sufficient in providing momentum for carrying wastewater from the subject building to the village sanitary sewer system, thus necessitating some form of pumping. Such pumping shall be by a method and utilize equipment previously approved by the superintendent. 
(i)  Whenever possible, a building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth of the building sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost and shall be laid at uniform grade. Changes in direction greater than 45 degrees shall be provided with cleanouts accessible for cleaning or with manholes when approved by the superintendent. 
(j)  The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building code and other applicable rules and regulations of the village , and/or the procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials and the Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(k)  No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, yard drains, footing drains, floor drains, drain tile or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer, a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer, or directly to the public sewer. 
(l)  All distribution boxes, septic tanks, leach beds and other prior methods of wastewater disposal must be physically and permanently disconnected from the building sewer and private sewer except that where the septic tank is between the building and street lateral, the superintendent may approve other suitable arrangements. 
(m)  The person who had previously secured a building sewer permit shall notify the clerk-treasurer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made by the superintendent or his employee and no trenches shall be backfilled nor any part of the building sewer covered unless they conform with the requirements of appendix A to Local Law No. 5-1979, as amended, which appendix is hereby adopted by reference, and until the entire building sewer is inspected and approved by the superintendent. 
(n)  The superintendent shall take a reading of the water meter or effect whatever is necessary in order to determine the amount of water being used by a property owner, and each owner of property which is subject to the mandatory use of the sewer system shall be liable for sewer rents from the date of mandatory sewer connection, regardless of whether said property owner has actually connected to the sewer system, unless such connection has been precluded by some action of the village. 
(o)  All excavations for building sewers shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from danger. Streets, sideways, parkways or other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. 
(p)  The superintendent shall determine when and if existing service connections and/or fixtures need replacing and shall then notify the owner. Owners of buildings connected to the village sanitary sewer system by building sewers shall be required to keep such building sewers and connections in proper operating order and shall make all necessary repairs including the replacement of existing service connections and/or fixtures with acceptable materials as determined by the superintendent, within 48 hours after official notice of any defect, leak, stoppage or other malfunction. 
(Code 1978, § 20-19; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1990, § 1) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to in this section, is not set out herein but can be found on file in the village offices. 
Sec. 20-51. - Use of the public sewers-Water. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or drainage from downspouts, yard drains, sump pumps, yard foundations and ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer, except as provided by the rules and regulations. Dechlorinated water from swimming pools or industrial process water from such sources as water drains and blow-off pipes, or cooling water from various equipment, shall not be discharged into sanitary sewers if a closed storm sewer is available, and if discharging into a closed storm sewer is consistent with the requirements of article IV of this chapter. If a closed storm sewer is not available, or if discharging into a closed storm sewer would be in violation of article IV of this chapter, such water may, upon approval of the superintendent, be discharged into the sanitary sewer by indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and whereby such water flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of five gallons per minute, provided that the water does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other water containing no pollutants shall be discharged into such sewers which are specifically designated as storm sewers or into a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or industrial process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, and only if in compliance with the provisions of article IV of this chapter, into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Every user of a public sewer system who has any storm, surface or foundation drainage, or any waters from a sump pump, already entering or part of an existing private sewage system, which is to be connected to a public sewer system, shall disconnect such pipes, spouts and/or drains so as to preclude all such waters from entering the public sewer system, and shall thereafter provide other means to remove such waters away from their buildings, provided such means are consistent with the provisions of article IV of this chapter and section 20 of Appendix B, Zoning, of this Code. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no materials other than stormwater and water containing no pollutants shall be discharged into the storm sewers, except as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Compliance with the Town of Lewiston Sewer Use Regulations regarding grease and oils and the New York State Plumbers Code, Chapter 10, entitled "Traps, Interceptors and Separators" is required, with the following additions: "Permitted use shall be granted annually based upon an approval application received by the village. Compliance under this Code shall be required within three months of the adoption of local law." 
(Code 1978, § 20-20; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 3-2007, §§ 5-8; L.L. No. 1-2008) 
Sec. 20-52. - Same-Industry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge industrial waste into any public sewer in the village without having first obtained an industrial waste permit from the village and without having first complied with all of the applicable provisions hereof. Any person desiring to deposit or discharge, or who is now depositing or discharging industrial waste into any public sewer in the village shall make application to the clerk-treasurer for a permit. Application forms will be furnished by the clerk-treasurer on request. The clerk-treasurer shall review all applications for approval or disapproval. The clerk-treasurer upon approval of such applications will grant an industrial waste permit only when the evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the waste or wastewater to be deposited by the applicant in the public sewer will comply with all of the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Any person discharging industrial waste into a public sewer in the village shall construct a suitable control manhole downstream from any treatment or storage tanks or other approved works utilized by such person for pretreatment, wherever required by the superintendent. Such control manhole shall be for the purpose of facilitating observations, measurements and sampling of all waste created and discharged by such person. The control manhole shall be constructed at a location and in a manner approved by the superintendent and shall be constructed and installed at the expense of the person discharging the waste. Said person shall also be responsible for the maintenance of said control manhole so that at all times it is in a safe, acceptable and proper operating condition. 
(c)  If any person depositing or discharging industrial waste into the public sewer fails to secure an industrial waste permit, or if any person allows or causes waste of unacceptable quality under the requirements of this section to be discharged into any public sewer in the village , the superintendent is authorized, if such person is using village water, to disconnect such person's service line from the village water system and/or the public sewer system, and the same shall only be connected at the owner's expense. If such person does not use village water, the superintendent is authorized to disconnect such person's service line from the sewer system, and the same shall only be reconnected at the owner's expense. The superintendent shall notify the occupant or user of the premises wherein the waste is generated 48 hours before disconnecting either service line. No disconnected sewer or water connection shall be reconnected until the condition causing such disconnection has been corrected. 
(d)  The inspectors, agents or representatives of the village charged with the enforcement of this section shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the village , the superintendent, nor the individual inspector, agent or representative shall be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. The owners or occupants of premises where industrial wastes are created or discharged into the sewer shall allow the superintendent free access at all reasonable times to all parts of such premises for the purpose of inspection and/or sampling, or the performance of any of their duties hereunder, and the failure or refusal of such owners or occupants to comply with this provision shall constitute grounds for the disconnection of water and/or sewer service. 
(e)  Each industrial waste permit shall be accompanied by a permit map drawn in a scale sufficient to show the locations of all sewers, pipes and drains which collect and convey wastewater, industrial wastes and/or cooling waters from their point of origin to the public sewers. Each pipe or sewer shall be labeled and noted as to the substance it is conveying. Each inlet or entrance point into the sewer system shall be shown on a map, and each point shall be labeled with all substances or wastes which can enter the system at that point. 
(f)  Industrial users shall submit yearly reports, or more often if deemed necessary by the superintendent, indicating the volume of flow measurements and characteristics and concentrations for each waste entering public sewers and/or watercourses for their particular facility. All tests and reports shall be performed and prepared at the expense of the person discharging the waste. Each report, test, measurement and analysis shall be identified by the appropriate village industrial permit number, control manhole location and point of discharge into the public sewer or watercourse. 
(g)  An industrial waste permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation (the initial permit was issued to a specific user for a specific operation). 
(h)  Any substance which may cause the treatment works' effluent or any other product of the treatment works such as residues, sludge, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process where the treatment works is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the treatment works cause the treatment works to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, and criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge or disposal development pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(i)  Any person accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this section shall notify the village immediately. This notification shall be followed, within 15 days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process or for any fines imposed on the village under applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Code 1978, § 20-21; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1986, § 4) 
Sec. 20-53. - Same-Other discharge. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewers; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to buildings, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater facilities; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in such quantities, or of such size, so as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or of causing other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities. Such solid or viscous substances include but are not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, paint, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous substances capable of forming a gas which, either singly or by interaction with other substances, is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazards to life, or of forming solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in this article, or of creating any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or which require unusual provisions, attentions or expense to handle; and 
(6)  Cooling water unless it is unpolluted and below 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or even below a lesser temperature ceiling. 
If, in the opinion of the superintendent, such wastes could harm the sewers, sewer treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance, said superintendent may prohibit such discharges. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public sewer the following described substances or materials, if in the opinion of the superintendent such substances or materials could harm the sewers, sewer treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these substances or materials, the superintendent shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject substances or materials in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials used in construction of sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances or materials prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and other similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds the concentrations prescribed herein or exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectional or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the point of discharge exceeds the limits established below: 
Parameter Effluent Concentration Limits 
(24-hour average) 
(mg/l) Cadmium 0.4 Hex. Chromium 0.2 Total Chromium 4.0 Copper 0.8 Lead 0.2 Mercury 0.2 Nickel 4.0 Zinc 1.2 Arsenic 0.2 Available Chloride 50.0 Cyanide-free 0.4 Cyanide-complex 1.6 Selenium 0.2 Sulfide 6.0 Barium 4.0 Manganese 4.0 Gold 0.2 Silver 0.2 Fluorides:  To fresh water 4.0*  To saline water 36.0 Phenol 4.0  
;le=2;* May be multiplied by a factor of 1.5 if the municipal water supply is not fluoridated. 
Or any other element which will, in the opinion of the superintendent damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment processes. 
The limits set forth above may be amended from time to time as such amendment is deemed necessary by the superintendent to protect facilities or life or health. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite wastewater, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge into the receiving waters. 
(8)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(10)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, including, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or dissolved solids, including, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities so as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater facilities. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(11)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to such treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge into the receiving waters. 
(12)  Any waters or wastes that contains more than ten parts per million of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide. 
(c)  Drains receiving acid waste (pH 5.5 to 7.0) shall be constructed of acid-resisting material. Such drains located outside of the building shall be constructed of vitrified clay or earthenware pipe or other approved acid-resisting material. Joints shall be watertight and made of acid-resistant material. In no case shall corrosive waste be discharged into a drain, sanitary sewer, or soil or waste pipe without being first diluted or neutralized in such manner so as to render said waste noncorrosive. Such waste shall be treated by passage through a properly trapped dilution or neutralizing catchbasin which shall function automatically. In no case shall corrosive waste be discharged into a storm sewer, whether or not diluted or neutralized, unless consistent with the provisions of article IV of this chapter. 
(d)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, into the public sewers, which said waters or wastes contain the substances or materials or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to achieve an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 20-81. 
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, rules and regulations, ordinances and laws. 
(e)  Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such separator shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(f)  All significant industrial users must comply with federal government standards and any other applicable requirements promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307 of the Federal Waste Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 as well as pretreatment standards required by the village. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his own expense. 
(h)  No materials other than stormwater shall be discharged into the storm sewers except as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 20-22; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1986, §§ 5-7; L.L. No. 3-2007, §§ 9, 10) 
Secs. 20-54-20-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEASUREMENT AND TESTING 

Sec. 20-80. - Industrial cost recovery. 
    Industrial users shall be charged for their fair portion of the costs of wastewater treatment plant and facilities as provided by the provisions of appendices B and C to Local Law No. 5-1979, which appendices are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1978, § 20-23; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Sec. 20-81. - Criteria relating to charges. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined as herein provided. 
(b)  To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the superintendent may use one of the following methods: 
(1)  The amount of water supplied to the premises by the village or other public or private water company as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered; 
(2)  If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources as estimated by the village; 
(3)  If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose which is of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the public sewer system, the estimate of the amount of wastewater discharged into the public sewer system made by the village; 
(4)  The number of gallons of wastewater discharged into the public sewer system, as determined by the measurements and samples taken at a wastewater flow meter and sampling device installed by the owner of the property served by the public sewer system at his own expense, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the village pursuant to this section; or 
(5)  A figure determined by the village by any combination of the foregoing methods or by any other equitable method. 
(c)  The volume of flow used in computing abnormal wastewater surcharges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the village water department. In the event that an industry discharging waste into the public sewer system presents evidence to the clerk-treasurer demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of water used for all purposes does not reach the sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be established by the clerk-treasurer. 
(1)  Any person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers of the village who procures any part or all of his water supply from sources other than the village water department, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewer, shall install and maintain at his expense water meters of the type approved by the superintendent for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing the sewer service charge. Such meters shall be read monthly and tested for accuracy when deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(2)  Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the superintendent that a substantial portion of the water as measured by the aforesaid meter, does not enter the public sewer system of the village , the superintendent may require or permit the installation of additional meters at the owner's expense in such manner as to measure the quantity of water actually entering the public sewer system from the building or premises of such owner or occupant, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewer service charge and abnormal wastewater surcharge may be the quantity of water actually entering the sewer system as so determined, if the superintendent so elects. 
(d)  The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the public sewers shall be subject to inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent. Samples shall be collected in such manner so as to be representative of the character and concentration of the waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination of said waste shall be those set forth in the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water. The determination of the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be made by the superintendent at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the superintendent. Should an owner or occupant discharging industrial waste into the public sewers desire that a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that scheduled by the superintendent, such special determination may be made by the superintendent at the expense of the owner or occupant discharging the waste. 
(e)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes of abnormal strength or containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 20-53 or having an average daily wastewater flow greater than five percent of the total flow of the village shall be subject to review and approval by the village and the superintendent. 
(1)  Where necessary in the opinion of the village, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the five-day BOD, suspended solids, phosphorous or other objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 20-53, or to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be prepared and submitted by a qualified engineer for the approval of the village and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(2)  The approval of said plans or specifications by the village in no event shall relieve such person of the responsibility for modifying the constructed facilities or structures as needed to produce an effluent acceptable to the village under the terms of this article. 
(f)  Where the strength of wastewater from an industrial, commercial or institutional establishment exceeds: 300 parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand; 300 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or the total phosphorous compounds measured as P are greater than ten parts per million by weight, and where such wastes are permitted to be discharged into the sewer system by the village, an added charge, as hereafter determined, will be made against such establishment according to the strength of such wastes. 
(1)  The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to ensure a representative sample. The cost of sampling and testing shall be borne by the subject establishment. Tests shall be made by an independent laboratory. 
(2)  a.  The establishment discharging such waste shall pay a quarterly surcharge to the village in addition to the usual quarterly sewer service charges. Computation of such surcharge shall be based on the following formula: 
S = V × 8.34 [.011 (BOD = 300) + .007 (S.S. = 300)] 
S = surcharge in dollars 
V = millions of gallons of water consumed during billing period 
8.43 = pounds per gallon of water 
0.011 = unit charge per pound for BOD in dollars 
BOD = BOD strength index in parts per million by weight 
300 = normal BOD strength in parts per million by weight 
0.007 = unit charge per pound suspended solids in dollars 
S.S. = suspended solids strength index in parts per million by weight 
300 = normal suspended solids strength in parts per million by weight 
(There shall be no reduction in surcharge for a discharge with less than 300 BOD or S.S.) 
b.  For phosphorous: 
S (additional) = V × 8.34 [1.5 (P = 10)] 
1.5 = unit charge per pound of P in dollars 
P = phosphorous as "P" in parts per million by weight 
10 = normal "P" strength in parts per million by weight 
(g)  Industries with two or more discharge points into the same public sewer may be considered to be a single point source and may mathematically composite the waste by volume and concentration as if there were only one discharge point, for the purpose of determining abnormal wastewater discharge and concentrations of obnoxious pollutants, providing that no single discharge point would be injurious to the sewers, pumps or other appurtenances as herein restricted. To qualify under this section, and before mathematical compositing will be allowed, a complete analysis of each waste so composited must be submitted, along with the calculations showing the methods employed and the final computed single analysis to be used under this article. 
(h)  The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes may be required to install a wastewater flow meter and sampling device in a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. If the superintendent finds it is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the meters or monitoring devices as herein mentioned, he shall determine the quantity and quality of waste in any manner or method he may find practicable in order to arrive at the percentage of water entering the public sewer system of the village and/or the quality of the wastewater to be used to determine the sewer service charge and surcharge. 
(i)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters and wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(j)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed so as to prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern, whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village, subject to payment therefor by said industrial concern of an abnormal wastewater surcharge. 
(k)  No statement in this division shall be construed to preclude additional users from seeking and receiving permission to hook into the sewer system. However, the provisions of this article shall apply as well as those of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulations as the village may adopt from time to time. 
(l)  No statement in this division shall be construed to preclude the imposition or prevent the payment of industrial cost recovery payments as may be otherwise provided. 
(Code 1978, § 20-24; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Secs. 20-82-20-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT AND RESERVATIONS 

Sec. 20-106. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall enter into any municipal wastewater facilities or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of such municipal wastewater facilities. 
(Code 1978, § 20-25; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Sec. 20-107. - Power and authority of inspections. 
(a)  The superintendent, authorized employees of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and/or other duly authorized employees or agents of the village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge into the sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  The superintendent, authorized employees of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and/or other duly authorized employees or agents of the village, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises as established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village, federal or state employees, and the village, federal or state governments shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property caused by village, federal or state employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by the negligence or failing of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this article. 
(c)  The superintendent, authorized employees of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and/or other duly authorized employees or agents of the village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a sewer easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of said easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1978, § 20-26; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1986, § 8) 
Sec. 20-108. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation; fine; civil penalty. 
(1)  Any violation of divisions 1 through 4 of this article is hereby declared a violation except as otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Any person who violates the provisions of divisions 1 through 4 of this article and is convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction may be punished by a fine not to exceed $150.00. Each day on which there is a failure to comply with the provisions of divisions 1 through 4 of this article shall be deemed a distinct and separate violation and is punishable as such. 
(3)  The village may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the village in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil penalty of not over $200.00 for each violation of divisions 1 through 4 of this article. Each day on which there is a failure to comply with the provisions of divisions 1 through 4 of this article shall be deemed a distinct and separate violation and is punishable as such. 
(b)  Liability of violator. Any person violating any of the provisions of divisions 1 through 4 of this article shall become liable to the village for such expense, loss or damage incurred or suffered by the village by reason of such violation. 
(c)  Correction of violation. If a person violating any provision of divisions 1 through 4 of this article should fail to correct said violation within the time period established for such correction, the village may correct the violation and the cost thereof shall thereafter become a charge against the subject property. 
(Code 1978, § 20-27; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 20-109. - Appeals. 
(a)  In the event an application for a building sewer permit or industrial use permit is denied, or having been granted, is restricted or rescinded, the clerk-treasurer and/or superintendent shall file in the village office a copy of his decision which shall include the reasons for the refusal, restriction or cancellation. The clerk-treasurer shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant or permit holder. The applicant or permit holder shall thereupon have the right to appeal said decision to the village board of trustees, or any other committee or body said board may hereafter designate, which appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date of filing the decision in the village office. 
(b)  Any industrial user or user subject to an abnormal pollutant surcharge or abnormal wastewater surcharge shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees, or any committee or body said village board of trustees may hereafter designate, concerning the reasonableness of the procedures or charges contained within divisions 1 through 4 of this article. Such appeal shall only be allowed within 60 days of the enactment or amendment of a provision concerning procedures and changes affecting the appellant. 
(Code 1978, § 20-28; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Sec. 20-110. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The village hereby reserves the right to reject any application for a permit which does not provide for full compliance with the provisions provided within divisions 1 through 4 of this article. However, in the public interest the village may, in its discretion, provide temporary service for a period not to exceed 90 days pending correction or proper connection to the available sewer system. In addition to the charge provisions contained within divisions 1 through 4 of this article and any other local law or ordinance, additional charges may be imposed by the village to ensure an equitable system of cost recovery for the treatment of these wastes and for this temporary service. 
(b)  The village reserves the right to accept and/or reject any and all applications for service of a nature not hereinbefore covered. 
(c)  The village reserves its right at any time, without notice, to terminate services in its mains or in any service connection for the purpose of making repairs and/or extension or for any other lawful purpose, and it shall be expressly agreed that the village and its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure of any kind for any cause whatsoever. 
(d)  The village hereby reserves the right to determine when and in what manner additions and extensions to the existing system, or the creation of a new system, shall be made and to make such arrangements and agreements as will serve the best interests of the village. 
(e)  The village hereby reserves the right, in its discretion, to install and maintain any auxiliary recorders, transmitters and/or other equipment which the village shall deem to be in the best interests of the village and the operation of the sewer system. 
(f)  The village hereby reserves the right to impose further rates, rules or regulations, to ensure an equitable system of cost recovery for the treatment of various wastes. 
(g)  The village hereby reserves the right to enter into contracts with corporations, individuals or other municipalities for wastewater treatment, either into or out of the village, under such terms and conditions as shall properly protect the best interests of the village. 
(Code 1978, § 20-29; L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1) 
Sec. 20-111. - Installation, maintenance, taps and connections; fees and charges. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance to conform to requirements. The installation and maintenance of private service lines, excluding the mains and lines of the village, shall be in accordance with the following provisions and specifications: 
(1)  Inspections; fee. No private service line from a village pipe or main shall be installed, altered, replaced or used until the same has been inspected and approved by the village. A fee of $75.00 shall be paid to the village upon filing an application for each inspection. 
(2)  Street openings. No opening shall be made in any village street, except with the consent and approval of the village DPW superintendent, upon such terms and conditions as he shall require, including the posting of a reasonable bond if, on his reasonable judgment, such bond is necessary. 
(3)  Taps and connections. All connections to or taps of water/sewer mains for service shall be made by or under the supervision of the village. A receipt for tapping fees shall be on file with the village in advance of making such connection or tap. 
(4)  Line specifications. 
a.  All private lines up to the meter shall be installed, maintained, altered or replaced with type K copper tubing which shall conform to ASTM Designation 888, latest revision, of the following widths and thickness: 
Width 
(inches) Thickness 
(inches) 3/4" 0.065 1" 0.065  
b.  There shall not be any joints in services up to 100 feet. All joints in type K copper tube service lines between the curb stop and meter shall be made with compression fittings. 
c.  All services greater than 150 feet in length will require a meter tile set. The installation must meet the current adopted specifications for that type meter installation. The cost of the tile set shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Service lines installed between the tile set and the structure can be constructed of 200 psi minimum rated thermoplastic with stainless steel inserts as an alternate to the copper specified above. 
(5)  Trenches. 
a.  The service line shall be laid out not less than four feet below the established grade of the adjacent street or existing ground level; but where it is impractical to meet the department, requirement by reason of existing conditions, the village may, upon application therefor, grant a permit for some other method of installation. 
b.  All service lines shall be laid in a separate trench at least three feet distant horizontally from any other underground facility and in solid ground. The placing of service line in the same trench as that occupied by water or sewer pipe, gas pipe or other utility lateral connections will not be permitted except by special authorization of the village in extraordinary cases, including where solid rock is encountered. 
(6)  Tapping point. The village shall designate the point at which the main is to be tapped and also the position of the service pipe connection at the tap. The applicant's contractor shall make necessary excavations and backfill for all taps, which shall be at least four feet square and not less than six inches below the main. 
(7)  Installation of three-fourths-inch and one-inch taps. 
a.  Upon completion of excavation by the applicant's contractor, the village will tap the main and shall supply and install the required bronze service saddle, corporation stop. 
b.  The village shall supply the required curb stop, curb box and copper service line to reach the property line for installation by the applicant's contractor. The installation of this equipment shall be done under the supervision of the village. 
(8)  Installation of taps greater than one inch. All equipment, including tap, service saddle, corporation stop, curb stop, curb box, copper service to reach the property line and all else necessary, shall be supplied and installed by the applicant's contractor under the supervision of the village. All equipment supplied by the applicant's contractor shall be submitted to and approved by the village prior to installation. 
(9)  Replacement of taps. No new tap shall be made to a main to connect with a service line which is intended to replace an existing service line, unless the existing service line is properly disconnected at its tap to the existing main. The expense of such disconnection shall be borne by the applicant. 
(10)  Abandoned taps. Where a service line is abandoned, the service line must be shut off at the tap and disconnected at the expense of the owner. 
(11)  Maintenance. All outside service lines, building service pipes, outlets and fixtures shall be maintained in good order and repair and protected from frost, leaks and breaks and must be promptly repaired if not in good order to prevent waste of water. If the owner fails to observe these requirements, the village may shut off the water supply and assess the cost thereof against the real property affected, to be collected as part of the water/sewer rent. 
(b)  Tapping charges. 
(1)  Fee. Any person who desires to receive water/sewer from the village, shall, in connection with his application, pay a charge, as established from time to time by resolution of the village board, for the tapping of water/sewer mains. 
(2)  Responsibility of contractors. Where either hand excavation or excavating machines are used by contractors or others in digging trenches for water, sewers, drains, gas mains and conduits, or in connection with any other underground excavation work, all mains shall be maintained in position at the expense of such persons or contractors. Contractors or others working in the public street must ascertain for themselves the location of all water service connection pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction or repair of a water, sewer, drain, gas main or conduit or in connection with any other underground excavation work, such person or contractor must, at his expense, cause them to be replaced or repaired in accordance with the requirements of or directly by the village, promptly, and he must at once notify the village of the interruption of service and must reimburse the village for any expense to it in providing temporary service and in restoring regular service. 
(3)  Responsibility for facilities within streets or easements. The village will operate, maintain and, where necessary, replace all existing mains and appurtenances, fire hydrants and other facilities within the territory of any street or any easement that is under the jurisdiction of the water district, except that repair or damage resulting from collision or any other external cause shall be paid for by the person causing such damage. 
(L.L. No. 1-2009) 
Secs. 20-112-20-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEWER RENTS 

Sec. 20-136. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as the "sewer rent ordinance." 
(Code 1978, § 20-76; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.200) 
Sec. 20-137. - Applicability of division. 
    This division shall apply to all users of the village sanitary sewer system, except where the village itself is a user thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 20-77; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.201) 
Sec. 20-138. - Disposition of revenues. 
    Revenues derived from sewer rents, including penalties and interest, shall be credited to a special fund, to be known as the "sewer rent fund" and the moneys therein shall be used pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 453, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1978, § 20-78; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.202) 
Sec. 20-139. - Schedule. 
    Each user of the village sanitary sewer system shall pay the following charges based on the consumption of water on the premises as determined by the water meter therein situated: $4.64 per 100 cubic feet effective July 1, 2015. 
(Code 1978, § 20-79; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.203; L.L. No. 2-1972, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1974, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1986, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1991, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1992, § 1; Amend. of 8-18-1997; L.L. No. 1-1998; L.L. No. 1-1999; L.L. No. 01-2007; L.L. No. 02-2011, § 1; L.L. 01-2013, § 1; L.L. No. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 20-140. - When due; late payment penalty. 
    All sewer rents shall be due and payable at the office of the village clerk-treasurer as follows: 
(1)  Sewer rents will be billed on a quarterly basis. 
(2)  The net amount for the quarter billed plus all amounts previously billed and unpaid shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month in which the bill is rendered. 
(3)  In the event such bill is not paid as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the gross amount of such bill, computed at 110 percent of the net amount shall be paid. 
(Code 1978, § 20-80; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.204; L.L. No. 9-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 14-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1985, § 2) 
Sec. 20-141. - Unpaid rents to constitute lien upon property served. 
    Unpaid sewer rents, including penalties, shall constitute a lien upon the real property served pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 452(3), as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1978, § 20-81; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.205) 
Sec. 20-142. - Collection of unpaid rents. 
    Unpaid sewer rents, including penalties, shall be collected by the board of trustees pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 452(4), as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1978, § 20-82; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.206) 
Sec. 20-143. - Disconnection of water service for nonpayment. 
    In addition to the methods of collection of unpaid sewer rates including penalties as otherwise provided in this division, the water service of a user shall be disconnected in the event such user does not pay the sewer rent within 30 days of billing. 
(Code 1978, § 20-83; Ord. of 12-21-1959, § 9.207; Res. of 10-21-1980) 
Secs. 20-144-20-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-170. - Lewiston Heights Water District. 
    The board of trustees of the village hereby consents to the creation of Lewiston Heights Water District, such water district comprising real property located partly within the Town of Lewiston and partly within the Village of Lewiston, as such real property is described in a resolution and order adopted by the town board of the Town of Lewiston at a meeting thereof held on June 2, 1942, and upon a map which has also been filed with the village clerk-treasurer and which accompanied the petition for the establishment of such Lewiston Heights Water District and hereby authorizes and directs the village clerk-treasurer to file a certified copy of this resolution consenting to the creation of such Lewiston Heights Water District in the office of the town clerk of the Town of Lewiston, New York. 
(Code 1978, § 20-95; Res. of 7-6-1942) 
Secs. 20-171-20-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER RENTS 

Sec. 20-194. - Schedule. 
    The quarterly rate for water consumption shall be $3.54 per 100 cubic feet of water consumed, effective July 1, 2015. 
(Code 1978, § 20-102; Mo. of 6-26-1962; L.L. No. 2-1972, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1974, § 3; L.L. No. 9-1980, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1985, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1986, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1991, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1992, § 2; Res. of 5-20-1996; L.L. No. 1-1998; L.L. No. 1-1999; Res. of 7-15-2002; L.L. No. 02-2004; L.L. No. 02-2005; L.L. No. 02-2008; L.L. No. 02-2011, § 2; L.L. 01-2013, § 2; L.L. No. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 20-195. - Replacement, repair of meters. 
    Each water user will be charged for all costs for repair or replacement of water meters damaged either willfully or through negligence. 
(Code 1978, § 20-103; L.L. No. 2-1972, § 4; L.L. No. 2-1974, § 4) 
Sec. 20-196. - When due; late payment penalty. 
    All water consumed shall be due and payable at the office of the village clerk-treasurer as follows: 
(1)  Water consumption will be billed on a quarterly basis. 
(2)  The net amount for the quarter billed plus all amounts previously billed and unpaid shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month in which the bill is rendered. 
(3)  In the event such bill is not paid as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the gross amount of such bill, computed at 110 percent of the net amount shall be paid. 
(Code 1978, § 20-104; L.L. No. 9-1983, § 2; L.L. No. 14-1983, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1985, § 4) 
Sec. 20-197. - Unpaid charges constitute a lien. 
    Unpaid water bills, including penalties, shall constitute a lien upon the real property served. The lien shall be prior and superior to every other lien or claim except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful charge imposed by or for the state or a political subdivision or district thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 20-105; L.L. No. 9-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 20-198. - Collection of unpaid water bills. 
    Unpaid water bills, including penalties, may be collected by the board of trustees in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid sewer rents as set forth in the provisions of the General Municipal Law § 452(4), as amended from time to time. The aforementioned method of remedy shall not be intended to limit the village in any other remedy to which it may be entitled. 
(Code 1978, § 20-106; L.L. No. 9-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 20-199. - Disconnection of water service for nonpayment. 
    In addition to the methods of collection of unpaid water bills, including penalties, the water service of a user shall be disconnected in the event such user does not pay the water bill within 30 days of billing. 
(Code 1978, § 20-107; L.L. No. 9-1983, § 2) 
Secs. 20-200-20-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 20-222. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with the requirements of the SPDES general permit for MS4s. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised; 
(2)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge nonstormwater wastes; 
(3)  To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4; 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; and 
(5)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, contaminated water, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4. 
(Code 1978, § 20-108; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-223. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(b)  Responsibility for administration. The SMO shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the village. 
(c)  Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Code 1978, § 20-109; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-224. - Discharge prohibitions. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except as provided in this section. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article, unless NYSDEC or the village has determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm sewers, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or property from imminent harm or damage, provided that, such approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of this article. 
(3)  Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition of illegal discharges shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4. 
(Code 1978, § 20-110; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-225. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Code 1978, § 20-111; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-226. - Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater. 
(a)  Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those types of activities that: 
(1)  Cause or contribute to a violation of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit; or 
(2)  Cause or contribute to the village being subject to a special condition. 
(b)  Such activities include improper management of pet waste or any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization. 
(c)  Upon notification to a person that he is engaged in activities that cause or contribute to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or contributes to violations of the village's MS4 SPDES stormwater discharge permit authorization. 
(Code 1978, § 20-112; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-227. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in section 20-226, the village may require implementation of BMPs to control those illicit discharges and activities. 
(1)  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. 
(2)  Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in section 20-226, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutants to the MS4. 
(3)  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 20-113; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-228. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Code 1978, § 20-114; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-229. - Suspension of access to MS4. 
(a)  Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of people, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to people. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the SMO if he finds that the illicit discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to reoccur. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to the premises terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior approval of the SMO. 
(Code 1978, § 20-115; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-230. - Access and monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records as may be required to implement this article. 
(3)  The village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The village has the right to require the facilities subject to this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  An unreasonable delay in allowing the SMO access to a facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if the person denies the SMO reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(6)  If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1978, § 20-116; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-231. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the village in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Code 1978, § 20-117; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-232. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(2)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(3)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(4)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(5)  That the village will seek civil remedies or criminal penalties, including the imposition of a criminal fine, as provided in subsection (b) of this section; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350.00 nor more than $700.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(Code 1978, § 20-118; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of village legislation, Penal Law §§ 55.10, 70.15, 80.05, 80.10, Village Law § 20-2006, Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(4.)(b.). 
Sec. 20-233. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the SMO to the village board of trustees within 15 days of its issuance, which shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, and within five days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of the municipal clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the discharger. 
(Code 1978, § 20-119; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-234. - Corrective measures after appeal. 
(a)  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
(b)  If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger. 
(Code 1978, § 20-120; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-235. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Code 1978, § 20-121; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-236. - Alternative remedies. 
(a)  Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he may be given alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon recommendation of the village attorney and concurrence of the SMO, where: 
(1)  The violation was unintentional; 
(2)  The violator has no history of pervious violations of this chapter; 
(3)  Environmental damage was minimal; 
(4)  The violator acted quickly to remedy violation; and/or 
(5)  The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution. 
(b)  Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Attendance at compliance workshops; 
(2)  Storm sewer stenciling or storm sewer marking; and/or 
(3)  River, stream, or creek cleanup activities. 
(Code 1978, § 20-122; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-237. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Code 1978, § 20-123; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 20-238. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Code 1978, § 20-124; L.L. No. 3-2007, § 4) 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An appendix to the subdivision regulations, containing various forms, has been omitted from this printing, but is on file in the village clerk-treasurer's office. 

ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF POLICY 
    In order to better implement the Zoning Regulations and as a restatement of the authority previously given under section 5 of the Village of Lewiston Planning Ordinance, the planning commission is authorized and empowered to approve Plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, to approve development of entirely or partially undeveloped plats already filed in the office of the clerk of the county and to conditionally approve preliminary plats, within the Village of Lewiston. It is declared the policy of the planning commission to consider land Subdivision Plats as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development of the village. This means, among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health, or peril from fire, flood or other menace; that provision shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewerage and other needed improvements; that all proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with the development pattern of the neighboring properties; that the proposed streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to the official map, if such exists, and shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the master plan, if such exists, and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of fire fighting equipment to buildings; and that proper provision shall be made for open spaces for parks and playgrounds. In order that land subdivision may be made in accordance with this policy, these regulations shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Village of Lewiston Land Subdivision Regulations." These regulations shall be administered in compliance with Village Law § 7-728 et seq. and other applicable law. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. I; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Development plan, comprehensive plan, village plan or master plan. A composite of the mapped and written proposals recommending the physical development of the village prepared by the planning commission pursuant to Village Law § 7-722 which indicates the general locations recommended for various public works and reservations and for the general physical development of the village and includes any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Drainage right-of-way. The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage. 
    Easement. The lands created through authorization by a property owner for the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property. 
    Engineer. The duly designated engineer of the Village of Lewiston. 
    Lot. A piece, parcel or plot of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Official map. The map established by the village board under Village Law § 7-724 showing the streets, highways and parks heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments thereto adopted by the village board or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the planning commission and the subsequent filing of such approved plats. 
    Official submission date. The date when a subdivision plat shall be considered submitted to the planning commission, and is hereby defined to be the date of a meeting of the planning commission at which all required surveys, plans and data described in article VI are submitted. 
    Performance bond or guarantee. Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the planning commission approves a plat, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements. 
    Planning commission. The Village of Lewiston Planning Commission as established pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 234. 
    Preliminary plat. The preliminary drawing or drawings indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for its consideration and meeting the requirements of article VI. 
    Resubdivision. Revision of all or part of an existing filed plat including consolidation of lots. 
    Street. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or town roadway or way shown upon a plat theretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Niagara County prior to the appointment of a planning commission and the grant to such commission of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking area, and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this appendix, streets shall be classified as follows: 
A.  Arterial streets are those which do or are intended to carry heavy traffic. 
B.  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets. 
C.  Minor streets or local residential streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
D.  Marginal service streets are streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
E.  Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Street pavement. The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by vehicular traffic. 
    Street width. The distance between property lines or right-of-way lines. 
    Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who shall lay out for the purpose of sale or development, any subdivision or part thereof, as defined herein, either for himself or others. 
    Subdivision. The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for transfer of ownership or building development and shall include resubdivision; provided, however, that the public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets shall not be included within this definition nor subject to these regulations. 
A.  A major subdivision is any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more lots or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of municipal facilities. 
B.  A minor subdivision is any subdivision containing not more than four lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, official map, or zoning ordinance, if such exists, or these regulations. 
    Subdivision plat or final plat. A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by law and by these regulations to be presented to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in the office of the Niagara County Clerk. 
    Village board. The board of trustees of the Village of Lewiston. 
    Zoning ordinance. The officially adopted zoning ordinance or local law of the Village of Lewiston together with any and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. II; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR FILING SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, intro. ¶; L.L. No. 1-1973) 

Sec. 1. - Preliminary plat submission. 
A.  Discussion of requirements and classification. 
1)  Before preparing the preliminary plat, the applicant shall discuss with the planning commission, or its representative, the requirements of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, water, fire protection and similar aspects as well as the availability of existing services. 
(2)  Classification of the proposed preliminary plat is to be made at this time by the planning commission as to whether it is a minor or major subdivision as defined in these regulations. The commission may require, however, when it deems it necessary for protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, that a minor subdivision comply with all or some of the requirements specified for major subdivisions in these regulations. 
B.  Application procedure. Prior to filing an application for the approval of a subdivision plat, the applicant shall file an application for the approval of a preliminary plat. The application shall: 
1.  Be made on forms available at the office of the village clerk-treasurer. 
2.  Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide as well as all lands owned by the applicant adjacent to the area proposed for subdivision. 
3.  Be accompanied by three copies of the preliminary plat, as described in article VI, section 1, of these regulations. 
4.  Comply in all respect with article IV of these regulations and with the provisions of Village Law §§ 7-730 and 7-728, except where a modification may be specifically authorized by the planning commission. 
5.  For a major subdivision, be accompanied by a fee plus an amount for each lot within the subdivision proposed for approval, both as established by the village board, at least two weeks before the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. Twenty-five percent of such fee shall be submitted prior to conditional approval of the proposed subdivision; the remaining 75 percent of said fee shall be submitted prior to final approval by the planning commission. 
6.  For a minor subdivision, be accompanied by a fee as established by the village board at least two weeks before the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
7.  Be accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision under chapter 16, Stormwater Management, of the village Code, and as described in article VI, section 1 of these regulations. Any such SWPPP shall be accompanied by the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to subsection 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
C.  Study of preliminary plat. The planning commission will carefully study the practicability of the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, sewerage disposal, drainage and any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) submitted pursuant to paragraph B(7) of this section, lot sizes and arrangement, the future development of adjoining land and the requirements of the comprehensive plan and the official map as they be adopted. 
D.  Approval of improvements. Upon completion of the study by the planning commission, the improvements shown on the preliminary plat as required under article VI, section 1-K, if acceptable to the planning commission, shall be submitted to the village board together with a recommendation for the approval of that board. If the improvements shown are returned to the planning commission with the approval of the village board, the planning commission will proceed as hereinafter provided. 
E.  Applicant to attend planning commission meeting. The applicant shall be prepared to attend the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission and any subsequent meetings deemed necessary by the chairperson of the planning commission to discuss the preliminary plat. 
F.  Required changes for conditional approval. Within 45 days after the time of submission of a preliminary plat, the planning commission shall take action to conditionally approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove such preliminary plat and the ground for any modification required or the ground for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to act within such forty-five-day-period shall constitute a "conditional approval" of the preliminary plat. 
G.  Stormwater management requirements. If a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) was submitted pursuant to paragraph B(7) of this section, the preliminary plat application shall not be approved unless the plat and SWPPP comply with the performance and design criteria and standards in chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 14-16) 
Sec. 2. - Subdivision plat. 
A.  Application procedure. Within six months of the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the planning commission an application for approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall: 
1.  Be made on forms provided by the planning commission at the time of conditional approval of the preliminary plat. 
2.  Include the entire subdivision. 
3.  Be accompanied, for a minor subdivision, by three copies of the subdivision plat and conform to article VI, section 2-A, of these regulations. 
4.  Be accompanied, for a major subdivision, by three copies of the subdivision plat and the construction detail sheets as described in article VI, section 3 of these regulations. 
5.  Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat as conditionally approved. 
6.  Be presented to the chairman of the planning commission at least two weeks prior to a regular meeting of the commission in order that a public hearing may be scheduled and the required notice given. 
7.  Be accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision under chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, and as described in article VI, sections 2 and 3 of these regulations. Any such SWPPP shall be accompanied by the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to subsection 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
B.  Official submittal date. The subdivision plat shall be considered officially submitted only at the regular meeting of the planning commission following completion of the application procedure outlined above. 
C.  Endorsement of state health department. The proposed subdivision plat shall be properly endorsed by the state health department as meeting the standards of the state sanitary code, public health law, or other applicable health codes, before any public hearing is scheduled. The plat shall be in final form before state health department approval. 
D.  County official map notification. The planning commission will also, if the county has established a county official map, notify the Niagara County Planning Board and the county superintendent of highways or commissioner of public works, if the subdivision plat proposes structures or new streets having frontage on, access to, or is otherwise directly related to any county road, existing or proposed, as shown on the county official map. The county planning board reports to the planning commission within 30 days on its approval or disapproval or on its approval subject to stated conditions of the proposed subdivision plat. The plat may be approved by the village subject to stated conditions, notwithstanding such report, when the application of such report will act to deprive the owner of the reasonable use of his land. 
E.  Public hearing. Before the planning commission acts on any subdivision plat, it shall hold a public hearing thereon within 30 days after the time of official submittal date in accordance with Village Law § 7-728. If any zoning changes are to be requested at the time of approval of the subdivision plat, a public hearing thereon must be held in accordance with Village Law § 7-738. The two public hearings may be held at the same time. 
F.  Action on proposed subdivision plat. After careful study, the planning commission shall, within 45 days from the public hearing on the subdivision plat, approve, modify, or disapprove such plat. If a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) is submitted pursuant to paragraph A.7 of this section, the subdivision plat application shall not be approved unless the plat and SWPPP comply with the performance and design criteria and standards in chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated on the records of the planning commission. A subdivision plat shall not be signed by the authorized officers of the planning commission until the applicant has met all the conditions of the action granting approval of such plat. 
G.  Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the commission and endorsed, in writing, on the plat. In the event that any subdivision plat, when recorded, contains any such changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the commission shall institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of the county clerk. 
H.  Signing of plat. Every subdivision plat submitted to the planning commission for its approval shall carry the following endorsement: 
"Approved by Resolution of the Planning Commission of the Village of Lewiston, New York, on the _______ day of _______, 20 ___, subject to all requirements and conditions of said Resolution. Any change, erasure modification, or revision of this Plat, as approved, shall void this approval. Signed this _______ day of _______, 20 ___, by 
___________ 
Chairman  ___________ 
 Secretary  
In the absence of the chairman or the secretary, the acting chairman or acting secretary, respectively, may sign in his place. If there is a county official map, such endorsement shall stipulate that the plat does not conflict with the county official map or, in cases where the plat does front on, or have access to, or is otherwise related to roads or drainage systems shown on the county map, that such plat has been approved by the county planning board in the manner specified by General Municipal Law § 239-f . 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 17, 18) 
Sec. 3. - Required improvements and agreements. 
A.  Improvements and performance bond. Prior to an action by the planning commission approving a subdivision plat, the applicant shall be required to complete, in accordance with the decision of the village board and the planning commission and to the satisfaction of the appropriate village department, all the street, sanitary, and other improvements specified in the action approving said plat or, as an alternative, to file with the village board a performance bond in an amount estimated by the village board to secure to the village the satisfactory construction and installation of the incompleted portion of the required improvements. A period of one year, or such other period as the village board may determine appropriate, within which required improvements must be completed, shall be specified by the village board and the planning commission and expressed in the bond. Such performance bond shall comply with the requirements of Village Law § 7-730 and shall be satisfactory to the village board as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. The bond shall be retained for a period of one year after the date of completion of the required improvements to assure their satisfactory condition. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his expense without reimbursement by the village or any district therein. Said improvements shall include but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
1.  Streets and street lighting facilities. 
2.  Street signs. 
3.  Curbs and gutters. 
4.  Landscaped curb strips. 
5.  Sidewalks. 
6.  Street shade trees. 
7.  Monuments. 
8.  Stormwater runoff system, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
9.  Sanitary collection system. 
10.  Water supply system. 
11.  Park and recreation facilities. 
12.  Electrical, telephone, and utility lines. 
13.  Plantings and ground cover. 
B.  Inspection of improvements. The village shall employ an inspector to act as agent to the village board for the purpose of assuring the satisfactory completion of improvements required by the village board and the planning commission and shall determine an amount sufficient to defray the costs of inspection. The applicant shall pay the village costs of inspection before the subdivision plat is signed for filing. If the village board or the planning commission or its agent finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the recommendations of the village board or the planning commission or the approved construction detail sheets, the applicant and the bonding company will be severally and jointly liable for the costs of completing said improvements according to specifications. 
C.  Offers of cession and release. 
(1)  The plat shall be endorsed with the necessary agreements in connection with required easements or releases. Offers of dedication to the village shall be presented to village board prior to plat approval. 
(2)  Formal offers of dedication to the village of all streets and parks, not marked on the plat with notation to the effect that such dedication will not be offered, shall be filed with the village board prior to plat approval. If the owner of the land or his agent who files the plat does not add as part of the plat a notation to the effect that no offer of dedication of such streets, highways, or parks or any of them is made to the public, the filing of the plat in the office of the county clerk or registrar shall constitute a continuing offer of dedication of the streets, highways, or parks or any of them to the public and said offer of dedication may be accepted by the village board at any time prior to revocation of said offer by the owner of the land or his agent. 
(3)  Before final approval of the subdivision plat, the village board will require a certificate of approval from the village attorney as to the legal sufficiency of the offers of cession by the subdivider of the areas for public use such as parks, streets, playgrounds, and other areas. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 19) 
Sec. 4. - Filing of approved subdivision plat. 
    Upon completion of all requirements set forth in the action approving the subdivision plat and notation to that effect upon the subdivision plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and shall be properly signed by the chairman of the planning commission and may be filed by the applicant in the office of the county clerk. Any subdivision plat not so filed and recorded within 62 days of the date upon which said plat is approved or considered approved by reasons of the failure of the planning commission to act, shall become null and void. The applicant shall provide the village clerk-treasurer with a copy of the plat certified by the county clerk as to being the true and certified copy of said plat on file in the county office. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 5. - Resubdivision. 
    For a resubdivision, the same procedure, rules, and regulations apply as for a subdivision. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 5; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 6. - Public streets, parks and playground areas. 
    The approval by the planning commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute the acceptance by the village of any street, park, playground, or other open space shown on the plat. The planning commission may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. If the planning board determines that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot properly be located in any such plat, a payment shall be made to the village of a sum to be determined by the village board, which sum shall constitute a trust fund to be used by the village board exclusively for neighborhood park, playground, or recreation purposes including the acquisition of property. The village board may require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the village board covering future title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any park or playground areas, as well as written agreement covering the maintenance and plowing of all streets within the subdivision until such time as they may be accepted by the village board. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 7. - Time of construction. 
    Upon posting of the performance bond in accordance with article III, section 3A, and after approval and filing of the subdivision plat, the subdivider may initiate land sales or construction of the subdivision itself. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. III, § 9; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 
    The village board and the planning commission, in considering an application for the subdivision of land, shall be guided by the following considerations and standards: 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. IV, intro. ¶; L.L. No. 1-1973) 

Sec. 1. - General. 
A.  Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
B.  Conformity to official map and comprehensive plan. Subdivision shall conform to the streets and parks shown on the official map as may be adopted and shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan as it is developed and adopted by the planning commission. 
C.  Compliance with stormwater regulations. Subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. IV, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 20) 
Sec. 2. - Design standards. 
A.  Streets. The following regulations shall govern the layout of streets: 
1.  Subdivisions shall be so designed as to provide a street pattern which shall be based upon a local residential or minor street pattern connected to a residential collector street system. 
2.  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas, or their proper protection where adjoining land is not subdivided, at the same or greater width insofar as such may be deemed necessary for public requirements. 
3.  When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
4.  Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic. 
5.  All right-of-way street widths and street pavements shall be measured at right angles or radial to the center line of the street and shall not be less than the following: 
Right-Of-Way Width Pavement Width 66' 28' with concrete curbs 6' landscaped strip 5' sidewalk  
6.  Whenever possible, streets shall intersect at right angles and not intersect at angles of less than 60 degrees unless approved by the planning commission. 
7.  The grades of streets shall be in accordance with specifications established by the village engineer and such grades as submitted on subdivision plats shall be approved by him prior to final approval by the planning commission. 
8.  All street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be rounded by curves of at least 20 feet radius and curbs shall be adjusted accordingly. 
9.  All proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide access to adjacent properties. When a proposed subdivision abuts an existing subdivision, the subdivider shall make every attempt to design the street system of the proposed subdivision to connect with dead-end or "stub" streets of the existing subdivision. 
10.  The following standards shall apply to cul-de-sac streets: 
a.  A cul-de-sac shall be located, if possible, so that it drains toward its entrance. 
b.  Unless there is the expectation of extending the street through to the adjoining property, a cul-de-sac street shall never be brought to the property boundary line, but shall be placed so that the lots can back on the property line of the subdivision. 
c.  No cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
d.  All cul-de-sacs shall have a turnaround at the dead end of the street. 
11.  If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street through to adjacent property and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties. 
12.  New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except that wherever a proposed subdivision borders a half or partial street, the planning commission may require that the other part of the street be platted in the proposed tract if it is found that such a requirement would increase the effectiveness of the circulation system in the area. 
13.  Multiple intersections involving a junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited. 
14.  Local residential streets and residential collector streets shall not intersect with arterial streets less than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center line. 
15.  The minimum distance between center line offsets at street jogs shall be 150 feet. 
16.  Minor or secondary street openings into collector or major arterial roads shall, in general, be at least 500 feet apart. 
17.  No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. 
18.  The minimum radius of horizontal curve, minimum length of vertical curves, and minimum length of tangents between reverse curves shall be in accordance with specifications established by the village engineer, and said items shall be approved by him prior to final approval of the subdivision plat by the planning commission. 
19.  In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each other at any one point more than ten degrees, shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the center line of street shall not be less than 400 feet on major streets, 200 feet on collector streets and 100 feet on minor streets. 
20.  When a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land (as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts). Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
B.  Lots. The following regulations shall govern the layout of lots: 
1.  The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
2.  All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance as to area and dimensions for the zone in which the subdivision is located. However, in the event of utilizing Village Law § 7-738, the planning commission may use its discretion in determining lot sizes. 
3.  Each lot shall abut on a street built to the village's specification. 
4.  Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of required building lines on both streets as required by the zoning ordinance. 
5.  Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line. 
6.  Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight streets, and radial to curved streets. 
7.  Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, stormwater drainage, or similar circumstances, the planning commission may, after adequate investigation, require modification of such lots. 
8.  Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
9.  Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. 
10.  Double frontage lots will not, in general, be approved. 
11.  The lot arrangement shall be such that in constructing a building in compliance with the zoning ordinance, there will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other natural condition. Lots shall not be of such depth as to encourage the later creation of a second building lot at the front or rear. 
12.  Driveway access and grades shall conform to specifications as established by the village engineer and on file in the village clerk-treasurer's office. Driveway grades between the pavement and setback line shall not exceed ten percent. 
13.  Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the minimum size required in the zoning district in which a subdivision is located, the board may require that streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision in accordance with the requirements contained in these regulations. 
C.  Easements. An easement shall be provided for all natural drainage ways and all utility lines when such utility line or lines do not fall within a dedicated right-of-way. All easements shall be plotted on the preliminary plat and subdivision plat. A clause shall be inserted in the deed of each lot affected by an easement indicating that the easement exists and its purpose. Except as further required in this section, easements shall have a minimum width of ten feet. Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainage way, channel, or stream, a drainage way easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse shall be provided. The easement shall be 20 feet wide or such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for maintenance. Where it is found that additional easement width is needed, such width shall be determined by the planning commission in consultation with the village engineer. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines. All utility lines which are primarily intended to provide service to the lots within the subdivision shall be installed underground at a depth and at such locations as will minimize risk of interruption of services. A five-foot easement running parallel with and contiguous to all street and highway rights-of-way shall be provided to the village granting the village the right to protect, plant, prune, spray, remove, control, regulate and improve shrubbery and shade trees thereon. 
D.  Landscaping and ground cover. 
1.  All lot areas which are not covered by structures or paving shall be properly seeded by the developer. 
2.  The developer shall provide a liberal and functional landscaping scheme for the entire subdivision. Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of two trees which shall be in addition to the street shade trees. This requirement may be waived by the village board or the planning commission in wooded areas where the subdivider intends to retain existing trees. 
3.  Individual homeowners may, by written agreement with the subdivider and builder, seed and landscape their yards independently. 
4.  When a proposed subdivision borders upon an existing commercial or industrial establishment, or any other use which, in the opinion of the village board or the planning commission, shall be visually detrimental to the tranquility of the future residents of the subdivision, the village board shall require a landscape screen to buffer the subdivision from the visually noncompatible use. 
E.  Preservation of natural features. 
1.  Top soil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to cover all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. At no time shall topsoil be removed from the site without written permission of the village board. 
2.  To the fullest extent possible, all existing trees and shrubbery shall be conserved by the subdivider. Special consideration shall be given to the arrangement and ultimate improvement or development of the lots to this end. Precautions shall also be taken to protect existing trees and shrubbery during the grading of the lots and roads. Where there is a question as to the desirability of removing a group of trees, which serve to add interest and variety to the proposed subdivision, in order to allow for use of the land for a lot or lots, the planning commission may, after proper investigation, require modification of such lots. Where any land other than that included in public rights-of-way is to be dedicated to the public use, the developer shall not remove any trees from the site without written permission from the village board. 
3.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural lake, pond, or stream, the boundaries or alignment of said watercourse shall be preserved unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, a change or realignment will enhance the development and beauty of the subdivision or the utilization of such features by the future residents of the subdivision. All proposed changes in watercourse alignment shall be in accordance with the Water Resources Law (Environmental Conservation Law § 15-0101 et seq.). 
4.  Unique physical features such as historic landmarks and sites, rock outcroppings, hilltop lookouts, desirable natural contours, and similar features shall be preserved if possible. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  The subdivider shall not be permitted to leave any hills or mounds of dirt around the tract. All surfaces shall be restored within six months of the time of completion of the section of the subdivision. 
F.  Floodplain. 
1.  Mapping-If any portion of the land within the subdivision is subject to inundation or flood hazard by stormwater, such fact and portion shall be clearly indicated on the preliminary plat and the prominent note on each sheet of such map whereon any such portion shall be shown. 
2.  Use-Land subject to flooding, and land deemed by the planning commission to be otherwise uninhabitable, shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property or aggravate the flood hazard. 
G.  Drainage improvements. 
1.  The subdivider may be required by the planning commission to carry away by pipe, open ditch, or other drainage facility any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in peripheral unobstructed easements of appropriate width. 
2.  A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The village engineer shall approve the design and size of facility based on anticipated run-off from a "ten-year" storm under conditions of total potential development permitted by the zoning ordinance in the watershed. 
3.  The subdivider's engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on the existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. This study shall be reviewed by the village engineer. Where it is anticipated that the additional run-off incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility during a five-year storm, the planning commission shall notify the village board of such potential condition. In such case, the planning commission shall not approve the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said condition. 
4.  The design standards for all drainage improvements shall comply with any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) submitted pursuant to article III of this appendix A. 
H.  Parks, playgrounds, or open space. 
1.  Land shall be reserved for park, playground, open space, or other recreational purposes in locations designated on the comprehensive plan or elsewhere where the planning commission deems that such reservations would be appropriate. For a major subdivision, each reservation shall be of an area equal to five percent of the total land within the subdivision, but in no case shall a reservation be less than one acre. The area to be preserved shall possess the suitable topography, general character, and adequate road access necessary for its recreational purposes. 
2.  Where a major subdivision is too small to establish an adequate recreation area site; or where the village comprehensive plan or good planning judgment would not locate a recreation area, or in the case of a minor subdivision, the applicant will be required to provide a cash equivalent of $100.00 per lot, deposited with the village clerk-treasurer for the account of the village park, playground and open space trust fund to be used for acquisition and improvement of such areas in suitable locations. 
For the purposes of determining the amount of cash equivalent to be paid to the village under the previous subparagraph, the number of lots after subdivision or resubdivision shall be reduced by the number of lots existing prior to subdivision or resubdivision. The resulting number will be multiplied by the $100.00 cash equivalent and shall be the amount to be deposited with the village clerk-treasurer. If the number of lots after subdivision or resubdivision is less than the number of lots before subdivision or resubdivision then no cash equivalent will be required. 
3.  Where the planning commission requires land to be set aside for parks, playgrounds, or other recreational purposes, the commission shall require that the site be graded, loamed, and landscaped and may require it to be fenced. 
4.  When area for park, playground, recreational purposes or open space shall have been required on the subdivision plat, the approval of said subdivision plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the village of such an area. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. IV, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 2-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 21-24) 
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS 
    The developer, before the approval of the subdivision plat, shall complete all improvements to the satisfaction of the village board, the village superintendent of public works and the village engineer, or post a performance bond sufficient to insure the satisfactory completion of the following required improvements except where waivers may be requested and the village board may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such improvements as it considers are not requisite in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
A.  Streets. All streets shall be constructed, graded, and paved in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
B.  Storm drains, culverts, catchbasins, etc. Storm drains, culverts, catchbasins, and other drainage structures shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board and in accord with the plat approved by the planning commission. All drainage facilities shall comply with the requirements of the current specifications of the Department of Transportation of the State of New York, and the performance and design criteria and standards in chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. The location, length, depth, size, grade, and type of pipe shall be designated in the plans. If unusual conditions are discovered at the time of construction, which are not provided for on the plans, the village superintendent of public works, the village engineer, and/or the stormwater management officer shall determine the type and extent of construction required to overcome such conditions. 
C.  Curbing. Curbing shall be constructed on both sides of all streets shown on all subdivision plats and in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
D.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets shown on all subdivision plats in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
E.  Driveway aprons Driveway aprons shall be constructed between the curb and the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and the property line in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
F.  Street signs. Street signs shall be installed at the intersection of all streets at the location approved by the village board and in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
G.  Grass strips. Grass strips shall be provided within the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and the property line. 
H.  Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in every subdivision at intervals of 40 to 60 feet along both sides of all streets. Existing trees may be taken into consideration when determining the above. Trees shall be at least three feet from any sidewalk and located on the building side of the sidewalk rather than on the street side. Where dwelling structures are oriented with their rear facing the street, street trees shall be at least six feet from the curb line. Trees shall also be at least ten feet from any line which is directly below utility wires. No tree shall be planted within 25 feet from an existing or proposed street light nor within 25 feet from the intersection of the property line of the street with that of an intersection street. Trees shall be of a species, and caliper and height acceptable to the village superintendent of public works and the village board. 
I.  Shade trees. Shade trees, other than within the right-of-way, may be required when, taking into consideration the existing trees on the lots, the village board and the planning commission shall deem it necessary. Such trees shall be in conformance with the standards for size, kind, and locational limitations prescribed for trees along the street line. 
J.  Street lighting facilities. Street lighting facilities shall be provided along all streets shown on the subdivision plat and along all streets upon which the subdivision abuts. Such lighting facilities shall conform to standards adopted by the village board and shall be installed as approved and directed by the superintendent of public works and the National Grid. 
K.  Sanitary sewers and treatment and disposal facilities. Sanitary sewers and treatment and disposal facilities shall be required. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect or provide for connection with such sanitary sewer and shall provide within the subdivision facilities necessary to make the system accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Sewer systems shall be approved by the village board, the village superintendent of public works, the village engineer, the Health Department of the State of New York and be in conformance with all other provisions of law. The construction shall be performed in accordance with standards and specifications adopted by the village board and subject to the supervision and inspection of the village superintendent of public works and the village engineer. 
L.  Public water main. Where a public water main is within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall connect with such water main and provide a water connection for each lot in accordance with standards and specifications adopted by the village board and those of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters. 
M.  Permanent monuments. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at intervals of approximately 500 feet, or at such other distance as the village board and the planning commission may determine to be appropriate, and their location shall be shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes shall not be considered acceptable as permanent monuments for the purpose of these regulations. Monuments shall conform to standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
    Permitted modifications. 
A.  Curbing may be omitted and, in lieu thereof, paved gutters or other means for controlling the runoff of stormwater may be constructed as may be approved by the village board, the planning commission, the superintendent of public works, and the village engineer, provided any such means for controlling stormwater runoff comply with chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
B.  Sidewalks may be omitted on one or both sides of a street as may be deemed appropriate by the village board and the planning commission. 
C.  Where curbing and/or sidewalk are not provided, adequate provision for the protection of the edge of the pavements and graded and stabilized shoulders along all pavement edges and at all driveway openings, and other accessways shall be provided in accordance with standards and specifications adopted by the village board. 
D.  Where curbing and/or sidewalk are not provided, grass curb strips shall not be required. However, grading and seeding of the area between the pavement edge, the edge of shoulder, or approved drainage structures and the front property line of the lot shall be provided. 
E.  Individual sewage disposal systems (septic tanks) may be provided in lieu of facilities connected to a public sanitary sewage system, where such system is not reasonably available. Such on-site disposal systems shall not be subject to the provisions of these regulations, but shall be subject to all other applicable laws and regulations of the village, the county and the state. 
F.  Individual on-site water supply systems may be provided in lieu of providing a water supply connected to a public water supply system, where such a system is not reasonably available. Such on-site water supply systems shall not be subject to the provisions of these regulations, but shall be subject to all other applicable laws and regulations of the village, the county and the state. 
G.  Fire hydrants may be omitted where adequate water mains which are a part of a public water system are neither existing nor proposed to be available to the subdivision. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. V; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 25, 26) 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS AND SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 1. - Preliminary plat. 
    Preliminary plats submitted to the planning commission shall be accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision under chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. Preliminary Plats shall also be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall show the following information: 
A.  The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and streets. There shall also be included a key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet showing all streets, streams, and property within 1,500 feet of the applicant's property. All property held by the applicant in the area shall be identified. 
B.  The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines (include entire area proposed to be subdivided and remainder of the tract owned by the subdividing owner). 
C.  All pertinent features such as existing structures, streets, railroads, water bodies, streams, swamps, and large trees, that may influence the design of the subdivision, and topography at a contour interval of not more than five feet, unless waived by the planning commission. 
D.  The location, width, and approximate grade of all proposed streets. Approximate elevations shall be shown at the beginning and end of each street, at street intersections, and at all points where there is a decided change in the slope or direction. 
E.  The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all proposed or existing lots. 
F.  The approximate location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for playground or park use. 
G.  The names of all property owners of record, or the names of developments within 500 feet. 
H.  The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner, and the name of the land surveyor. 
I.  The date, north point, and scale. 
J.  Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre. 
K.  Proposed provision of water supply, fire protection, disposal of sanitary waste, stormwater drainage, street trees, street lighting fixtures, street signs, and sidewalks, data on which must be available for consideration at this stage. 
L.  Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be numbered consecutively in accordance with the procedure established by the village. The total number of residential lots shall be noted on the plat. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VI, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. 04-2007, § 27) 
Sec. 2. - Minor subdivision plat. 
A.  In the case of minor subdivision only, the subdivision plat application shall include the following information: 
1.  A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or parts of the tract. 
2.  An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on the ground and marked by monuments as approved by the village engineer and shall be referenced and shown on the plat. 
3.  All on-site sanitation and water supply facilities shall be designed to meet the minimum specifications of the state department of health, and a note to this effect shall be stated on the plat and signed by a licensed engineer. 
4.  Proposed subdivision name, name of the village and county. 
5.  The date, north point, map scale, name and address of owner and/or subdivider. 
6.  The plat to be filed with the county clerk shall be on uniform size sheets in accordance with New York State Statutes. 
7.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision under chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VI, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 28) 
Sec. 3. - Major subdivision plat. 
    Major subdivision plats shall be accompanied by separate construction detail sheets, and both shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval, as follows: 
A.  Drawing, scale, and size of plat and construction detail sheets. The subdivision plat and construction detail sheets shall be clearly and legibly drawn on a stable transparent base (Mylar, cronaflex, etc.). In areas zoned for lots of minimum size of 20,000 square feet or more, maps and profiles shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. In areas zoned for lots less than 20,000 square feet, maps and profiles shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. Maps shall be on uniform size sheets in accordance with the New York State Statutes. Whenever any project is of such size that more than one sheet is required, then an index map on the same size sheet shall accompany these sheets. The construction detail sheets shall show all items included in section 3.C [of this section] and as actually constructed. 
B.  Information to be shown on plat. Plats shall show the following information: 
1.  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate that of any other development in the village. 
2.  Date, north point, and scale. 
3.  Name, address, and signature of owner, subdivider, and licensed engineer or land surveyor. 
4.  Names of owners on record of abutting properties or developments. 
5.  Locations, names, and widths of existing streets, highways and easements, building lines, parks, and other public properties. 
6.  Locations and widths of all streets and sidewalks, together with names of streets, and location, dimensions, and status of all easements proposed by the subdivider. 
7.  Lot areas in square feet. 
8.  Lot lines with accurate dimensions and bearings of angles. 
9.  Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. 
10.  Radii of all curves and lengths of arcs. 
11.  Location, material, and approximate size of all monuments. 
12.  The accurate outline of all property which is offered, or to be offered, for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the subdivision. 
13.  Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre. 
14.  Each block shall be numbered and the lots within such block shall be numbered consecutively in accordance with the procedure established by the village. The total number of residential lots shall be noted on the plat. 
In addition to the subdivision plat as described above, the following shall also be presented to the village board: 
1.  A certificate that there are no tax liens on the property being subdivided. 
2.  A performance bond in such amount as is necessary to complete street and utility improvements. 
3.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision under chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
C.  Construction detail sheets. Construction detail sheets shall show the following information, except where requirements have been waived, applicable specifications may be omitted: 
1.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the elevation along the center line of the existing street or streets, within 100 feet of the intersection, in both directions, shall be shown. All elevations must be referred to established U.S. government or approved local bench marks, where they exist within one-half mile of the boundary of the subdivision. 
2.  The planning commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that present elevations of all proposed streets shall be shown every 100 feet at five points on a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each property line, and points 30 feet inside each property line. 
3.  Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, manholes, and catchbasins; the locations of street trees, street lighting standards and street signs; the locations, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants; and the exact location and size of all water, gas, electric, or other underground utilities or structures. 
All plans shall conform to the village minimum road specifications and shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VI, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 04-2007, § 29) 
ARTICLE VII. - VARIANCES AND WAIVERS 

Sec. 1. - Variance authority. 
    Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the official map, the comprehensive plan, or the zoning ordinance, if such exists. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VII, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 2. - Waiver authority. 
    Where the planning commission finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VII, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 3. - Conditions for granting. 
    In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VII, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
ARTICLE VIII. - VALIDITY 
    If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of these regulations is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or otherwise invalid, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of these regulations. 
(Code 1978, app. A, art. VIII; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Appendix B - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Local laws zoning or rezoning specific property or granting specific use permits are not included herein, but are on file in the village clerk's office. Also, the zoning map mentioned in this local law is not printed herein, but is kept on file in the office of the village. 

Sec. 1. - Purposes and interpretation. 
A.  Title: This Local Law of the Village of Lewiston shall be known and may be cited as "The Village of Lewiston, N.Y., Zoning Ordinance." The Local Law hereinafter will be referred to as the ordinance. 
B.  The purposes of this ordinance are to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by regulating and restricting the location, construction and the use of buildings and structures and the use of land within the Village of Lewiston and for said purpose to divide the village into districts. 
C.  In interpreting, construing and applying the provisions of these ordinances, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the public. It is not intended that these ordinances shall conflict, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village of Lewiston, previously adopted or which may hereafter be adopted and not in conflict with these ordinances, nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger yards, courts, or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or permits, or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
D.  The provisions and regulations of this local law, and interpretations thereof, shall be made in accordance with the objectives of the Village of Lewiston Comprehensive Master Plan ( 2004) and consistent with the policies and purposes of the Village of Lewiston adopted Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (1986) for the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the community and protecting and enhancing the coastal resources of the community. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 9-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  Zoning officer. 
1.  This ordinance shall be enforced by the zoning officer who shall be appointed by the board of trustees. 
2.  The zoning officer shall issue no zoning permits until all the provisions of this ordinance have been complied with. 
B.  Building permits. 
1.  No building, structure, or use thereof shall be erected, added to, or structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the building inspector. 
2.  For the purpose of this ordinance, the excavating for a building or the moving of any building from one site to another site shall be deemed construction and a permit therefor required. 
3.  Application for building permits shall include three copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale and showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance, the building code, and provisions of the Education Law of the State of New York as applicable to plans for construction. A certified copy of the layout or plot plan shall be submitted to the zoning officer and leave the corner posts in for final issuance of permit. 
4.  One copy of such layout or plot plan, together with the permit, shall be returned to the applicant when approved by the building inspector, upon payment of such building permit fee as shall be established from time to time by the board of trustees. 
5.  Applications for building permits shall be made to the building inspector by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, on forms provided by the building inspector. 
6.  Any permit hereafter issued for the construction of a building shall be invalid if construction thereof is not commenced within six months of the date of issuance of the permit, or if said construction is commenced but has been abandoned for a period of six months, or if the entire construction authorized by said permit is not completed according to plans within one year of the date of issuance of said permit. 
7.  The following measures shall be followed within zone A of the flood hazard boundary map issued by the flood insurance administration for the Village of Lewiston: 
a.  Permit requirements. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the designated responsible person. No manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the designated responsible person for each change. No mobile home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the designated responsible person. 
b.  Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to the designated responsible person with a fee as determined by the board of trustees before the issuance of a permit will be considered. The applicant shall also submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required by chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. Any SWPPP submitted pursuant to this subparagraph shall comply with the requirements of chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
c.  Review of applications. The building inspector is appointed as the "person" responsible for receiving applications and examining the plans and specifications for the proposed construction or development. After reviewing the application, the building inspector shall require any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this document. 
d.  The building inspector shall review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334[1344]. 
e.  The building inspector shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall: 
(i)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
(ii)  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and 
(iii)  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage, consistent with any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) submitted pursuant to chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
f.  The building inspector shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to ensure that: 
(i)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
(ii)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(iii)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, consistent with any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) approved by the village in accordance with chapter 16 of the village Code. 
g.  The responsible person shall require within flood-prone areas new and replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
h.  The responsible person shall require within flood-prone areas: 
(i)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(ii)  On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
i.  The responsible person shall require that all subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
j.  The responsible person shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state, or other source, until such other data has been provided by the administrator, as criteria for requiring that: 
(i)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level; and 
(ii)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood level. 
k.  For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates within zone A on a community's FHBM, the responsible person shall: 
(i)  Obtain, or require the applicant to furnish, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement; 
(ii)  Obtain, or require the applicant to furnish, if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed; and 
(iii)  Maintain a record of all such information. 
l.  The building inspector shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
m.  The building inspector shall ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
n.  The building inspector shall require that all mobile homes to be placed within zone A on the community's flood hazard boundary map shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
(i)  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
(ii)  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
(iii)  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
(iv)  Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored. 
o.  The flood hazard boundary map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration for this community, dated February 15, 1974, with panel numbers 36063322001, and any officially published revisions to this map, is adopted as the official map for the enforcement of this document. Zone A on this map delineates the area within which the requirements of this document will be enforced, said zone A being the special flood hazard area thereon. 
p.  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this document shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this document its most reasonable application. 
C.  Definitions. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from water of any source (see definition of flood). 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate of improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. The term includes but it is not limited to, the definition of "mobile home" as set forth in regulations governing the mobile home safety and construction standards program (24 CFR 3282.7(a)). 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(a)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(b)  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. 
D.  Building Code. 
1.  The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as amended from time to time, is hereby declared to be the Building Code of the Village of Lewiston. 
2.  Compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be enforced by the Building Inspector who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees. 
E.  Certificates of Occupancy. 
1.  No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector, stating that the building or proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of this ordinance and the building code. This certificate must be posted in all business establishments. 
2.  No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended without a certificate of occupancy (certificate of existing use, therefor) having first been issued by the building inspector. 
3.  Said certificates shall be issued to the applicant therefor within ten days after the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with the provisions of this ordinance and the building code, and the payment of such fee therefor as shall from time to time be established by the board of trustees. 
4.  The building inspector shall maintain a record of all certificates and copies thereof shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected upon payment of the established fee therefor. 
5.  Under such rules and regulations as may be established by the zoning board of appeals, a temporary certificate of occupancy for not more than 30 days for a part of a building may be issued by the building inspector. 
F.  Zoning board of appeals. 
1.  Creation and appointment. The zoning board of appeals is created consisting of five members. 
2.  Organization. The zoning board of appeals may prescribe such rules it deems necessary for the conduct of its affairs. 
3.  Powers and duties. The zoning board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties as set forth in Village Law §§ 712, 712-a and 712-b, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
a.  Additional powers and duties. In addition to the said powers and duties, the zoning board of appeals shall also hear and decide, or review and report, on all matters referred to it on which it is requested to pass under any provision of the village Code. 
b.  Appeals. All appeals and applications made to the zoning board of appeals shall be in writing and shall contain such information as is required by the Village Law and by this village Code. 
c.  Fees. 
(i)  In every matter brought before the zoning board of appeals for determination or action under the provisions of Village Law § 712-b, the applicant or appellant shall pay a filing fee, as established by the board of trustees, to the village at the time of submission of the application or appeal. 
(ii)  In the event an applicant or appellant requests a special meeting of the zoning board of appeals before its next regularly scheduled meeting date, the chairperson of said board shall cause a special meeting to be held, upon payment by the applicant or appellant of an additional fee, as established by the board of trustees, to the village. 
(iii)  In addition to the foregoing fees, in any matter brought before the zoning board of appeals which involves the sending or publishing of any notices, the actual costs shall be borne by the applicant or appealing party and shall be paid to the village prior to the hearing of such appeal. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 4-1977, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1992, § 4; L.L. No. 04-2006; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 3-5) 
Sec. 3. - Establishment of districts. 
    The Village of Lewiston is hereby divided into the following types of zoning districts: 
R-1 Districts: Low Density Residential Single-Family Districts 
R-1a Districts: Medium Density Residential Single-Family Districts 
R-2 Districts: Residential Two-Family Districts 
R-3 Districts: Residential Multifamily Districts 
R-4 Districts: Residential Multi-Family-Professional Office Districts 
R-5 Districts: Residential Townhouse Districts 
RB Districts: Restricted Business Districts 
RB-2 District: Retail Business District 
B-1 District: General Business District 
O-P District: Open and Public District 
W-D District: Waterfront Development District 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Zoning map. 
    Said zoning districts are bounded as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the Village of Lewiston" adopted as part of this ordinance and certified by the village clerk-treasurer which accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 5. - Interpretation of the district boundaries. 
A.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforementioned districts as shown on this zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
2.  Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center lines or right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
3.  Where the boundary of a district follows a body of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the village unless otherwise indicated. 
4.  Where the boundary line of the district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be the boundary line of the railroad right-of-way nearest the district bounded. 
5.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
6.  Distances shown on the zoning map are perpendicular or radial distances from street lines measured back to the zone boundary line, which lines, in all cases where distances are given, are parallel to the street line. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 5; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 6. - Application of regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to be specific. Those matters for which there are no specific provisions in this ordinance shall be deemed to be prohibited. 
B.  Except as herein provided: 
1.  No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless in conformity with the requirements set forth in the zoning schedule, section 8, and all other regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
2.  No building shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
a.  To exceed the height; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
c.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot areas; or 
d.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, inner courts or outer courts; 
than specified herein for the district in which such building is located. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 7. - Definitions. 
A.  Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance shall carry their customary meanings. For the purpose of interpreting, construing, and applying the provisions of this ordinance, the following definitions shall be observed. 
1.  Accessory building: A supplemental or subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
2.  Accessory use: A subordinate use, building, or structure customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use, building or structure. 
2a.  Adult use business: Is a commercial establishment where a "substantial portion" of the business includes an adult bookstore, adult eating or drinking establishment, adult theater, or other adult commercial establishment, or any combination thereof, as defined below: 
(a)  An adult bookstore is a bookstore which has as a "substantial portion" of its stock-in-trade any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(b)  An adult eating or drinking establishment is an eating or drinking establishment which regularly features any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(3)  Employees who, as part of their employment, regularly expose to patrons "specified anatomical areas"; and which is not customarily open to the general public during such features because it excludes minors by reason of age. 
(c)  An adult theater is a theater which regularly features one or more of the following: 
(1)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Live performances characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; and which is not customarily open the general public during such features because it excludes minors by reason of age. 
An adult theater shall include commercial establishments where such materials or performances are viewed from individual enclosures. 
(d)  An other adult commercial establishment is a facility-other than an adult bookstore, adult eating and drinking establishment, adult theater, commercial studio, or business or trade school-which features employees who, as part of their employment, regularly expose to patrons "specified anatomical areas" and which is not customarily open to the general public during such features because it excludes minors by reason of age. 
For the purpose of defining adult-oriented establishments, "specified sexual activities" are: (i) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) actual or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or (iii) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast. "Specified anatomical areas" are (i) less than completely and opaquely concealed: (a) human genitals, pubic region, (b) human buttock, anus, or (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or (ii) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely concealed. 
For the purpose of determining whether a "substantial portion" of a business includes an adult bookstore, adult eating or drinking business, adult theater, or other adult commercial establishment, or combination thereof, the following factors shall be considered: (1) the amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers and allocated to such uses, and (2) the amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers and allocated to such uses compared with the total floor area and cellar space accessible to customers in the establishment. 
For the purpose of determining whether a bookstore has a "substantial portion" of its stock in materials defined in paragraphs (a) (1) or (a) (2) hereof, the following factors shall be considered: (1) the amount of such stock accessible to customers compared with the total stock accessible to customers in the business, and (2) the amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers containing such stock, and (3) the amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers containing such stock compared with the total floor area and cellar space accessible to customers in the establishment. 
3.  Alley: A narrow service-way providing a secondary public access to abutting properties. 
4.  Alterations: As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an enlargement, whether by extending a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another. 
5.  Apartment building: A building arranged, intended, or designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. 
6.  Apartment, garden: Any apartment building of three or less stories or floors above average finished grade. 
7.  Apartment, high rise: Any apartment building of four or more stories or floors above average finished grade. 
8.  Apartment, town house: An apartment building which is so designed and erected that no family or housekeeping unit is located above, below, attached and to the rear of, or attached and to the front of any other family or housekeeping unit and not over three stories above average finished grade. 
9.  Architectural review commission: A commission, established by the board of trustees of the Village of Lewiston, and empowered to review and make recommendations upon the appropriateness of exterior architectural, landscape and related features of buildings and sites. 
10.  Area building: The total area measured in a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls. 
11.  Auto court: A building or group of buildings, whether detached or connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term "auto court" includes buildings designated as tourist courts, motor lodges, motels and by similar applications. 
12.  Basement: A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its height above the average level of the finished grade at the front of the building. 
12a.  Bed and breakfast residence: Bed and breakfast residence means living quarters within a principal building for the temporary use of guests of the occupants of the premises, which living quarters shall not be a dwelling unit as herein defined and which are not rented or otherwise leased as separate dwelling units. 
13.  Board of appeals: The officially established Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Lewiston. 
14.  Board of Trustees: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lewiston. 
15.  Boat livery or marinas: Riverside operation and premises for mooring, docking, renting, storing or servicing of boats; servicing shall include such supplies and accessories related to such operation as permitted by the board of trustees. 
16.  Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. 
17.  Building, detached: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
18.  Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
19.  Building inspector: The officer of the Village of Lewiston charged with issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy and with ensuring compliance with all building codes. 
20.  Building line: A line formed by the intersection of the ground surface and a vertical plane coinciding with the furthest projection of any eave, roof or rooflike portion of the structure. Yard requirements are measured from the building line. 
21.  Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
22.  Cellar: A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its clear height below the average level of the finished grade at the front of the building. 
23.  Certificate of occupancy: A certificate issued by the building inspector upon completion of construction, alteration or change in occupancy or use of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all the requirements of this ordinance and such adjustments thereto granted by the board of appeals. 
24.  Church: A building, institution or establishment defined as a church by the Internal Revenue Service. 
25.  Club, private: A nonprofit social organization whose premises are restricted to its members and their guests. 
26.  Cluster development: A development of residential lots for detached single-family dwellings, each of which may contain less area than the minimum lot area required for the zone within which such development occurs, but maintaining the density limitation imposed by said minimum lot area through the provision of open space as a part of the subdivision plan. 
27.  Commercial or business: Means and includes the purchase, sale or transaction involving the disposition of any article, substance, commodity or service, the maintenance or conduct of offices, professions or recreational or amusement enterprises conducted for profit and also includes business offices, sales display rooms and premises, motels and hotels. 
28.  Court: An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, which is bounded on at least three sides by the walls of a building situated on the same lot. 
29.  Court, closed: A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable. 
30.  Court, open: A court extending to a street line or opening upon any front, side or rear yard. 
30a.  Drive thru: A building which, by design of physical facilities or service, permits customers to receive or obtain a product or service while remaining in a motor vehicle, and may include fast-food establishments, banks and similar services. 
30b.  Duplex: (See Dwelling, two-family, condominium, town house and building.) 
31.  Dwelling: A building designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families. The terms "dwelling," "single-family dwelling," "two-family dwelling," "duplex," or "dwelling group" shall not be deemed to include auto court, rooming house, tourist home or motel. 
32.  Dwelling, single-family: A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
33.  Dwelling, two-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
34.  Dwelling, multi-family: A dwelling or group of dwellings on one plot containing separate living units for three or more families, but which may have joint services or facilities or both. 
35.  Dwelling, multiple: A building used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses, apartment flats, apartment hotels and group houses. 
36.  Dwelling group: A group of two or more single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any yard in common. 
36a.  Dwelling, townhouse: An attached building designed for, owned and occupied exclusively by one family, which building constitutes a group of dwellings on adjacent lots containing separate living units and having separate services or facilities. 
37.  Dwelling unit: A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one family. 
38.  Family: Two or more related persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel. 
39.  Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of materials erected for the enclosure of yard areas. 
40.  Flammable liquids: Liquids having a flash point below 200 degrees Fahrenheit, closed cup tester. Class 1 flammable liquids (e.g., gasoline, ether, liquid petroleum gas) are those having a flash point below 25 degrees Fahrenheit. Class II flammable liquids are those having a flash point below 70 degrees Fahrenheit but not below 25 degrees Fahrenheit. 
41.  Floor area of a building: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building; in residential districts only, cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential use are excluded. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls. 
42.  Funeral home: Every place or premises devoted to or used in the care and preparation for burial of the body of a deceased person or maintained or held out to the public by advertising or otherwise as the office or place for the practice and/or the transaction of business by a funeral director or undertaker. 
43.  Garage, private: A garage used for storage purposes only and having a capacity of not more than four automobiles or not more than two automobiles per family housed in the building to which the garage is accessory, whichever is greater. 
44.  Garage, public: Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, operated for gain, and which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles. 
45.  Gasoline station or filling station: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is exclusively used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, but which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, or otherwise servicing motor vehicles as the only permitted accessory uses. 
46.  Grade, established: The elevation of the center line of the streets as officially established by the village. 
47.  Grade, finished: The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, drives, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans, plots, or designs relating thereto. 
48.  Hedge: A natural barrier erected or planted for the enclosure of yard areas. 
49.  Home occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit by a member of the family residing therein, is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and which conforms to the following additional conditions: 
a.  The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building or other structure accessory thereto. 
b.  Not more than one person outside the family shall be employed in the home occupation. 
c.  No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation or other objectionable substances or conditions shall be produced. 
d.  There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except as permitted for residences, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building. 
In particular, a home occupation includes dressmaking, professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, realtor, accountant, or the like, and teaching limited to a single pupil at a time. Day care centers, nursery schools, beauty salons or barber shops are not included as home occupations. 
50.  Hospital: Unless otherwise specified, the term "hospital" shall be deemed to include sanitarium, sanitorium, preventorium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments. 
51.  Reserved. 
52.  Junkyard: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage or sale of waste, scrap or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing or salvaging of machinery or vehicles and for the sale of parts thereof. 
53.  Kennel, dog: A structure or area used for the harboring of more than three dogs that are more than two months old. 
54.  Launderette: A business premises equipped with individual clothes washing, clothes drying and/or dry cleaning machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment house or apartment hotel or auto court. 
55.  Lot: Land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance, having not less than the minimum area and width required by this ordinance for a lot in the district in which land is situated, and having its principal frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may be determined in accordance with the provisions of the law to be adequate as a condition for the issuance of a building permit for a building on such land. 
56.  Lot, corner: A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets. 
57.  Lot, depth of: A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines. 
58.  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
59.  Lot, through: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or near parallel streets. 
60.  Lot, width of: The mean width measured at right angles to its depth. 
61.  Lots, back-to-back: Lots or portions of lots which are on opposite sides of the same rear line common to both. 
62.  Reserved. 
63.  Motel: A building or group of buildings, whether detached or connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as tourist courts, motor lodges, auto courts and by similar appellations. 
64.  Reserved. 
65.  Nonconforming use: Use of a building or land that does not conform to the regulations as to use for the district in which it is situated. 
66.  Open space: An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the building. 
67.  Parking space: The area required for parking one automobile, which in this ordinance is held to be an area nine feet wide by 20 feet long, not including passageways. 
67a.  Permit: (See Zoning Permit). 
68.  Planned unit development: A primarily residential development consisting of several types of dwelling structures, open space, and commercial area planned and developed as a single neighborhood project. This ordinance does not establish any regulations for this type of development. No development of this type shall be approved and/or constructed unless an ordinance governing the approval, planning, design, construction, use and other regulations for such development shall have been adopted by the board of trustees subsequent to required public hearings. 
69.  Planning commission: The Village of Lewiston Planning Commission. 
70.  Recreational equipment: 
a.  "Boats" and "boat trailers" shall include boats, floats and rafts plus the normal equipment necessary to transport same on the highway. The size and weight of such boat and/or boat trailer shall not be such as to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a stock passenger automobile. 
b.  To be used to describe vehicles such as snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, air cushion vehicles, and other similar recreational equipment. 
70a.  Recreational vehicle: A recreational vehicle is a vehicular-type structure, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle which is self powered. With allowances for engineering variations the basic entities are: 
a.  A "travel trailer" is a vehicular portable structure, mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a stock passenger automobile; primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use. 
b.  A "camping trailer" is a vehicular portable structure mounted on wheels, constructed with collapsible partial side walls of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material for folding compactly while being drawn by another vehicle, and when unfolded at the site or location, providing temporary living quarters; and whose primary design is for recreation, camping, or travel use. 
c.  A "truck camper" is a portable structure, designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use. 
d.  A "motor home" is a structure built on and made an integral part of a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis other than a passenger car chassis, and primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, and travel use. 
71.  Residential hotel: A dwelling occupied by permanent guests only and not by transients. It may include restaurants, newsstands and other accessory services primarily for servicing its occupants and only incidentally the public. 
72.  Sign: Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public. Further definitions related to signs are included herein, in section 13, sign regulations. 
73.  Site plan: A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography, location of buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, boundaries, all essential dimensions and hearings, any tree over four-inch caliper or 20 feet in height, and any other information deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
74.  Story, half: A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story. 
75.  Story, height of: The vertical distance from the top surface of a floor to the top surface of the floor next above. The height of the topmost story, or in the case of a single-story building, is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the top surface of the ceiling joists or trusses. 
76.  Street: A public or private right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
77.  Street line: The dividing line between the street right-of-way and the lot. 
78.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
79.  Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, rafters or joists. 
80.  Subdivision, submittal of: See Land Subdivision Regulations of the Village of Lewiston. 
81.  Swimming pool: Any body of water or receptacle for water having a depth at any point greater than three feet and constructed in or above ground on private or public property for swimming or bathing. 
82.  Temporary use: An activity conducted for a specific limited period of time which may not otherwise be permitted by the provisions of the ordinance. Examples of such uses are buildings incidental to new construction which are removed after the completion of the construction work. 
83.  Theater: A building especially adapted to present drama, operas, motion pictures, lectures, etc. 
84.  Tourist home: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
85.  Use: The specific purposes for which land or building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
86.  Valuation, full: The value for which the building would have been expected to sell on the real estate market. 
87.  Variance: A modification of the regulations of this ordinance, granted by the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
88.  Veterinary hospital: Unless otherwise specified, the term "veterinary hospital" shall be deemed to include animal hospital, animal clinic and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis, treatment and other care of animal ailments. The term "veterinary hospital" does not include boarding kennels or similar facilities. 
89.  Village board: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lewiston. 
90.  Yard: An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a building or structure. 
91.  Yard, front : An open space on the same lot with a building between the front building line of the building and the front line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front building line closest to the street and the street line, at right angles to the street line. 
92.  Yard, rear: An open space on the same lot with a building between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot. The depth of the rear lot shall be measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building, at right angles to the rear lot line. 
93.  Yard, side: An open space on the same lot with a building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the side yard shall be measured between the side line of the lot and the side of the building, at right angles to the side lot line. 
94.  Zoning board: The officially established Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Lewiston. 
95.  Zoning officer: The officer of the Village of Lewiston charged with the issuance of zoning permits and with ensuring the conformity of the uses permitted and all other requirements under this ordinance for the zone in which a building or land is located or to be located. 
96.  Zoning permit: A permit issued by the zoning officer stating that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in conformity with the uses permitted and all other requirements under this ordinance for the zone in which it is located or is to be located. 
B.  Scope and meaning of certain words and terms: 
1.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
2.  The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation, company, partnership, association, cooperative, organization or individual. 
3.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
4.  The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any purpose for which a lot or land or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use; and to any purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use or erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved or rebuilt with the intention or design of using the same. The term "permitted use" shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 7; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 2-1973, §§ 1, 3; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 11-1984, § 2; L.L. No. 13-1984, § 2; L.L. No. 02-2000; L.L. No. 02-2013) 
Sec. 8. - Zoning schedule. 
    The schedule of area, lot and bulk requirements enclosed herein is made part of this ordinance. The regulations included in said schedule are hereby established as minimum regulations of this ordinance. Municipal facilities deemed necessary and appropriate by the village board are hereby exempted from such area and bulk requirements. 
Minimum Lot Size Yards, Principal Building Yards Accessory Building Maximum 
Building Height Maximum Building 
Coverage Zone 
District Use Area 
(sq. ft. 
or acres) Width (feet) Front and Side Front (feet) Each Side (feet) Rear (feet) Side (feet) Rear (feet) Principal (feet) Accessory (feet) Principal 
% of Lot Accessory % 
of Rear Yard R-1 Single-family 
dwellings 22,000 
sq. ft. 125 40 27 40 15 20 30 15 30 20 ***Cluster 
residential 5 acres - - - - - - - - Religious, public and quasi public 22,000 
sq. ft. 125 *Public utility uses 22,000 
sq. ft. 125 40 27 40 15 20 
R-1a Single-family dwellings 6,500 
sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 ***Cluster 
residential 5 acres - - - - - - - - Religious, public and quasi public 22,000 
sq. ft. 125 Public utility uses 22,000 sq. ft. 125 40 27 40 15 20  
R-2 Single-family dwellings 6,500 sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 
R-2 Two-family dwellings 8,500 
sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 ***Cluster 
residential 5 acres - - - - - - - - Religious, public and quasi public 10,000 
sq. ft. 80 30 10 30 5 10 35 30 30 20 *Public utility uses 10,000 
sq. ft. 80 30 10 30 5 10 - - - *Private clubs 10,000 
sq. ft. 80 30 10 30 5 10 30 15 30 20 Hospitals, 
philanthropic, 
charitable 2 acres 200 40 40 40 15 20 35 30 20 20 RB-2 Retail and service 
establishments - - 20 
Maximum - 15 10 10 35 20 50 R-3 Single-family 
dwellings 6,000 
sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 R-3 Two-family dwellings 8,000 
sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 R-3 Apartment or 
townhouse 
developments 1 ac/2,000 dwellings 150 40 40 40 15 20 35 15 30 20 ***Cluster 
residential 5 acres 60 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 Religious, public and quasi public 10,000 
sq. ft. 80 30 10 30 5 10 36 30 30 20 *Public utility uses 10,000 
sq. ft. 80 30 10 30 5 10 - - - *Tourist homes 8,000 
sq. ft. 66 20 10 20 5 10 30 15 30 20 Hospital, 
Philanthropic, 
Charitable 2 acres 200 40 40 40 15 20 35 30 20 20 R-4 (All uses set forth in R-3 with same 
numerical 
restrictions in 
balance of schedule.) *, ***Professional 
offices R-5 Single-family 
dwellings 22,000 
sq. ft. 125 40 27 40 15 20 30 15 30 20 *, R-5 Townhouse 
residential dwellings 1/2 ac/1,000 dwellings 150 parcel 20 lot (As determined to be necessary by board of trustees upon issuance of permit) ***RB Retail and service 
establishments - - - -** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Public utility uses - - - -** 15 10 10 - - 50 Hospitals, 
philanthropic and 
charitable activity - - - -** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Private clubs - - - 15** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Restaurants - - - -** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Banks and funeral 
homes - - - -** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Townhouses - - - 15** 15 10 10 35 20 * ***B-1 Retail and service 
establishments - - 20 
Maximum -** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Public utility uses - - - -** 15 10 10 - - 50 Hospitals, 
philanthropic and 
charitable activity 10 10 35 20 50 *Private clubs - - - 15** 15 10 10 35 20 50 *Gasoline stations and motor vehicle 
repair shops 10,000 
sq. ft. 100 - 15** 15 10 10 18 18 50 *Hotels and motels - - - - - - - - - - *Townhouses - - - 15** 15 10 10 35 20 50 W-D Uses dependent upon proximity, access or 
utilization of water 10,000 
sq. ft. 75 10 15 15 15 15 35 20 50 (As determined by 
village board) Uses enhanced by 
waterfront location (Waterside-40 ft.) (Waterside-40 ft.)  
;le=2; * Special use permit required. 
;le=2; ** Where abutting any other district, side yards are required equal to the minimum required in the abutting district if greater. 
;le=2; *** Development plan required. 
;le=2; Note: All parcels of land located in the above districts are subject to the restrictions and regulations of the Nondevelopment District [see Section 10A7] where a part or all of the parcel contains an area having a natural slope of 20 percent or greater. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 8; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 9; L.L. No. 8-1983; L.L. No. 3-1984, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1987, § 3; L.L. No. 9-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 1; L.L. No. 01-2005; L.L. No. 02-2013) 
Sec. 9. - District regulations. 
A.  R-1 District: Low Density Residential Single-Family District. 
R-1a District: Medium Density Residential Single-Family District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses. 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Single-family cluster residential developments subject to the requirements and procedures of section 10R. 
c.  Churches and other similar places of worship, parish houses, convents and other such facilities of recognized religious groups. 
d.  Municipal parks, playgrounds and recreation areas deemed necessary and appropriate by the village board. 
e.  Public buildings. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Private garages. 
b.  Home occupation and other customary accessory uses that are clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. There shall be no external evidence of such use except an announcement or professional sign not over two square feet in area. 
c.  Other customary residential structures such as private swimming pools, fireplaces, trellises, lampposts and animal shelters for domestic pets of the household. 
d.  Signs in accordance with section 13. 
e.  Parking in accordance with section 12. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the requirements of section 11. 
a.  Public utility uses. 
b.  Certain limited personal service. 
c.  Private clubs. 
d.  Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable institutions and similar uses. No such use, however, shall be established or permitted on a parcel of land less than two acres in area, nor shall any part of such use be permitted within 20 feet of any street line or lot line. 
e.  In R-1a Districts only-Bed and breakfast residences. 
B.  R-2 District: Residential Two-Family District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses. 
a.  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-1a Districts, section 9A, part 1, subject to all the restrictions specified therein. 
b.  Two-family dwellings. 
c.  Townhouses. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  All accessory uses permitted in R-1 and R-1a Districts, section 9A, Part 2, subject to all restrictions specified therein. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the regulations of section 11. 
a.  Public utility uses. 
b.  Certain limited personal services. 
c.  Private clubs. 
d.  Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable institutions and similar uses. No such use, however, shall be established or permitted on a parcel of land less than two acres in area, nor shall any part of such use be permitted within 20 feet of any street line or lot line. 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Bed and breakfast residences. 
C.  R-3 District: Residential Multifamily District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses. 
a.  All uses permitted in R-2 districts, section 9B, part 1, subject to all the restrictions specified therein. 
b.  Garden apartments and town house apartments, subject to the requirements and procedures of section 10R. 
c.  Clubs and lodges, excepting such clubs and lodges the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business or primarily for gain. In conjunction with such club or lodge, a dining room may be operated provided it is incidental to the activities of said club or lodge and is conducted for the benefit of the members thereof only, and further provided that no signs be displayed advertising such activity. 
d.  Fraternity and sorority houses. 
e.  Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable institutions and similar uses. No such use, however, shall be established or permitted on a parcel of land less than two acres in area, nor shall any part of such use be permitted within 20 feet of any street line or lot line. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  All accessory uses permitted in R-1a districts, section 9A, part 2, subject to all restrictions specified therein. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the regulations of section 11. 
a.  Public utility uses. 
b.  Tourist homes. 
D.  B District: General Business District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses subject to the requirements of section 10R. 
a.  Retail business establishments which are clearly of a community service character, such as, but not limited to the following: 
i.  Stores selling groceries, meats, baked goods and other such food items. 
ii.  Drugstores. 
iii.  Stationery, tobacco and newspaper stores, luncheonettes, and confectionery stores. 
iv.  Hardware, radio and television stores. 
v.  Clothing, accessory and jewelry stores. 
vi.  Restaurants and drinking places provided all service and on-premises consumption take place within an enclosed building except, that after notification by registered or certified mail of all owners of abutting property and subsequent acceptance in writing by said property owners, and subject to the recommendation by the planning commission and subject to all conditions imposed by said commission, service and consumption may also take place in completely defined outdoor cafe areas. 
vii.  Churches, libraries and other public and quasi-public buildings. 
b.  Personal service establishments which are clearly of a community character, such as, but not limited to the following: 
i.  Barber[shops] and beauty shops. 
ii.  Professional and craft studios. 
iii.  Tailor shops, dry cleaning pickup stations and self-service laundries. 
iv.  Business and professional offices, banks and financial institutions. 
v.  Funeral homes. 
vi.  Establishments servicing goods such as those permitted under part 1.a. of section 9D. 
vii.  Public utility offices and substations. 
c.  Equipment sales and service. 
d.  Commercial recreation uses such as bowling alleys. 
e.  Theaters and places of public assembly. 
f.  Wholesale businesses such as wholesale tobacconists, candy stores and the like, which, within the opinion of the board of trustees, will not be detrimental to or endanger public safety. 
g.  Other business uses which, in the opinion of the board of appeals, are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above. 
h.  Combined uses of single bedroom apartments with the permitted uses set forth above in paragraph 1. a. and b. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Private garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles used in conjunction with a permitted business use. 
b.  Dwelling units, accessory to the principal business use, provided said units are: 
i.  Located in the principal building. 
ii.  In compliance with the area and yard requirements of the R-3 district, except side yard requirements which shall be waived when the dwelling units are above the first floor and the first floor is used commercially. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the regulations of section 11. 
a.  Public utility uses. 
b.  Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
c.  Automobile sales and service. 
d.  Shops for custom work or making articles or products to be sold at retail on the premises. 
e.  Private clubs. 
f.  Hotels and motels. 
g.  Gasoline stations. 
h.  Motor vehicle repair shops. 
i.  Combined uses of gasoline stations with convenience food stores which use is permitted only in that portion of the B-1 district bounded on the north by Cayuga Street; on the south by Seneca Street; on the west by 8th Street and on the west side of Portage Road and excluding any portion of the bowling alley property TM#101.15-1-06 which lies within the boundary area. 
j.  Bed and breakfast residences. 
k.  Reserved. 
E.  RB District: Restricted Business District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses subject to the requirements of section 10R. 
a.  Personal service and retail establishments which are of a community character such as, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Barber[shops] and beauty shops. 
2.  Professional and craft studios. 
3.  Tailor and dressmaking shops. 
4.  Business and professional offices. 
5.  Public utility offices. 
6.  Florists, galleries, clothing and accessory shops; stores selling gifts, stationery, books and jewelry. 
b.  Other business uses which, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses and substations. 
a.  All accessory uses permitted in the B district, section 9D, part 2. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the regulations of section 11. 
a.  Public utility uses. 
b.  Hospitals, philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
c.  Private clubs. 
d.  Restaurants. 
e.  Banks and funeral homes. 
f.  Bed and breakfast residences. 
F.  O-P District: Open and Public District. 
1.  The intent of the district is to delineate publicly owned and/or open areas. 
2.  Lands owned by the village may, at the discretion of the village, be leased for the purpose of establishing senior citizen community facilities. At such time, the height and bulk of buildings to be erected, the area of yards and other open spaces and the population density limitations will be determined by the board of trustees together with such other regulations deemed necessary. As a procedural matter, the board of trustees will treat any consideration as if it were a special use permit and follow such procedures as outlined in the law. 
3.  No use, structure or accessory use or structure shall be undertaken along the shoreline that will contribute to flooding and erosion or inhibit public control efforts, permanently reduce existing access, substantially reduce public vistas or jeopardize coastal resources in accordance with the adopted local waterfront revitalization program for the Village of Lewiston. 
G.  R-4 District: Residential Multi-Family-Professional Office District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses. 
a.  All uses permitted in R-3 districts, section 9C, part 1, subject to all the restrictions specified therein. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  All accessory uses permitted in R-3 districts, section 9C, part 2, subject to all restrictions specified therein. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the procedures and regulations of section 10R and section 11. 
a.  All uses set forth in R-3 districts, section 9C, part 3, subject to all restrictions specified therein. 
b.  Professional offices or the combined use of professional offices with dwelling units. 
H.  R-5 District: Residential Townhouse District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses. 
a.  All uses permitted in R-1 districts, section 9A, part 1, subject to all the restrictions specified therein. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  All accessory uses permitted in R-1a districts, section 9A, part 2, subject to all restrictions specified therein. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the procedures and regulations of section 10R and section 11. 
a.  Townhouse dwellings. 
I.  W-D District: Waterfront Development District. 
1.  Permitted principal uses subject to the requirements of section 10R. 
a.  Uses which depend on proximity, access and/or utilization of the water including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Boat liveries and marinas. 
2.  Boat and boating accessories service, repair, sales and rental. 
3.  Fishing and tackle equipment and supplies sales. 
4.  Flood and erosion protection structures. 
b.  Uses which are enhanced by a waterfront location and proximity to water-dependent uses including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Tourist facilities (restrooms, snackbars, information areas, cultural and recreation facilities). 
2.  Restaurants and eating establishments. 
3.  Hotels and motels. 
4.  Bed and breakfast residences, tourist homes. 
5.  Retail and service facilities complementary to the above uses. 
c.  Other water-related uses which, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, are similar in nature to those permitted above and are consistent with the adopted Village of Lewiston Local Waterfront Revitalization Program. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Parking areas in accordance with section 12. 
b.  Temporary boat and boating equipment storage. 
c.  Signs in accordance with section 13. 
d.  Other accessory uses incidental to those permitted above. 
J.  RB-2 District: Retail Business District. 
1.  Permitted principal use is subject to the requirements of section 10R. 
a.  Retail business and personal service establishments as follows provided that such uses promote or enhance the continuity of use as a retail shopping area, promotion of pedestrian traffic and enhancement of aesthetic qualities of the area: 
1.  Stores selling groceries, meats, baked goods and other foods. 
2.  Drug stores. 
3.  Stationary, tobacco, newspaper stores, luncheonettes and confectionery stores. 
4.  Hardware, radio and television stores. 
5.  Clothing, accessory and jewelry stores. 
6.  Restaurants and drinking places. 
7.  Barber and beauty shops. 
8.  Professional and craft studios. 
9.  Professional offices which provide legal, medical, architectural, accounting or real estate services. 
10.  Tailor shops, and dry cleaning pick-up stations. 
b.  Other retail business and personal services establishments which, in the opinion of the board of trustees, are similar in nature to those permitted above and are consistent with the promotion of pedestrian traffic and enhancement of the aesthetic quality of the district. 
2.  Permitted accessory uses. All accessory uses as are permitted in B districts, provided that they do not adversely affect the purpose set forth in paragraph 1.a. 
3.  Uses permitted with a special use permit subject to the regulations of section 11. 
a.  Apartments when such use is combined with retail and personal service establishments as set forth in paragraph 1. 
b.  Repair and service when such use is auxiliary to a retail use as set forth in paragraph 1. 
c.  Business offices when such use is combined with retail business and personal service establishments as described in paragraph 1. 
d.  Banks and financial institutions. 
e.  Hotels and inns when such use will provide enhancement of pedestrian traffic. 
f.  Bed and breakfast style establishments when such use is a secondary use of the premises. 
g.  Theaters and places of public assembly. 
h.  Public buildings. 
i.  Private clubs when such use is a secondary use to the principal types of uses as set forth in paragraph 1. 
j.  Shops for custom work or making of articles or products to be sold at retail on the premises. 
k.  Other uses which, in the opinion of the board of trustees are similar in nature to those permitted above and are consistent with the promotion or enhancement of the district uses as a shopping area, promotion of pedestrian traffic and enhancement of aesthetic quality of the district. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 9; L.L. No. 9-1973, §§ 1-3; L.L. No. 3-1977, § 2; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1983, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 8-1983, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 3-1984, § 2; L.L. No. 11-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 13-1984, §§ 3-6; L.L. No. 5-1986, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1987, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3-1987, §§ 4, 5; L.L. No. 4-1987, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1989, §§ 3-5; L.L. No. 2-1991, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1991, §§ 2-5; L.L. No. 11-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 10. - General provisions and permitted modifications. 
A.  Preservation of natural features. 
1.  No structure other than bridges shall be built within 50 feet of a stream carrying water on an average of six months of the year except in the case of the Niagara River nor on land subject to periodic overflow. 
2.  Structures on parcels abutting on the Niagara River must be in conformity with the requirements of federal and state laws and international treaties. 
3.  No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale, or for use other than on the premises from which the topsoil shall be taken except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building in such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, provided such stripping, excavation or otherwise removal of topsoil complies with chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
4.  As to any area of land having an area of more than one acre from which topsoil has been removed or covered over by fill, such area shall be seeded to provide an effective cover crop within the first growing season following the start of said operation, provided that any such seeding and topsoil removal or coverage over by fill shall comply with chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
5.  Existing natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and view/vistas shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed uses of such property, retention of the maximum amount of such features consistent with the use of the property shall be required. No use shall be undertaken which eliminates or substantially reduces the view/vista of an existing property due to height, bulk or orientation of structure. 
6.  The existing Niagara escarpment shall not be breached, excavated, blasted or otherwise altered or damaged. 
7.  For the purpose of preserving the natural features in all areas in the Village of Lewiston having natural slopes of not less than 20 percent, i.e., a vertical rise in ground elevation of 20 feet within a horizontal distance of 100 feet, no development permitted by the district within which such slope occurs shall be permitted on such slope until the requirements and procedures set forth in this local law and section 10R have been complied with. 
B.  Lot and yard regulations and modifications. 
1.  No lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal building. 
2.  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered to provide a yard or open space for any other building. 
3.  All yards, open space, off-street parking, and required landscaping must be contained within the zone in which the use is permitted. 
4.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which is in single or joint ownership of record at the time such line is adopted, the regulations of the less restricted district shall apply to the portion of such lot lying within the less restricted district and the regulations of the more restricted district shall apply to that portion of the lot lying within the more restricted district. 
5.  When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part of a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the subdivision must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe upon any of the provisions of this ordinance either with respect to any existing structures or use and any proposed structures or use. 
6.  No lot shall be so reduced in area that any required open space will be smaller than prescribed in the regulations for the district in which said lot is located. Whenever such reduction in lot area occurs, any building located on said lot shall not thereafter be used until such building is altered, reconstructed, or relocated, so as to comply with the area and yard requirements applicable thereto. 
7.  Any lot separately owned and recorded on the tax map of the Village of Lewiston at the time of enactment of this ordinance which has a width of less than the prescribed number of feet permitted in an applicable district may be used as a building lot if it shall have sufficient area to permit the required front and rear yard setbacks within such district and in accordance with section 10, subsection B 10. 
8.  Any lot in a subdivision heretofore approved by the planning commission at the time of enactment of this ordinance which contains lots having a width of less than the prescribed number of feet permitted by this ordinance may be sold and a residence constructed thereon, notwithstanding the provisions of the ordinance. 
9.  Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by the foregoing or any other provisions of this ordinance, the board of appeals may permit erection of a dwelling on any lot, separately owned or under contract of sale and containing at the time of passage of this ordinance an area, width or depth smaller than that required for a one-family dwelling provided the lot and proposed dwelling comply with the pre-existing ordinance. 
10.  In the case of lots which comply with the provisions for modification of size under paragraph 9, the combined total side yard requirements as specified in the schedule shall be reduced by six inches for each foot by which a lot is less than the minimum lot width requirement specified in the schedule for the zone in which located. In any case, the side yard area shall be reduced to not less than 50 percent of the requirement of the schedule. 
11.  Terraces: A paved surface shall not be considered a part of the building in the determination of yard sizes, provided, however, that such surface is unroofed and without walls, parapets, or other form of enclosure. Such surface, however, may have an open guard railing not over three feet high, and shall not project into any yard to a point closer than four feet from any lot line. 
12.  Corner lots: On every corner lot in a residential district there shall be provided on the side street a side yard equal in depth to that required for the front yard depth of the side street. 
C.  Accessory building. 
1.  An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this ordinance for the principal building. 
2.  Detached accessory buildings shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements for accessory buildings specified in the zoning schedule, section 8. 
3.  For the purpose of regulating the locations of accessory buildings on corner lots and on lots extending through between two parallel streets, all portions of a corner lot or a through lot which fronts on a public street shall be subject to the front yard requirements of the zone district in which said corner lot or through lot is located. 
4.  Accessory buildings, including but not limited to, private garage and house trailer, shall not be placed within a required front yard. Undue hardship cases shall be treated by the zoning board of appeals as a variance request. 
D.  Street frontage. 
1.  Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a public street improved to meet the village's requirements. 
2.  Where a building lot has frontage on a street which is proposed for right-of-way widening, the required front yard area shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line. 
E.  Height modifications and exceptions. 
1.  In any district any principal building may be erected to a height in excess of that specified for the district provided such front, side, and rear yard is increased one foot for each one foot of such additional height and with the approval of the zoning board of appeals. Prior to such approval, the building plan shall be submitted to the fire chief for his recommendation as regards fire prevention, safety, alarms and fighting. 
2.  The height limitation of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, penthouses and domes not used for human occupancy; nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads and similar features and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve and shall not exceed in cross-sectional area 20 percent of the ground floor area of the building. 
3.  The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to prevent the erection above the building height limit of parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and without windows) extending above such height limit not more than five feet. 
F.  Visibility at intersections. 
1.  At all street intersections, no obstructions to vision such as a wall, fence or hedge exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street or the property line, except a single post or tree, shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot lines of such lot and a line drawn between points along such street lot lines 30 feet distant from their point of intersection. 
2.  At such intersections, no tree shall be planted or allowed to remain between the said pavement or roadbed and the street lines of adjoining lots, whose lower or lowest limbs shall be within eight feet of the ground; and no signs of greater area than four square feet shall be erected, maintained or used within 200 feet of such intersections, measured on the street or lot line. 
G.  Fences, walls or hedges. 
1.  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, relocate, or maintain a fence or hedge in any district without first having obtained a permit from the zoning board of appeals if said fence is in excess of the following specifications: 
a.  On a front lot -four feet in height; 
b.  On a side lot line in a front yard-four feet in height; 
c.  On a side lot line in a side or rear yard-six feet in height; 
d.  On a rear lot line-six feet in height. 
2.  Application. Applicant shall file an application for a building permit accompanied by a drawing or sketch showing location and detail of general construction. The applicant shall also furnish a signed statement by all abutting property owners saying that they agree to the construction and have no objections. 
3.  Refusal. In the event the applicant cannot secure the consent of all abutting property owners, then he shall have the right to call for a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals in the usual manner. The board shall have the power to approve the application, basing their decision on the merits of the case. 
4.  Measure. The height of a fence, wall or hedge shall be measured from the ground level at the base of the fence, wall or hedge. 
5.  Appearance. All support portions of a fence, including vertical supports, if visible, shall be placed on and face the interior of the property upon which the fence is erected. 
These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of fences used in connection with farms except insofar as such fences might affect the public safety. 
These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth. 
H.  Swimming pools. 
1.  No swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or maintained on any premises within the village except in compliance with all the provisions contained in the Code. 
2.  The term "swimming pool" or "pool" as used in this article shall mean any body of water or receptacle for water, having a depth at any point greater than two feet, constructed, installed, or maintained in or above ground for swimming, bathing or immersion therein. 
3.  No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter a swimming pool without having first applied for and secured approval of the issuance of a permit from the building inspector on such form as he may prescribe. Such application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications with sufficient detail to establish that it will be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Code and shall include the following: 
a.  Pool dimensions, depths, volume in gallons, the distance of the pool from all lot lines, existing and proposed structures, if any. 
b.  Location and type of pool fencing and means used to prevent unauthorized access to the pool. 
4.  Fencing of swimming pools. 
a.  All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence. All fence openings, or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be a minimum of four feet in height above the grade level and shall be permanent construction of suitable quality, strength and durability to prevent entry into the swimming pool area. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices for keeping the gate securely closed and locked at all times, when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
b.  In the case of aboveground swimming pools which have fencing or other suitable barriers as a part of their construction which would prevent access, additional fencing will not be required provided that the ladder or gates have a means of preventing access to the pool (i.e., a foldup affair or some means of preventing the use of the ladder to gain access to the pool). 
5.  Location of swimming pools filters and other mechanical devices. 
a.  No swimming pool shall be located within the required front yard. 
b.  No portion of the swimming pool shall be located at a distance less than five feet from any property line. 
c.  Filter pumps and other mechanical devices used in connection with a swimming pool shall be located at least five feet away from the property line and be so constructed as to not interfere with comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of occupants of adjoining premises. 
6.  If not otherwise provided for in the building code, the electrical installation providing power to the recirculation system shall be circuited through a ground-fault connector in operating condition. 
7.  If the use of any swimming pool shall be abandoned or permanently discontinued, the owner, in the case of an in ground pool, shall completely fill the pool and return the surface of the ground to its original grade and approximately to the same condition as existed before the pool was constructed, and in the case of an aboveground pool, the owner shall disassemble and remove the pool and return the surface of the ground to its original grade and approximately the same condition as existed before the pool was constructed. 
8.  The building inspector may inspect all swimming pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this Code regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being met and may enter the premises for the purposes of determining compliance therewith. 
I.  Moving of buildings. The moving of any building from any place to a new site within any use district shall be deemed to be an erection or construction and as such, shall be subject to all provisions of the building code and zoning ordinance. Permits shall be granted only by the zoning board of appeals, after public hearing. A surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the village board of trustees or the superintendent of public works shall be furnished by the applicant to indemnify and save harmless the said Village of Lewiston from damages. 
J.  Surface waters and grading. No improvement on any plot or lot shall be made in such a way as to cause or permit surface water to overflow onto any public highway or abutting property in such manner as to interfere with the natural drainage of the land. A drain, ditch or swale of sufficient size where required shall be provided between abutting properties to carry surface water in the direction of natural drainage of the land. 
K.  Storage of flammable liquids. The storage of flammable liquids shall be entirely underground in storage tanks approved by the New York State Board of Fire Underwriters and having a pipe layout satisfactory to the building inspector. Safety containers shall be used within any building or structure in which flammable liquids are handled. 
L.  Clean-up requirements. No person shall permit uncut grass, weeds, brush, rubble, trees, etc., abandoned scrap of any nature, machinery, building material or other such debris on real property. 
(a)  The property owner shall be responsible to have grass, bushes, shrubs, trees, cut and trimmed to conform to the character of the surrounding homes and businesses. 
M.  Dumping. Dumping of refuse, waste material and other substances is prohibited in all districts in the village except for the purpose of filling to establish grades for which a permit must be obtained from the village board, provided that any such filling is consistent with the provisions of article IV, storm sewers, of chapter 20 of the village Code, and chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
N.  Nonoperating motor vehicles. The dismantling, storage, or salvaging of motor vehicles not in legally operable condition shall not be permitted except within an enclosed building or within a licensed junkyard, and shall in no case be permitted within a required front yard. 
O.  Unsafe buildings. 
1.  A building or structure or any part thereof that may be or shall at any time hereafter become dangerous or unsafe shall, unless made safe and secure, be taken down and removed. 
2.  No building damaged by fire or any other cause to the extent of more than 50 percent of its full valuation shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
3.  If the building inspector shall determine that any building or other structure shall be unsafe or dangerous to person or property, he shall serve or cause to be served a written notice upon the owners and occupants thereof or such of them whose identity and whereabouts can be determined, and if such person shall within 30 days of a written notice fail to comply with the requirements of the notice, the village board shall be advised of the facts in the case and shall have the power to take appropriate action to compel compliance, including demolition in compliance with the Local Law of the Village of Lewiston thereof, the cost of which shall be a lien on the property superior to any other lien and which shall be recovered in the same manner and at the same time as village and county taxes. 
4.  Except so far as may be necessary for the safety of life or property, nothing in this ordinance shall require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continuance of, the use and occupancy of a lawfully existing building. 
P.  Special regulations applicable to all residential districts. 
1.  No use which is noxious or offensive by reason of refuse, matter, dust, odor, smoke, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, unreasonable use of lights or nighttime operations shall be permitted. 
2.  No accessory structure exceeding 15 feet in height, except when specifically stated in the schedule, shall be permitted. 
3.  Any owner of camping and recreational equipment may park or store such equipment on private residential property subject to the following conditions: 
a.  At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. 
b.  If the camping and recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the lot. 
The requirements of this sub-paragraph may be waived by action of the village board who may issue a conditional parking permit provided, however, a request for such conditional permit is supported by evidence presented to the board by the owner of the property upon which said exception is requested showing that, because of topography, or some other physical condition, enforcement of this section would create an unusual and undue hardship. 
c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph b., camping and recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading and unloading purposes, for a period of not more than 48 hours, so long as such parking for loading or unloading purposes does not obstruct the view of driveway vehicular and pedestrian traffic of adjoining or abutting properties. 
d.  All recreational equipment must be kept in good repair and be licensed during some portion of the current year. 
e.  The parking or storage of an unoccupied mobile home, being a movable or portable dwelling, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation for year round living is specifically prohibited. 
f.  The board of trustees by resolution adopted at a stated meeting shall fix the time and place of an information meeting on the proposed conditional parking permit and cause notice thereof to be given by publication. 
g.  Fee for conditional parking permit shall be as established by the board of trustees. 
h.  If conditions under which the conditional parking permit was issued are not adhered to, the board of trustees shall notify the permit holder of such noncompliance by registered letter. If the permit holder fails to correct the noncompliance within ten days, the board of trustees may rescind the permit. 
i.  No front yard shall be used for the storage of boats, camping trailers, utility trailers, motorized camping vans or similar vehicles except as provided by this ordinance. 
4.  Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be parked out-of-doors overnight or on Sunday in conjunction with a dwelling unit in any residential district. No vehicle for commercial display purposes shall be stored in any residential district at any time. 
5.  In any residential district, no accessory building shall be erected in any required yard, except that accessory buildings may occupy in the aggregate up to 20 percent of a required rear yard. 
6.  The servicing, maintenance, experimentation, adjustment, or other such manner of work upon a motor vehicle or other such noise-producing activity conducted in connection with or through the use of motor vehicles shall not be permitted except for such activity conducted by the owner or his employees upon the owner's premises in cases of emergency. 
7.  In a residential district, there shall be no outside storage of any unregistered and/or unlicensed motor vehicle for a period longer than 30 days in any calendar year providing that such unregistered and/or unlicensed motor vehicle, notwithstanding the year in which the same shall have been manufactured, is at all times while being so stored kept in such condition and maintained with such equipment that it will meet the minimum requirements to pass the New York State Motor Vehicle Inspection standards as provided by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and all rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner of motor vehicles for the periodic inspection of motor vehicles in the State of New York and as the same may be amended from time to time. This section shall not apply to an owner of such unregistered and/or unlicensed motor vehicle who is a member of the armed forces while serving on active duty. 
There shall be no outside storage in a residence district of motor vehicle parts at any time. 
8.  Kennels for the keeping of and breeding of dogs or other animals as an accessory use shall not be in any front yard and shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance of 50 feet. 
9.  In residential districts, the number of motor vehicles for which parking space may be provided as accessory to an authorized use shall not exceed the following: 
a.  In R-1 and R-2 districts, two motor vehicles, and for each 5,000 square feet by which the lot exceeds 5,000 square feet, space for one additional motor vehicle may be provided. 
b.  In an R-3 District, two motor vehicles for a one-family or two-family dwelling. 
Q.  Special regulations applicable to all business and industrial districts. 
1.  Business district manufacture or repair. The number of persons engaged in the manufacture of articles or the fabrication of goods or articles shall not exceed two in any establishment in a B district. The individual and total horsepower of machinery used for such purposes in any such establishment shall not exceed ten h.p. and 20 h.p., respectively. Manufacture shall be limited to that incidental to retail sale on the premises. Motors operated by other than electrical power will require review and recommendation of the village planning commission. 
2.  Automobile service equipment. All garage and filling station pumps, lubricating or other automobile devices shall be located at least 20 feet from any street line or highway right-of-way. All fuel, oil or other flammable substances shall be stored at least 35 feet distant from any street line or lot line. No public garage for more than five motor vehicles shall have any entrance or exit for such vehicles within 50 feet of a residential district, any school, any church, or any institution for the residence, training or treatment of children or handicapped persons. 
3.  Outdoor display. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes or coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which would infringe upon the required yard areas specified in this ordinance. 
4.  Side yard and rear yard transition. Where a lot in a business or industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along such abutting line a yard equal in width and depth to that required in the residential district, which yard shall be maintained by the owner as a landscaped buffer area. 
5.  Front yard transition. Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential and partly as business or industrial, the front yard depth in the business or industrial district shall be equal to the required front yard depth of the residential district for a distance of 50 feet into the business or industrial district. 
6.  Business entrances on residential streets. Where a residential district is bounded by a portion of a B-1 district, or a B-2 district, any side street extending through such residential district into such B-1 or B-2 district shall not be used for any business purposes, except as herein set forth. The business structures erected in either of such business districts shall face and open upon the street set aside for that particular business district, except that show windows in such business structure may be built and exposed upon said street within the area set aside as part of either of said business district and an entrance may be made at the corner. Other entrances thereto must face the business street, except that entrances may be made from such residential street to the upper stories of such business structure. 
7.  Adult use businesses. 
a.  No adult use business shall be located within 1,000 feet of a park, school, day care center, library or religious or cultural activity. 
b.  No adult business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other business, agricultural or residential zone boundary. 
c.  Such distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, topography and zoning. 
d.  Said business shall not be permitted as a home occupation, and a special-use permit shall be obtained for all adult use businesses. 
e.  A special use permit shall be obtained for all adult use businesses subject to the regulations of section 11. 
R.  Development plan procedures and regulations. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the development plan regulations is to encourage flexibility in the design and the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and economical provisions of streets, utilities and public spaces and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas. The procedure is intended to permit regulation of the location of structures and improve circulation facilities and other site qualities and to ensure the application of adequate standards relating to public health, safety and welfare and convenience both in the use and occupancy in buildings and facilities. 
2.  Applicability. 
a.  No single-family cluster residential development or garden apartment or town house apartment nor any other building constituting a part thereof shall be erected, altered, restored or have its exterior architectural features changed without first having followed the procedures contained in this section and had its development plan approved as provided for herein. 
b.  No building located in the business or restricted business district or in an area defined in section 10A7 shall be erected, altered, restored or have its exterior architectural features changed without first having followed the procedures contained in this section and having had its development plan approved as provided herein. 
i.  A change in color of the building, or trim as the case may be, shall not be considered a change in architectural feature, provided that the change in color shall be of a singular color and uniformly applied to the surface of the building. 
3.  Application. 
a.  Preliminary development plan-First submission. The owner shall submit a preliminary development plan to the planning commission for review, which shall include the following information: 
i.  Proposed site plan, showing building locations, land use areas, traffic circulation, parking, pedestrian walks, and landscaping. 
ii.  Proposed construction sequence for buildings, parking and landscaping. 
iii.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required by chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code, together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
The planning commission shall review the preliminary development plan with the owner and shall prepare general recommendations with regard to the plan. The planning commission shall then send a copy of its recommendations to the owner indicating its approval in principle and any specific changes required, or its disapproval. 
b.  Development plan-Second submission. The owner shall submit a plan to the planning commission which plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer, land surveyor or planner, and shall include the following information: 
i.  Survey showing exterior features of the property including contours, buildings, structures, large tree trunk diameter, trees, utilities, rights-of-way and land-use. 
ii.  Site plan showing building locations, land use areas, traffic circulation, parking, pedestrian walks, landscaping and trading. 
iii.  Preliminary drawings for buildings delineated to be constructed in the current phase, including floor plans, exterior elevations in sections and architectural renderings as required for proper review. 
iv.  Preliminary engineering plans, including street improvements, drainage systems, public utility extensions, and feasibility studies of any anticipated problems which might arise due to the proposed development as required by the planning commission. 
v.  Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the development plan. 
vi.  Such other information as may be required or requested to indicate that the plan complies with the regulations and standards contained herein. 
vii.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required by chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code together with the recommendation of the stormwater management officer to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to section 16-4(b) of the village Code. 
4.  Standards for review. In making a determination, the following standards shall be utilized: 
a.  General standards. 
i.  The development plan shall be consistent with the regulations in paragraph 5. 
ii.  The uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under another use. 
iii.  The proposed development is in conformance with the general intent of the comprehensive master plan and consistent with the policies and purpose of the Village of Lewiston Local Waterfront Revitalization Program. 
iv.  The planned development shall provide for an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on the project site making appropriate provisions for the preservation of scenic features and amenities of the site and the surrounding areas. 
v.  The planned development shall be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the area surrounding the project site. 
vi.  Existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development. 
vii.  Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, complies with the standard necessary for creating and sustaining a desirable and stable environment; and all phases can be completed within three years of approval of the development. 
b.  Design standards. 
i.  All buildings in the layout and design shall be an integral part of the development and have convenient access to and from adjacent uses and blocks. 
ii.  Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design, masses, materials, placement and connections to provide a visually and physically integrated development. 
iii.  Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the planned development group shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to the treatment given to street frontage of these same buildings. 
iv.  The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take advantage of the topography of the project site where appropriate to provide separate levels of access. 
v.  All buildings and walls shall be so oriented as to ensure adequate light and air exposure to the rooms within. 
vi.  All buildings shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities wherever possible and shall be so oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings. 
vii.  All buildings shall be arranged as to be accessible to emergency vehicles. 
c.  Landscape design standards. 
i.  Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an integral part of a coordinated landscape design for the entire project area. 
ii.  Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover, and street trees, and shall combine with appropriate walks and street surfaces to provide an attractive development pattern. Landscape materials selected shall be appropriate to the growing conditions of the village's environment. 
iii.  Whenever appropriate, existing trees shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape design plan. 
iv.  All streets bordering the project areas shall be planted at appropriate intervals with street trees. 
d.  Circulation system design standards. 
i.  Existing and proposed streets are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within, and in the vicinity of the proposed development. 
ii.  There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and loading space. 
iii.  Roads, pedestrian walks and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be properly related to existing and proposed buildings, and appropriately landscaped. 
iv.  Buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic. 
v.  Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent buildings. 
vi.  Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good appearance, easily maintained, and indicative of their function. 
vii.  Drive-thru uses. In order to protect the economic base and the attractiveness of a pedestrian-friendly district, drive-thru uses shall be permitted within the business district, but must be sensitively designed according to the following guidelines and standards: 
A.  Design drive-thru uses and features and to be subordinate to other site and architectural elements of the project. 
1.  Drive-thru lanes and windows are prohibited between the building and the street. 
a.  Drive-thru uses must be located to the rear of the structure and shall be buffered on the rear and side lot lines. 
2.  Drive-thru uses shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Provide sufficient stacking area to ensure that public rights-of-way are not obstructed. 
b.  Drive-thru uses must be built as an integral architectural element of the primary structure and use. The materials must be the same as those used in the primary structure and the drive-thru facility must be under the roofline of the primary structure. 
c.  Drive-thru exit and entryways shall be incorporated into site curb cuts and shall not be separated from site access ways with separate street entries or exits. No drive-thru exit or entry shall enter or exit onto Center Street. 
e.  Parking and loading design standards. 
i.  Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and monotony of parked cars. 
ii.  Pedestrian connections between parking areas and buildings shall be via special pedestrian walkways. 
iii.  Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access, and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall site design. 
iv.  Any loading facility shall be screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness. 
f.  Stormwater standards. 
i.  All development shall be designed in accordance with the design standards in section 16-6 of the village Code. 
ii.  If the development plan is accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) pursuant to section 10(R)(3) of this Ordinance, then such development plan and SWPPP shall comply with the requirements of chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
5.  Regulations. 
a.  Specific regulations for cluster residential development. 
i.  The provision for cluster residential developments is intended and designed to provide a means for the development of large tracts of land on a unit basis, by allowing greater flexibility and overall residential site design and building location than the conventional single lot method provided in other sections of this law. 
ii.  Permitted uses: Single-family residences. 
iii.  Minimum site size: Five acres with a 30 percent green space requirement. 
b.  Specific regulations for garden apartments and town house apartment developments. 
i.  Apartment structures shall not exceed a density of 16 dwelling units per net acre of lot area, street area not included. 
ii.  Driveways for ingress and egress for apartment developments shall connect with other than minor streets wherever possible; shall not be located within 200 feet or within one-half the length of the block, whichever is the lesser distance, of an existing street intersection and shall have a pavement width of at least 22 feet except where they are within a parking area, in which case they shall be not less than 25 feet in width. 
iii.  The minimum yard requirements of the schedule (section 8) apply only to the entire tract, and no buildings shall be located within such yard areas. 
iv.  The minimum distance between buildings in an apartment development shall be 25 feet except that no wall containing an entrance to an apartment shall be closer to another apartment building than 50 feet. 
v.  The width of any outer court upon which windows from a living room, bedroom, or dining room open shall be not less than the height of any opposing wall forming said court. The depth of an outer court formed by walls on three sides shall be not greater than 11/2 times the width. 
vi.  The width of any outer court shall be not less than two-thirds the height of any opposing wall forming said court, and the depth shall not be greater than 11/2 times the width. 
vii.  The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than the full height of the walls enclosing such court, but not less than 50 feet. 
viii.  An open and unobstructed passageway shall be provided at the grade level of each inner court. Such passageway shall have a cross-section area and sufficient headroom to permit the passage of firefighting equipment and shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or an unobstructed open area between buildings. 
ix.  Parking areas may be located in any yard other than the required front yard but not closer than ten feet to any property line and shall comply with all other requirements of the regulations applicable to all zones in this ordinance. 
x.  Every apartment building shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from all interior roads, driveways, and parking areas. 
xi.  Every apartment development shall be provided with garbage and refuse storage and collection areas screened from view, and away from the fronts of apartment buildings. 
xii.  In addition to any storage area within individual apartment dwelling units, 200 cubic feet of storage area shall be provided for each dwelling unit in a convenient, centrally located area in the basement or ground floor or elsewhere, where personal belongings and effects may be stored under lock and separated from the belongings and effects of other occupants. 
xiii.  A wall of an apartment structure or parallel walls of adjacent apartment structures shall not continue in the same plane for a horizontal length of more than 75 feet without an offset of at least four feet. 
xiv.  Each apartment development shall provide a playground area or areas at a standard of 500 square feet for each ten dwelling units. Outdoor play equipment shall be installed in each playground in sufficient amount and variety to service the occupants of the development. 
xv.  The entire area of an apartment development not improved for driveways, parking area or covered by building or walkways shall be attractively landscaped and properly maintained at all times. 
c.  Special regulations applicable to the business and restricted business districts. 
i.  Business district manufacture or repair. The number of persons engaged in the manufacture of articles or the fabrication of goods or articles shall not exceed two in any establishment in a B district. The individual and total horsepower of machinery used for such purposes in any such establishment shall not exceed ten horsepower and 20 horsepower, respectively. Manufacture shall be limited to that incidental to retail sale on the premises. Motors operated by other than electrical power will require review and recommendation of the village planning commission. 
ii.  Automobile service equipment. All garage and filling station pumps, lubricating or other automobile devices shall be located at least 20 feet from any street line or highway right-of-way. All fuel, oil or other flammable substances shall be stored at least 35 feet distant from any street line or lot line. No public garage for more than five motor vehicles shall have any entrance or exit for such vehicles within 50 feet of a residential district, any school, any church, or any institution for the residence, training or treatment of children or handicapped persons. 
iii.  Outdoor display. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes or coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which would infringe upon the required yard areas specified in this ordinance. 
iv.  Side and rear yard transition. Where a lot in a business or restricted business district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along such abutting line a yard equal in width and depth to that required in the residential district, which yard shall be maintained by the owner as a landscaped buffer area. 
v.  Front yard transition. Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential and partly as business or restricted business district, the front yard depth in the business or restricted business district shall be equal to the required front yard depth of the residential district for a distance of 50 feet into the business or restricted business district. 
vi.  Business entrances on residential streets. Where a residential district is bounded by a portion of a business or restricted business district, any side street extending through such residential district into such business or restricted business district shall not be used for any business purposes, except as herein set forth. The business structures erected in either of such business or restricted business districts shall face and open upon the street set aside for that particular district, except that show windows in such business structures may be built and exposed upon said street within the area set aside as part of either of said business or restricted business district and an entrance may be made at the corner. Entrances thereto must face the business street, except that entrances may be made from such residential street to the upper stories of such business structures. 
vii.  A review of a development plan for land located in a restricted business district shall take into consideration that the intent of the district is to serve as a buffer zone between the business and residential zones but to be as compatible as possible with the residential zones on which it borders. In addition to the general purposes concerning development plans, all activities occurring or to occur shall be restricted so as to reduce inconvenience to residential zones. 
d.  Special regulations for combined uses of single-bedroom apartments with principal uses set forth in paragraphs 1a and 1b of section 9d. 
i.  Total maximum area coverage: Total principal building coverage shall not exceed 20 percent of the total parcel area. 
ii.  Buildings, number: The number of principal buildings may be more than one. 
iii.  Building area coverage: Each principal building shall have an area of ground coverage of not less than 2,000 square feet nor more than 5,000 square feet. 
iv.  Building height: The height of buildings shall not exceed two stories in height plus roof structure. 
v.  Apartment density: Not more than 8 apartments per acre or fraction thereof shall be permitted. 
vi.  The uses permitted in paragraph 1 of section 9D with the exception of offices shall be limited to the ground floor. 
vii.  Apartments: 
(a)  Area: Each apartment shall have not less than 600 nor more than 1,000 square feet of usable area. 
(b)  Shall be limited to the second story. 
(c)  Shall be limited to one-bedroom apartments. 
(d)  No apartment shall be permitted in any one building unless combined with commercial and/or offices in the use of the total building. 
e.  General regulations. 
i.  Subground level: Only accessory uses such as heating, laundry and storage shall be permitted in areas below ground level. 
ii.  All other requirements of this law shall be applicable to the development plan. 
iii.  Land use: Proposed land uses shall not adversely affect surrounding development. 
iv.  Such regulations contained in the subdivision regulations of the village as the planning commission may find applicable to the development plan. 
v.  The proposed site or lot to be developed shall set aside 30 percent of the site or lot to be devoted to seeding, planting, retention of tree cover, or other landscaping; this area shall be used for no other purpose. 
vi.  All processes shall take place within an enclosed building; storage out-of-doors, if permitted, shall be shielded from view from the street and adjacent off-street parking area by fencing, landscaping or other appropriate measures. 
vii.  Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient amount to permit the transfer of goods and materials in other than a public street, off-street parking area, or front yard; a landscaping screen of no less than six feet in height shall be required where off-street loading and unloading areas abut residential uses, so that such operation shall be shielded from view from such residences. 
viii.  If, in parking areas, dividing isles are proposed, there shall be provided for the planting of one tree of a type acceptable to the village for each ten vehicle spaces; the parking area shall be illuminated by nonglare lighting standards focused downward to avoid back light. 
ix.  Any vibration, glare, heat or noises resulting from the use of the premises shall not be evident beyond the property line. 
x.  Any use of the premises shall not result in the dissemination of noxious dust, smoke, gas, chemicals or odors into the air. 
6.  Approvals. 
a.  The planning commission may, in its discretion, waive any of the requirements in paragraph 3 except that the application shall be in writing and shall provide information concerning the proposed development sufficient for the planning commission to make a determination, and the stormwater requirements of subparagraphs (a)(iii) and (b)(vii) of paragraph 3 shall not be waived. 
b.  The planning commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of, or take alternative action relative to, the development plans within 45 days of their submission to the planning commission, unless the period is extended by mutual consent of the commission and the applicant. 
c.  The planning commission may in its discretion hold a public hearing on the development plan. 
d.  If the development plan is proposed to be completed in phases, separate approvals of each phase of development may be given. 
e.  Any recommendation of the planning commission regarding a development plan shall be subject to review by the village board of trustees. The board of trustees, may in its discretion, at the next regular board of trustees meeting following the recommendation by the planning commission of a development plan and its filing with the board of trustees, confirm, reverse or modify said determination in part or whole. In taking any action to reverse or modify the recommendation of the planning commission, the board of trustees may cause the public hearing to be held concerning the development plan and may make further determinations upon the plan thereafter. 
f.  Any approval of the development plan shall be invalid if construction or activity contemplated thereunder is not commenced within six months of the date of approval, or if the entire development plan as approved, is not completed within one year of the date of approval, unless the same is extended by the planning commission or board of trustees as the case may be. 
g.  No building permit may be issued until the plan with all supporting documentation has been filed and approved by resolution of the planning commission or the board of trustees as the case may be. 
h.  No development plan shall be approved unless in compliance with the provisions of chapter 16, stormwater management, of the village Code. 
7.  Miscellaneous provisions. 
a.  The planning commission or the village board may require that a performance bond to guarantee the completion of any one or more of the requirements set forth in the approval be furnished and filed with the village, said performance bond running to the benefit of the Village of Lewiston. 
b.  From time to time the planning commission may review the development plan to ascertain that the requirements of these regulations are being complied with. If, in its determination, it finds that the development plan is not being complied with, the planning commission may order a recession of the plan approved. The recession shall become effective 20 days after written notice to the owner and posting upon the premises unless within that time the village board reaffirms its approval of the development plan by a three-fourths vote. The planning commission may in its discretion extend the effective date of the recession of approval and may also withdraw its order prior to the effective date of termination. The village board shall have the right at any time to rescind its approval should it find noncompliance with the development plan. On the effective date of an order rescinding a plan approval, any building permit and/or certificate of occupancy heretofore issued with respect to the plan shall be automatically revoked and terminated. 
c.  In the event that the zoning officer finds that the construction is not in accordance with the approved building and site plans and the requirements of this law are not being substantially complied with, the building and/or certificate of occupancy permit shall be cancelled or terminated until the requirements are complied with. 
d.  The planning commission shall refer the application to the historic preservation commission acting in its capacity as the architectural advisory board as set forth in section 15-103(h) of the village Code for its review and recommendations. 
S.  Special regulations applicable to the waterfront district. 
1.  Any yard in the waterfront district which faces the Niagara River shall have a minimum setback of 40 feet for nonwater dependent uses. Such setback shall apply to both principal and accessory buildings. 
2.  Any yard in the waterfront district which faces the Niagara River shall have a setback for water dependent uses as determined by the board of trustees based upon the intended water-dependent use and the provisions of the Village of Lewiston's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program. Water-dependent uses are those uses described in subparagraph a. of section 9.I.1. 
3.  A front yard setback may be reduced to a distance as approved by the board of trustees when the waterside setback of 40 feet applies. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 10; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 2-1973, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1979, §§ 2, 10; L.L. No. 8-1979, § 4; L.L. No. 4-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1981, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1983, §§ 1-3; L.L. No. 1-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1989, § 3; L.L. No. 9-1989, §§ 6, 7; L.L. No. 7-1990, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 2; L.L. No. 14-1985, § 2; L.L. No. 1-2000; L.L. No. 02-2002; L.L. No. 01-2005; L.L. No. 04-2007, §§ 6-13) 
Sec. 11. - Uses requiring a special use permit. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The special uses for which conformance to standards are required shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective district, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards as determined by the board of trustees in addition to all of the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  All such uses are hereby declared to possess characteristics of such unique and special forms that each specific use shall be considered as an individual case. 
B.  Plan approval. 
1.  A plan for the proposed development of a site for a permitted special use shall be submitted with an application for a special use permit and such plan shall show the location of all buildings, parking areas, traffic access and circulation drives, open spaces, landscaping, and any other pertinent information that may be necessary to determine if the proposed special use meets the requirements of this ordinance, and to enable the village engineer to ascertain the adequacy of the existing facilities, such as sewers, storm drains, roads, etc., for the use requested by the applicant. 
2.  The board of trustees shall submit such application to the planning commission and the zoning board of appeals for recommendation. The planning commission and the zoning board of appeals shall review the application and within 30 days after the receipt of such application, make a written report to the board of trustees setting forth its findings and recommendations concerning the application. In making its recommendations, the planning commission may suggest any revision to the site plan or other plans as will, in its opinion, cause the proposed use to be in substantial conformance with the comprehensive plan and its principles of land use and development. 
3.  The board of trustees shall conduct a public hearing on all applications for a special use permit in accordance with the procedures and requirements established elsewhere in this ordinance and in the Village Law of the State of New York. The applicant or his duly authorized agent shall be present and be authorized to accept or reject such modifications to the application as may be proposed by the board of trustees. 
4.  Within a reasonable time from the date of such public hearing, the board of trustees shall either approve or disapprove the application so heard. No special use shall be permitted unless the plan submitted therefor shall have been first approved by a majority vote of the full board of trustees. 
a.  If an application is approved by the board of trustees, the building inspector shall be furnished with a copy of the approving resolution of the board and he shall issue the permit applied for in accordance with the conditions imposed by the board of trustees. 
b.  If any application is disapproved by the board of trustees, the reasons for such denial shall be set forth in the board's resolution and a copy of such resolution shall be transmitted to the building inspector. The building inspector shall deny the application accordingly by providing the applicant with a copy of the board's reasons for disapproval. 
c.  The building inspector shall transmit one copy of all approved and denied applications to the planning commission and one copy of all approved applications to the tax assessor. 
C.  Expiration. 
1.  A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular special use and shall expire if the special use shall cease for more than three months for any reason. 
2.  A special use permit shall expire on the December 31 of any calendar year where the special use has not been conducted for a period of eight months during such calendar year. 
3.  The determination as to whether a special use is being conducted shall be determined based upon the average intensity of operations of similar uses within the village or, if there be none, upon a comparison with similar uses in areas outside the village. Where such use is observed to fall below the average level of operations, such use shall be deemed to have ceased. 
D.  Standards applicable to all special uses. 
1.  The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operation involved, the size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to the existing or future streets giving access to it, shall be such that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of the district, and the location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences will not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
E.  Whereas the necessity for certain specific uses is recognized and at the same time appreciating the fact that they or any one of them may be, or become, inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community if located without consideration to the existing conditions and surroundings, the following standards and proceedings are hereby established which are intended to provide the board of trustees with a guide for the purpose of reviewing certain uses not otherwise permitted in this appendix. 
F.  The village board, the planning commission and the zoning board retains the right to inspect the site after start-up to ascertain that the conditions of the special use permit are adhered to. If the conditions are not adhered to, the board of trustees shall notify the permit holder of such noncompliance by registered or certified letter. If the permit holder fails to correct the noncompliance within ten days, the board of trustees may rescind the special use permit. 
1.  Public utilities. Public utility uses may be permitted in any district with a special use permit. No special use permit shall be issued unless the board of appeals shall determine that: 
a.  The proposed installation in a specific location is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located. 
b.  The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to the general character of the area and will not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is located. 
c.  Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be provided. 
d.  A buffer strip ten feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. 
e.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. 
f.  All of the area, yard and building coverage requirements of the respective zone will be met. 
2.  Gasoline stations and motor vehicle repair shops. Gasoline service stations may be permitted in such districts as specified in section 9 of this ordinance provided that the following standards are observed: 
a.  The existing four gasoline stations shall be permitted to continue to operate at their present locations but no further permits for construction of new gasoline stations will be issued except as follows: 
i.  In the event the owner of an existing gasoline station shall divest himself of the ownership of said station or in the event that a change in oil company or brand takes place, but the station is intended to remain in business under new ownership and purveying products of the same or a different oil company or brand, the special use permit shall remain in force, except that the design for any change, alteration or modification to existing buildings, signs, pumps or other facilities shall be submitted to the planning commission and the zoning board for review and recommendation as to the conformance with the existing special use permit. 
ii.  In the event a gasoline station goes out of business in that it does not conduct sales in the usual course of business for a period of three months, and the special use permit is deemed to have expired pursuant to paragraph C, a replacement gasoline station will be permitted, provided the new location is consented to by the board of trustees. The board of trustees shall first submit such application to the planning commission for its recommendations. 
b.  In addition to the information required in the special permit application, the site plan submitted shall also show the number and location of fuel tanks to be installed, the dimensions, and capacity of each storage tank, the number and location of pumps to be installed and the type of structure and accessory buildings to be constructed. 
c.  The area and yard specifications for motor vehicle service stations are identified in the schedule of this ordinance. 
d.  The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be hard surfaced. 
e.  Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed building and no motor vehicle shall be offered for sale on the site. No motor vehicle parts, or partially dismantled motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an enclosed building. 
f.  No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the premises of a motor vehicle service station other than those serviced or used by the employees in the indirect or direct operation of the establishment. 
g.  Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and the building island only. The outdoor display of oil cans and/or antifreeze and similar products may be displayed on the respective island if provided for in a suitable stand or rack. 
h.  No motor vehicle service station or public garage shall be located within 500 feet of any public entrance to a church, school, library, hospital, charitable institution, or place of public assembly. Such distance shall be measured in a straight line from said public entrance to the lot line nearest said entrance along the street line. 
i.  Where a motor vehicle service station abuts a residential zone, it shall be screened by a buffer area no less than ten feet in depth composed of densely-planted evergreen shrubbery, solid fencing, or a combination of both which, in the opinion of the board of appeals, will be adequate to prevent the transmission of headlight glare across the zone boundary line. Such buffer screen shall have a minimum height of six feet above finished grade at the highest point of the station. The materials used shall be in keeping with the character of the adjacent residential area. If said shrubbery becomes decayed and fails to provide an adequate screen, the building inspector may direct the property owner to replace said shrubs. 
j.  All fuel pumps shall be located at least 20 feet from any street or property line and shall be adequately maintained and properly supervised. 
k.  In addition to the sign requirements for business uses in the business district, each motor vehicle service station shall be permitted to have one stationary, nonmoving, free-standing or pylon sign setting forth the name of the station and for the principal products sold on the premises, including special company or brand name, insignia or emblem, provided that such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area on either of two sides and shall be hung within the property line and no less than ten feet nor more than 25 feet above the ground. 
l.  Service stations may also exhibit one temporary sign located no less than ten feet inside the property line and specifically setting forth special seasonal servicing of automobiles, provided that such sign does not exceed seven square feet in area. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Reserved. 
5a.  Bed and breakfast residences. Principal buildings may be used as a bed and breakfast residence in such districts as specified in section 9 of this Local Law provided that the additional following standards and requirements are met: 
a.  The quarters to be utilized by the guests or the occupants of the premises shall not be permitted in any accessory structure. 
b.  The principal building in which the use is permitted shall be occupied by the owners as their principal residence. 
c.  The use by guests shall be temporary only. 
d.  Serving of meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast. 
e.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room or rooms designated a living quarter in addition to the parking spaces for the off-street parking spaces for the residence. 
f.  The standards for review as set forth in section 10R4 shall be considered as additional standards that may be considered by the board of trustees in considering the request for granting of the special use permit. 
g.  The standards and regulations governing this permitted use shall not be construed to exclude the requirement of further conditions and standards as determined by the board of trustees to be necessary and to be met upon the granting of such permit. 
h.  The permit issued hereunder shall be for a one-year period, from the date of its issuance, and may be renewed for one-year periods upon such conditions as determined by the board of trustees. 
i.  Application for a permit or renewal of a permit shall be accompanied by the applicable fee and a certification to the board of trustees that the premises are in compliance with all applicable New York State health and building codes for the intended use. 
j.  If not otherwise required by the Village Law, smoke detecting units as required by chapter 8 of the village Code shall be required. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 11; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 9-1973, § 3; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 4; L.L. No. 2-1981, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 7-1983, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1984, § 4; L.L. No. 13-1984, § 7; L.L. No. 6-1991, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1993, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 12. - Parking requirements. 
A.  Requirements by usage. 
1.  In all districts every industrial, business, institutional, recreational, residential, or any other use shall provide at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or increased in capacity, off-street parking for motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this and other applicable sections of this ordinance unless otherwise recommended by the village planning commission. All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner. 
2.  Whenever there is a change in use, or an increase in floor area, or other unit of measurement, and such change and such increase create a need for an increase of more than ten percent in the number of required off-street parking spaces, as determined by the requirements in this section, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with this section for that addition or change in use. 
3.  None of the off-street parking facilities as required in the ordinance shall be required for any existing building use, unless there is an increase in floor area exceeding 35 percent of the existing floor area on the effective date of this ordinance. 
4.  Access drives or walkways to any business or industrial district through any residential district shall not be permitted as this would constitute an illegal use of residential zoned land. 
5.  In stadiums, churches, and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 20 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for purposes of the parking standards. 
6.  The minimum number of off-street parking facilities required shall be as set forth in the following: 
a.  Auditorium-One for each five seats. 
b.  Automobile or machine sales and service-One for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
c.  Banks, business and professional offices-One for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
d.  Bowling alleys-Five for each alley plus the necessary space as set forth in this section for affiliated uses such as bars, restaurants, or other commercial uses. 
e.  Churches-One for each five seats in places of worship. 
f.  Assembly halls without fixed seats; exhibition halls, except church assembly rooms in conjunction with auditorium- One for each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly or dancing. 
g.  Dwellings-Two for each family or dwelling unit. 
h.  Funeral home, mortuaries-One for each four seats in the auditorium. 
i.  Hospitals-One for each three beds. 
j.  Roominghouses, lodginghouses-One for each two bedrooms. 
k.  Libraries, museums, or galleries-One for each 600 square feet of floor area. 
l.  Manufacturing plants, research or testing laboratories, bottling plants-One for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
m.  Medical and dental clinics or offices-One for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
n.  Motels and hotels-One for each living or sleeping unit. 
o.  Restaurants, cafe and nightclubs-One for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
p.  Retail stores, shops, etc.-One for each 150 square feet of floor area. 
q.  Sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes for the aged, children's homes-One for each three beds. 
r.  Theaters, assembly halls, other than schools-One for each five seats. 
s.  Wholesale establishments or warehouses-One for each 3,000 square feet of floor area. 
t.  In the case of a use not specifically mentioned above, the requirements for off-street facilities to which said use is similar shall be set forth by the building inspector. 
B.  Requirements of off-street parking. 
1.  The size of off-street parking space shall be nine feet wide by 20 feet long for all side parking or eight feet wide by 23 feet long for all parallel parking. 
2.  Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where distance is specified, such distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building or use such facility is required to serve. Off-street parking spaces shall be allowed in required yards except where specifically prohibited by this ordinance. 
a.  Multi-unit dwellings, not more than 200 feet from the building they are required to serve. 
b.  For uses located in the business and restricted business district and for hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent, nursing, and rest homes; homes for the aged, retirement homes, private clubs, lodges, and offices; not more than 100 feet from the building they are required to serve. 
c.  For uses other than those specified above, not more than 300 feet from the building they are intended to serve. 
3.  Necessary passageways and driveways for entrance and exits to parking spaces shall be provided. 
4.  All parking areas, passageways, and driveways (except where provided in connection with one-family residences) shall be surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather pavement, clearly marked for car spaces, and shall be adequately drained, all subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
5.  The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum required of the various buildings or uses computed separately and further provided that the land upon which the collective facilities are located is owned or leased by one or more of the collective users. 
6.  All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways serving commercial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by commercial users to protect adjacent residential zones from the glare of such illumination and from that of automobile headlights. 
7.  Off-street parking areas located in commercial zones and which provide parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a type approved by the building inspector and located not greater than 60 feet on center. 
8.  Such parking areas shall not be used for any purpose other than the accessory parking of vehicles. In no case shall the storage, service or dismantling of vehicles be permitted in such areas. 
C.  Loading spaces. 
1.  Loading spaces shall be provided and maintained on the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected, occupied, enlarged or intended to be used, involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles, of material or merchandise. 
2.  Such space shall be adequate for standing, loading, and unloading services, in order to avoid undue interference with use of public transportation. 
3.  Loading and unloading space shall not be occupied or considered as any part of the required off-street parking. 
4.  All business districts shall include a ten-foot by 25-foot loading space with a 14-foot height clearance, for every 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of building floor or land use for the above-mentioned purposes. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 12; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 3-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 5) 
Sec. 13. - Sign regulations. 
A.  Intent and applicability. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, and protect the physical appearance of the community. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents and to reduce the adverse effects of signage on natural beauty and on the general environment of the community as a whole. 
2.  No sign shall be erected, placed or altered at any place in the Village of Lewiston except as provided by this chapter and only after a permit has been issued in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly stated otherwise. 
3.  No sign for which a permit has been issued hereunder shall be moved, altered, changed, enlarged or reconstructed without a new permit having first been issued therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  The term "sign" shall mean any material, structure or device, or part thereof, composed of lettered, or pictorial matter, or upon which lettered or pictorial matter is placed when used or located out-of-doors or outside or on the exterior of any building including window display area, for display of an advertisement, announcement, notice, directional matter or name, and includes frames, billboards, sign boards, painted wall signs, hanging signs, illuminated signs, pennants, fluttering devices, projecting signs or ground signs, and shall also include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person or business when the same is placed in view of the general public. 
2.  The "face area" of a sign shall be the surface devoted to the conveying of the message exclusive of the structure to support it properly, trim and framing device and any appurtenances required by building codes. In the case of open sign structures not having a solid surface or a sign not otherwise inscribed in a definitive area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area required to circumscribe all letters and devices exclusive of supports using the product of the greatest horizontal dimensions and the greatest vertical dimension required to fully enclose the sign. 
Freestanding signs shall have parallel faces and only one display face shall be measured in determining total sign area. 
3.  The term "erect" shall mean to build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, and shall also include the painting of exterior wall signs. 
4.  The term "front" or "face" of a building shall mean the outer surface of a building, which is visible from any private or public street or highway. 
5.  The term "illuminated sign" shall mean any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light. 
6.  The term "lighting device" shall mean any light, string of lights, or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign. 
7.  The term "projecting sign" shall mean any sign which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than eight inches from such building. 
8.  The term "freestanding sign" shall mean any sign resting upon or attached to the ground by means of an integral base or one or more poles or standards. Freestanding signs include both pole signs and ground signs. 
9.  The term "wall sign" shall mean any sign which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects no more than eight inches from such building. 
10.  The term "window sign" shall mean any sign in, on or near a window surface designed to be viewed from the exterior of the premises. 
(a)  Temporary window sign-A window sign designed to advertise a special event. 
(b)  Permanent window sign-A window sign designed to advertise the enterprise therein. 
11.  Directional sign-A sign commonly associated with and limited to information and directions necessary and convenient for persons coming on the property; including signs marking entrances, parking areas, one-way driveways, rest rooms, pickup and delivery areas, and handicap areas. 
12.  Flashing sign-A moving, animated or illuminated sign on which any artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity or color at all times when in use. A revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign. 
13.  Private sale sign-A temporary sign advertising the sale of personal property at house sales, garage sales, rummage sales and the like. 
14.  Real estate sign-A temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises on which the sign is located. 
15.  Temporary sign-A sign which is designed to announce a special event or activity, erected on any premises which is intended to be removed upon the conclusion of the special event or activity. 
16.  Warning sign-Signs limited to message of warning, danger or caution. 
17.  Awning/canopy sign-A drawing, printing or other configuration, printed on or attached to an awning or canopy, which purports to indicate the nature or name of, or to publicize, any service, any organization or any commercial enterprises. 
18.  Roof sign-A sign that is mounted upon the roof or extending above the roofline of a building. 
19.  Awning-A roof-like covering of canvas or other flexible materials, which extends from the wall of a building. 
20.  Business establishment-A mercantile building or portion thereof, in which a business operation is conducted. 
21.  Canopy-A roof-like covering of metal or other rigid material, which extends from the wall of a building. 
22.  Enterprise-Any business activity having an address located within the Village of Lewiston. 
23.  Finished ground level-The natural surface of the ground, or surface of the ground after completion of any change in contour. 
24.  Window glass area-The total glass area of all windows located on the same building side and floor as a window sign, including any windows within a door frame. 
25.  "Sandwich board sign" - a hinged freestanding sign of any size, unattached to any building or ground surface and which opens in an "A" shape, whether professionally designed and manufactured or created or designed in any freehand style. 
C.  Prohibited signs. The following prohibitions shall apply to all districts in the Village of Lewiston: 
1.  No sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating, or moving light, lights or images. Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity. 
2.  No illuminated sign or lighting device shall be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
3.  No sign shall attempt or appear to attempt to direct the movement of traffic or imitate or resemble any official sign, signal or device. 
4.  No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to prevent any pedestrian or a driver of a vehicle from having a clear and unobstructed view of any official sign, entrance or exit of any sidewalk or roadway, intersection, approaching or merging traffic. 
5.  No sign shall be attached to a vehicle parking either in the right-of-way or on private property so as to be visible from the street, which sign is designed to advertise or otherwise direct attention to a business establishment. 
6.  No signs shall be placed on the roof of any building or project above roofline. 
7.  Except as permitted and regulated under section 13.F of appendix B, no sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices. The said devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention when not part of a sign. 
8.  No combination of permanent and temporary window signs in a window of a building shall occupy more than 30 percent of the area of said window. 
9.  No off-premises signs shall be permitted. 
10.  No sign which is obsolete or not in a good state of repair or not securely affixed to a building or substantial structure shall be permitted. 
11.  No sign or fluttering device shall be erected in such manner as to obstruct free egress from a window, door, fire escape, or public way so to become a menace to life, health or property. 
12.  No sign, banner or material of any sort shall be suspended across any public street, sidewalk or parking lot or any driveway without a special permit issued by resolution of the board of trustees. 
13.  No sandwich board signs of any size, shape or design shall be permitted within the public rights-of-way of village streets, nor on private property. 
14.  No sign shall be erected in the Village of Lewiston unless it is specifically permitted under this section. If a sign is not specifically permitted in this section it shall constitute a prohibited sign. 
D.  Permitted signs. 
1.  Permitted in all districts; no sign permit required. The following signs are permitted in all districts and no sign permit shall be required to erect such sign: 
a.  Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located, which sign shall not exceed six square feet in area, provided such sign is erected or displayed not less than five feet inside the property line. This sign must be removed from the premises within seven days after the property is sold or leased. Not more than one sign shall be permitted for each street contiguous to the premises, but in no case shall there be more than two signs on the premises. 
b.  Official signs, notices or direction devices erected or maintained by federal, state, county or local government or an agency thereof. 
c.  In residential districts, signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, which shall not exceed two square feet in area on any one side. 
2.  Permitted in all districts; sign permit required. The following signs are permitted in all districts and a sign permit shall be required prior to erecting such sign: 
a.  Professional nameplates that shall not exceed two square feet in area on either of two sides. 
b.  Parking lot markers, directional signs, entrances and exit signs and other such signs which are erected on the premises which shall not exceed two square feet in area on any one side and shall not contain any advertising of the use on the premises. 
c.  Signs or bulletin boards customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, municipal buildings, which signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed a total of 16 square feet in area, measuring one face of each sign and shall be located on the premises of such institutions, provided such signs or bulletin boards are erected or displayed not less than five feet from inside the property line. 
3.  Permitted in business districts; sign permit required. The following signs are permitted in all business districts and a sign permit shall be required prior to erecting such sign. Said signs are to be used solely for the purpose of identifying the business, occupants, and address of the premises on which the sign is erected. 
A.  Each separate enterprise shall be permitted to erect any two of the following five types of signs, but not two of the same type. If an enterprise occupies more than one acre, they shall be entitled to up to three of the following five types of signs, but not more than one of each kind. 
1.  Wall sign. [Refer to section 13.B.9] 
a.  The size of the wall sign, or in the case of more than one enterprise in one building, the total combined size of each wall sign, shall be no greater than one square foot for each one lineal foot of wall width upon which the surface of the sign is to be erected, provided that no wall sign, or total combined size of each wall sign, shall exceed 40 square feet in area and shall not be placed closer than two feet to the ends of the building. 
b.  Where two or more enterprises occupy the same physical space or are located in such proximity, one to the other, that it is necessary to pass through one enterprise to reach the other, the combined total wall signage shall not be greater than that permitted for a single enterprise. 
c.  Where two or more enterprises occupy the same building but not the same area, the size of sign permitted for each enterprise shall be proportional based upon their respective portion of the total lineal building width of the wall they are mounted upon. 
d.  Where a building fronts on two public streets, one additional sign of any category, except freestanding, may be erected, subject to the following provision: 
[i]  The total area of the combination of signs shall be not greater than 40 square feet. 
2.  Projecting signs. [Refer to section 13.B.7] A projecting sign shall not exceed six square feet in face area for a single face and shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  No part of the sign shall be less than eight feet above finish grade. 
(b)  It shall have no more than two faces, and in no case shall the largest dimension exceed three feet. 
(c)  The edge of the sign farthest from the building wall shall be not more than 36 inches distant from said wall. 
(d)  It shall not project into a public right-of-way without prior written consent. 
3.  Awning/canopy signs. [Refer to section 13.B.17, 19, 21] 
a.  Awning/canopy signs shall not exceed six square feet. 
b.  An enterprise may place signage upon only one awning/canopy if the building contains more than one awning/canopy. Where an awning/canopy covers more than one enterprise, each separate enterprise shall be entitled to identify itself thereon. Subject to above. 
c.  All awnings/canopies, if artificial illumination is present, shall be opaque. 
d.  Any awning/canopy sign shall contain only the name of the enterprise and street number of the enterprise. 
4.  Window signs. [Refer to section 13.B.10] 
a.  The total area of all permanent window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window glass area of the affected window. In no event, however, shall any combination of permanent and temporary window signs cover more than 30 percent of any given window, nor exceed 12 square feet. 
b.  In addition to the proprietary name and address, each sign may not have more than five generic words identifying the type of establishment. 
5.  Freestanding signs. [Refer to section 13.B.8] All freestanding signs, both ground mounted and pole mounted, shall be limited to not more than two faces. Such signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area on any one side. No freestanding sign shall be placed nearer any street right-of-way or lot line than ten feet. 
a.  Ground mounted. The height of a ground-mounted sign shall not exceed eight feet. 
b.  Pole mounted. The maximum height of a pole sign shall not exceed 15 feet above ground, nor shall the lowest portion be closer than eight feet to the ground except for the pole supporting the sign. 
B.  One neon/neon-like "OPEN" sign is permitted, not to exceed two square feet in area. Subject to section 13.C.1. There shall be no other neon or neon-like signs. 
4.  Permitted in all districts except B-1, RB and RB-2. 
a.  No signs shall be erected except monuments, historic markers, or other public information or directory devices erected by a public agency, unless approval of the board of trustees is obtained after recommendations of the historic preservation/planning commission. 
5.  Permitted in R-4 districts; sign permit required. The following signs are permitted in all R-4 districts and a sign permit shall be required prior to erecting such sign: 
a.  Each property, regardless of the number of enterprises located thereon, shall be permitted to erect one wall sign. In addition thereto, each property may have either one projecting sign, one awning/canopy sign or one freestanding sign. No window signs shall be permitted. 
1.  The size of the wall sign shall be no greater than 12 square feet. Where a property fronts on two public streets, one additional wall sign may be erected, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  The total area of any combination of signs shall be not greater than 18 square feet. 
(b)  No individual sign shall be larger in dimension than otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
2.  A projecting sign shall not exceed two square feet in face area for a single face and shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  No part of a sign shall be less than eight feet above finish grade. 
(b)  It shall have no more than two faces, and in no case shall the largest dimension exceed three feet. 
(c)  The edge of the sign farthest from the building wall shall be not more than 36 inches distant from said wall. 
(d)  It shall not project into a public right-of-way without prior written consent. 
3.  An awning/canopy sign shall not exceed six square feet. All awnings/canopies, if artificial illumination is present, shall be opaque. 
4.  A freestanding sign (ground sign or pole sign), having not more than two faces, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area on any one side. The height of the ground sign shall not exceed eight feet. The maximum height of a pole sign shall not exceed 15 feet above ground, nor shall the lowest portion be closer than eight feet to the ground except for the pole supporting the sign. No freestanding sign shall be placed nearer any street right-of-way or lot line than ten feet. 
No sign shall be erected or maintained nearer the building facade than three feet, or nearer the sidewalk surface than eight feet, and must be placed so as not to obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk. 
b.  Said signs are to be used solely for the purpose of identifying the business(es), occupants and address of the premises on which the sign is erected. Such sign may use generic words when identifying the type of establishment. In addition to the proprietary name and address, each sign may have not more than five words. An awning/canopy sign shall contain only the name of the enterprise(s) and street number of the enterprise. 
E.  Temporary signs. The dimensions of any temporary sign, its placement and the message or wording thereon shall be regulated, unless otherwise noted, by the provisions of this section 13. 
1.  Signs not requiring a permit: 
A.  The following signs shall be permitted in all districts on a temporary basis without the necessity for obtaining a permit: 
(1)  One non-illuminated, single-faced construction sign denoting the architect, engineer and/or builder, not exceeding 32 square feet in area per face, located at least 15 feet from any property line, may be erected on the construction site of any dwelling or other development. Any such sign shall be removed within six months of its erection, seven days of completion of the construction repair or renovation or upon total occupancy, whichever comes first. 
(2)  One non-illuminated home improvement or remodeling contractor sign not exceeding six square feet per face, located at least 15 feet from any property line, may be erected on the project site. Any such sign shall be removed within two months of its erection or within seven days of completion of the project, whichever comes first. 
(3)  One non-illuminated real estate sign not exceeding six square feet in area per face, located at least five feet from all property lines and not more than four feet in height. Such sign shall be removed within five days after the time of the contract of sale or lease. 
(4)  Private sale signs not exceeding four square feet may be displayed for a period not to exceed three days. 
(5)  Warning signs. If intended to remain in place more than five days, placement shall require a permit from the zoning enforcement officer. 
B.  The following signs shall be permitted in all business districts on a temporary basis without the necessity for obtaining a permit: 
Signs designed to advertise a special event or nonprofit activities may be displayed for a period of not more than 21 days prior to and seven days after the advertised event and shall be limited in size to 30 percent of the window glass area. In no event shall the combined window coverage of permanent and temporary window signs be more than 30 percent of any given window. 
2.  Signs requiring permits: 
A.  The following signs may be permitted on a temporary basis after obtaining a temporary sign permit as approved by historic preservation/planning commission: 
(1)  A charitable or not-for-profit educational, professional or service organization. The sign shall be no greater in dimension than 20 square feet and shall be located only on the premises where the event advertised is located. 
Any additional off site premise signs shall be limited to three square feet, ground mounted. Number and location to be determined by the historic preservation/planning commission. A $50.00 deposit is required which will be forfeited seven days after the event if signs are not removed. 
(2)  A newly established or located business establishment awaiting the approval of a permanent sign permit. 
(3)  An existing business which has lost the use of an earlier, legal, existing sign by reason of accident or other unanticipated event beyond the control of the owner of the business. 
(4)  A newly constructed multiple residence or commercial development, announcing the availability of leases or sales. 
B.  Each application for a temporary sign permit shall be made on the form provided and describe the manner in which the proposed sign is to be erected. Such permit may be granted by the historic preservation/planning commission to the proprietor of the enterprise where the proposed sign is to be erected. 
C.  A temporary sign permit, if granted, shall be effective for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of issue. The permit may be extended once for an added period not to exceed 30 days upon written application, setting forth the special circumstances requiring the extension. 
D.  Each applicant except those excluded by this chapter shall be required to pay an application fee of $50.00. An additional fee shall be charged if an extension is granted. 
F.  Permit procedures. Except for such signs as are specified in section 13.D.1, no sign shall be erected without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions of this law. 
1.  Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made to the historic preservation/planning commission through the village clerk-treasurer upon prescribed forms and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
b.  Location of the building, structure, or land to which, or upon which, the sign is to be erected. 
c.  Scale drawings including dimensions showing: Lettering and/or pictorial content of sign; construction details; position of lighting or other extraneous devices; a location plan showing the position of the sign on any buildings or land, and its position in relation to nearby building, structures, or existing signs, and to any private or public street or highway. 
d.  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or upon which the sign is to be erected, in the event the applicant is not the owner thereof. 
2.  Zoning enforcement officer's (ZEO) review. Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the ZEO shall review said application and, if he/she deems necessary, the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected. Upon making such review, the ZEO shall forward the application together with any comments or recommendations he/she may find appropriate to the historic preservation/planning commission. 
3.  Planning commission review. Upon receipt of the application from the zoning enforcement officer, the historic preservation/planning commission shall review said application not later than its next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant or his agent shall attend such meeting. If the commission determines that additional information is required to make its determination, the applicant shall submit same. The commission, upon receiving the required information, shall make a determination approving or disapproving the application. 
In determining the acceptability of any proposed sign, the historic preservation/planning commission shall apply the following criteria: 
(a)  The sign, as proposed, will not be detrimental to the subject premises and other property in the immediate area. 
(b)  The sign, as proposed, will not create a hazard. 
(c)  The sign, as proposed, will not interfere with the use of public lands or highways. 
(d)  The sign, as proposed, is in harmony with the purpose of this section and the zoning district in which the sign will be located. 
(e)  The sign, as proposed, shall be in aesthetic and architectural harmony with the subject premises and other signs and buildings in the immediate area. 
4.  Issuance of permit. Upon receiving notice of the determination of the commission approving an application, the zoning enforcement officer shall cause to be issued a sign permit. If the sign authorized under such permit has not been completed within six months from the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall become null and void, but may be reviewed within ten days from the expiration thereof upon a showing of good cause and upon payment of an additional fee as required. 
5.  Disapproval of permit. Upon receiving notice of the determination of the commission disapproving an application, the zoning enforcement officer shall cause to be issued a notice to the applicant of the disapproval and that the applicant has the right to appeal the historic preservation planning commission's determination and/or apply for a variance to the village zoning board of appeals. 
6.  Fee. A fee established by the board of trustees shall be paid upon issuance of a permit for such sign to the Village of Lewiston Clerk's Office. 
G.  Revocation of permit and removal of certain signs. 
1.  General conditions. 
a.  All signs must be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in such tidy and safe conditions so as not to be detrimental to the public health and safety. Any sign found unsafe or insecure, or a menace to the public shall be suitably repaired or removed. Any illuminated sign shall bear the underwriters' label and shall be designed so as to protect adjoining or nearby property and/or street from direct glare, nuisance or hazardous interference of any kind. 
b.  Any sign existing on or after the effective date of these regulations which advertises a business, product, or services no longer conducted or available, shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon which such sign is located, after written notice provided by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.  Enforcement. In the event of a violation of any of the foregoing general conditions, the zoning enforcement officer shall give written notice to the named owner of the sign and/or the named owner of the land on which the sign is located, either to conform or to remove such sign within 30 days of such notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the zoning enforcement officer shall revoke the sign permit and may remove or repair such sign, assessing all incurred costs and expenses against the owner and add the expense of removal to the next taxes assessed to the property. The zoning enforcement officer may cause any sign which is a source of immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. The remedies herein shall not be considered exclusive, but in addition to any other remedy available to the village. 
H.  Nonconforming signs. 
Discontinuance and removal. Any nonconforming sign existing at the time of the adoption of this section shall be discontinued, and the sign and the structural components shall be removed. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 13; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 2-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1994, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1994, §§ 1-4, 3-21-1994; Amd. of 1-6-2014; L.L. No. 2-2017) 
Sec. 14. - Nonconforming uses and buildings. 
A.  Continuance. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, the lawful use of land or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued although such use or building does not conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the zone in which such land or building is located; provided, however: 
1.  That no nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size. 
2.  That no nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of nonconformance. 
3.  That no nonconforming use may be expanded. 
B.  Unsafe structures. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition. 
C.  Alterations. A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50 percent of the full valuation of the building unless said building is changed to a conforming use. 
D.  Construction approved prior to adoption of this ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within eight months of the date of such permit, and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within one year from date of this ordinance. 
E.  Extension. A nonconforming use shall not be extended, but the extension of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming building which existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall not be deemed the extension of such nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. 
F.  Temporary buildings for construction purposes. A temporary building for construction purposes incidental to residential development may be erected and maintained in a residential district for a period not exceeding one year. 
G.  Restoration. No building damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of more than 50 percent of its full valuation shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
H.  Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six months, such use shall not thereafter be re-established, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
I.  Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of the same or higher classification, and such use thereafter shall not be changed to a lower classification. 
J.  District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall become changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein. 
K.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, any automobile wrecking yard or other junkyard and any billboard, advertising structure or nonconforming sign in existence in any residential district at the date of enactment of this ordinance shall, at the expiration of three years from such date, become a prohibited and unlawful use and shall be discontinued. Provided, however, that lawfully existing signs accessory to a nonconforming business or industrial building shall not be subject to this subdivision. 
L.  Those uses existing at the date of the adoption of this ordinance which would otherwise be permitted only with a special use permit may be required to meet certain regulations as set forth in section 11, "Uses requiring special use permits," for the particular use. 
M.  Any building which is nonconforming due to insufficient yard distances or lot area shall not be considered a nonconforming use. Any alterations or structural changes may be accomplished within the existing frame of said building, but any additions shall conform to the specific setback and yard distance requirements of this ordinance. The use of any such nonconforming building may be changed to any other permitted use so long as the yard or lot area requirements are no greater. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 14; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 15. - Violations; penalties for offenses; remedies. 
A.  Upon his own investigation or receipt of information or complaint, and where a violation of this law is determined to exist, the zoning officer/building inspector shall serve notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the owner, agent or contractor of the building, structure or lot where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and on the lessee or tenant of the part of or of the entire building, structure or lot where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and on the agent, architect, contractor or any other such person who takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building, structure or lot in which any such violation shall exist. 
B.  Such notice, in form approved by the village attorney, shall direct the removal or correction of such violation within ten days after service of the notice. 
C.  In such cases where the removal of the violation within ten days would be manifestly impossible, in the determination of the building inspector, the building inspector shall apply to the board of trustees for a determination as to a reasonable period of time within which such violation shall be removed. 
D.  Notice of violation. 
1.  A person who fails to comply with a notice of violation shall be guilty of a separate and distinct violation from the violations contained in the notice. 
2.  Upon the failure to comply with a violation notice the building inspector/zoning officer shall be authorized to commence a civil proceeding against the person so notified and seek the civil penalty hereinafter set forth. 
3.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this section 15, upon the building inspector/zoning officer's determination that a violation of this law exists, he is authorized, in his discretion, and prior to sending a notice of violation set forth in paragraph A, prepare and serve, or cause to be served, upon said person, an appearance ticket charging an offense of this law before an appropriate court of law. 
E.  Any owner, contractor, lessee, tenant, agent of other person who uses or maintains, or causes to be used or maintained, any building, structure or lot or any part thereof in the village for any purpose other than the uses permitted therefor in this law, or who erects, enlarges, alters or maintains, or causes to be erected, enlarged, altered or maintained, any building, or any part thereof in the village except in conformity with the provisions of this law, or who uses or maintains, or causes to be used or maintained, any building or any part thereof in the village which has been erected, enlarged or altered other than in conformity with the provisions of this law, or who otherwise violates, or causes to be violated, any provision of this law shall thereby be guilty of a violation pursuant to the penal law, and, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not less than $10.00 nor more than $250.00 for each such violation. Each day that a violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this enactment or any regulation promulgated hereunder by the board of trustees occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
F.  If any person fails to abate any said violation of this law within ten days after service of the notice set forth in paragraph A, said person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for each and every day that said violation continues, recoverable by a suit brought by the village, and to be retained by it. 
G.  The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided for by law, whether by legal process or otherwise, which may be instituted or taken to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, moving, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or lot, or to prevent any illegal acts, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
H.  In addition, and not in substitution for, the remedies provided for herein, the building inspector may refer an incident of noncompliance with the notice of violation to the village board for further action. Upon failure of a responsible person to comply with the notice of violation, the village board may direct correction of the violation at the expense of the village and may appropriate funds therefor and all costs for such corrections shall constitute a lien upon the subject property and shall draw interest equal to interest on delinquent taxes, and may be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes. 
I.  The building inspector shall submit a written report to the village board, not later than 12:00 noon of the day on which the first monthly meeting is held covering the calendar month preceding the report, containing not less than: The address of and date of each investigation or inspection initiated by him; address of each alleged violation concerning which information or complaints have been received by him; date of such receipt; nature of each violation found or complained of, if any; date of correction notice issued; dates of each reinspection; date of filing of request for arrest warrant with prosecutor having jurisdiction; disposition of each case closed; and status report of each case referred under paragraphs C and G. Such report shall include cumulative annual totals of inspections and investigations initiated, information or complaints received, violation notices for correction with breakdown of such violation by appropriate category, corrections confirmed upon reinspection warrant requests filed and convictions obtained. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 15; L.L. No. 1-1973; L.L. No. 7-1973, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1992, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1992) 
Sec. 16. - Amendments. 
A.  The board of trustees may from time to time on its own motion, or on petition, or on recommendation of the planning commission or the board of appeals, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this ordinance, attached schedules, or official zoning maps after public notice and hearing in accordance with the Laws of the State of New York applicable thereto. 
B.  Whenever the board of trustees amends, supplements or repeals any regulations or provisions of this ordinance, it shall first submit such proposed change to the planning commission for recommendation. 
C.  The board of trustees by resolution adopted at a stated meeting shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause notice thereof to be given as required by law. 
D.  In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the land included in such proposed change, or of that immediately adjacent extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment or change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-quarters of all members of the board of trustees. 
E.  Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement or change of the zoning or regulations herein contained or subsequently established shall have been denied by the board of trustees, then no new petition including the text and/or map covering the same property or the same property and additional property shall be filed with or considered by the board of trustees until one year shall have elapsed from the date of the filing of the first petition. 
A written notice of any proposed change or amendment affecting property within 500 feet of the boundaries of any state park or parkway shall be given to the regional state park commission having jurisdiction over such state park or parkway, the Niagara County Development and Planning Board and Erie and Niagara County Regional Planning Board at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 16; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 17. - Validity. 
    The invalidity of any section or provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 17; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 18. - Repealer. 
A.  All prior zoning ordinances of the Village of Lewiston, New York, regulating or restricting buildings, the use of lands, yards, and bulk particularly "Ordinance 81-zoning ordinance," adopted on October 3, 1966, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed and declared to be of no effect. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 18; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Sec. 19. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect ten days after publication and posting as required by law, except that it shall take effect from the date of its service as against a person served personally with a copy thereof, certified by the village clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1978, app. B, § 19; L.L. No. 1-1973) 
Appendix C - SCHEDULE OF MISCELLANEOUS FEES 

Sec. C-1. - Zoning. 
(1)  Application to zoning board of appeals ..... $35.00 
(2)  Request for special zoning board of appeals meeting ..... 35.00 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy in an R-1, R-1A and R-2 ..... 25.00 
(4)  Certificate of occupancy in an R-3, R-4, R-5, B-1, RB and RB2 
Up to $50,000 value ..... 50.00 
Over $50,000 value ..... 100.00 
(5)  Reinspection for previously certified building (new occupant) ..... 25.00 
(6)  Application for a special use permit ..... 50.00 
(7)  Application for rezoning ..... 100.00; 
Sec. C-2. - Planning and subdivisions. 
(1)  Master plan ..... 10.00 
(2)  Subdivision packet ..... 2.00 
(3)  Major subdivision application ..... 100.00 
(4)  Minor subdivision application ..... 50.00 
(5)  Request for special planning meeting ..... 35.00 
(6)  Application for development plan approval ..... 50.00 
(7)  State enivornmental quality review environmental assessment form (SEQREAF) ..... 50.00 
Sec. C-3. - Buildings 
(1)  Residential building fees:   Single and two family dwellings ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Alterations and renovations ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Additions ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Sheds and storage buildings ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Above ground pools ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   In ground pools ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Fences, new and replacements ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Roofs-Strip and replace ..... $35.00   Roofs-Second layer ..... $35.00   Demolitions ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Installation of a Generator ..... $25.00 plus building permit chart fee   Sewer line tie in ..... $65.00   Water line tie in ..... $250.00 (2)  Commercial building fees:   Up to 1,000 square feet ..... $500.00   Over 1,000 square feet ..... $1,000. plus 0.25 per square foot additional   Alterations and renovations ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Commercial plumbing ..... $75.00 plus building permit chart fee   Roofing ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Installation of a generator ..... $25.00 plus building permit chart fee   Demolitions ..... $100.00 plus building permit chart fee   Sewer line tie in ..... $65.00   Water line tie in ..... $300.00   Fence install or replace ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee (3)  Miscellaneous:   Compliance Inspection ..... $65.00   Wood burning fire place ..... $30.00   Signs-Permanent ..... $40.00 per sign   Signs-Temporary ..... $35.00 per sign for 30-day maximium   Sign alterations ..... $30.00 perline for each side   Fire alarm systems installation ..... $50.00 plus building permit chart fee   Fire alarm and protection system review ..... $100.00 flat fee   Fuel tank installation ..... $150.00 per tank   Compliance letter ..... $35.00   Zoning compliance letter ..... $35.00   Stop work order ..... $100.00 fee due to commence construction after stop order has been addressed   Re-inspections ..... $75.00 fee when inspector is called upon to make an inspection and obvious prerequisites have not been completed, resulting in additional inspections.   No permit obtained or permit delayed in the event that work requiring a building permit commenced without the appropriate permit(s) applied for and secured $100.00 fee will be added to permit fee. Each day is a separate violation.  
Sec. C-4. - Garbage. 
(1)  Commercial ..... $15.00 
(2)  Plus, per container in excess of 12 ..... 0.20 
Sec. C-5. - Administrative fees/fees for use of village property. 
(1)  Photocopies, per copy ..... 0.25 
(2)  Rent of municipal building: 
(a)  Per square foot ..... 8.00 
(b)  Room on a daily basis other than the gym ..... 20.00 
(c)  Use of gym by the hour ..... 10.00 
(3)  Tax search certificate ..... 10.00 
(4)  Copies of death certificates ..... 10.00 
(5)  Solicitors license, 14-20 ..... 25.00 
(6)  Academy Park ..... 50.00 
(a)  Band Shell ..... 25.00 
(7)  Lewiston Landing Waterfront Park ..... 50.00 
(a)  Shelter ..... 25.00 
(8)  Hennepin Park ..... 50.00 
(a)  Gazebo ..... 25.00 
(9)  Lewiston Plateau/Habitat Area ..... 50.00 
Sec. C-6. - Department of public works. 
(1)  Installation of corrugated sewer pipe: 
(a)  Up to 15 inches, per foot ..... 10.00 
(b)  Over 15 inches ..... cost plus 
(2)  Sewer permit, new construction: 
(a)  Three-fourths-inch tap ..... $600.00 
(b)  One-inch tap ..... 800.00 
Fees for taps greater than one-inch shall be priced per job. 
(3)  Sewer inspection requested by owner, realtor, bank, etc., for compliance with sewer laws ..... 60.00 
(4)  Waterline, new construction: 
(a)  Three-fourths-inch tap ..... 600.00 
(b)  One-inch tap ..... 800.00 
Fees for taps greater than one-inch shall be priced per job. 
(5)  Water shutoff at street ..... 15.00 
(6)  Water turnon at street ..... 15.00 
(7)  Testing meter: 
(a)  In home, over dispute ..... 15.00 
(b)  In shop, as required by owner ..... 20.00 
(Code 1978, app. C; Res. No. 9-1983; L.L. No. 9-92; Res. of 5-29-1992; Res. of 11-16-1992; Res. of 10-4-1999; L.L. No. 1-2009; Res. of 4-4-2011; L.L. No. 4-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1904 ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1904 Ordinances that are included in the Code. 
1904 Ords. 
Chapter/Section Section 

in Code ch. 1, § 1, ch. 1, § 2 17-1, 17-2 ch. 1, § 3 17-8 17-75 ch. 1, § 4 17-3 ch. 1, § 5, ch. 1, § 6 17-35, 17-36 ch. 1, § 7 17-4 ch. 1, § 8, ch. 1, § 9 17-69, 17-70 ch. 1, § 10 17-69 ch. 1, § 11 17-7 17-71 ch. 1, § 13, ch. 1, § 14 17-72, 17-73 ch. 1, § 14 17-74 ch. 1, § 15, ch. 1, § 16 17-37, 17-38 ch. 1, § 24 17-39 ch. 1, § 26 17-40 ch. 1, § 28, ch. 1, § 29 17-5, 17-6 ch. 1, § 30 11-22 17-75 ch. 1, § 34 17-72 ch. 3, § 10 12-44-12-46 ch. 3, § 11 12-2 ch. 3, § 13 12-3 ch. 3, § 14 8-1 ch. 3, § 15 2-71 ch. 3, § 18 12-5 ch. 3, § 19 12-4 ch. 3, §§ 23-25 12-5 ch. 3, § 30 12-6  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1978 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as supplemented through Local Law No. 2-2009, adopted October 5, 2009 that are included in the Code. 
1978 Code 
Section Section 
in Code 1-1-1-10 1-1-1-10 2-1-2-3 2-1-2-3 2-5-2-10 2-4-2-9 2-19-2-21 2-39-2-41 2-21 2-44 2-22 2-42 2-25, 2-26 2-45, 2-46 2-37-2-45 2-67-2-75 2-47-2-56 2-77-2-86 2-58, 2-59 2-87, 2-88 2-63-2-65 2-113-2-115 2-71-2-77 2-141-2-147 2-81-2-85 2-181-2-185 2-89 2-209 2-94 2-210 2-246 2-76 4-16-4-19 3-19-3-22 4-20-4-26 3-48-3-54 4-41-4-46 3-84-3-89 5-2-5-5 4-1-4-4 6-1-6-3 5-1-5-3 6-16-6-20 5-16-5-20 71/2-11, 71/2-12 7-11, 7-12 7-16-7-24 6-16-6-24 7-40 6-40 7-42 6-41 8-2, 8-3 8-2, 8-3 8-16-8-26 8-16-8-26 8-31-8-33 8-41-8-43 9-1-9-4 9-1-9-4 9-10, 9-11 9-30, 9-31 9-17-9-29 9-57-9-69 9-36 9-96-9-99 9-37 9-100 10-1, 10-2 10-1, 10-2 10-25-10-28 10-25-10-28 11-1 11-1 11-16-11-21 11-16-11-21 11-23 11-23 11-35-11-46 11-35-11-46 11-53-11-58 11-73-11-78 12-1 12-1 12-7 12-7 12-19-12-26 12-19-12-26 12-40-12-46 12-70-12-76 12-50-12-62 12-100-12-112 12-65-12-72 12-135-12-142 12-72 12-143 13-1-13-11 13-1-13-11 13-16-13-22 13-36-13-42 14-1 14-1 14-16-14-26 14-16-14-26 15-1, 15-2 15-1, 15-2 15-16-15-19 15-16-15-19 15-73-15-91 15-43-15-61 15-100-15-108 15-100-15-108 15-110 15-109 16.5-1-16.5-8 16-1-16-8 17-44 17-94 18-1 18-1 18-1.1 18-2 18-2 18-3 18-32-18-46 18-25-18-39 19-16-19-32 19-19-19-35 19-39-19-53 19-59-19-73 19-59-19-71 19-105-19-117 20-1 20-1 20-16-20-18 20-21-20-23 20-19-20-22 20-50-20-53 20-23, 20-24 20-80, 20-81 20-25-20-29 20-106-20-110 20-76-20-83 20-136-20-143 20-95 20-170 20-102-20-107 20-194-20-199 20-108-20-124 20-222-20-238 app. A, art. I, app. A, art. II App. A, Art. I, 
App. A, Art. II app. A, art. III, intro. ¶ App. A, Art. III app. A, art. III, § 1- 
app. A, art. III, § 6 App. A, Art. III, § 1- 
App. A, Art. III, § 6 app. A, art. III, § 9 App. A, Art. III, § 7 app. A, art. IV, intro. ¶ App. A, Art. IV app. A, art. IV, § 1, 
app. A, art. IV, § 2 App. A, Art. IV, § 1, 
App. A, Art. IV, § 2 app. A, art. V App. A, Art. V app. A, art. VI, § 1- 
app. A, art. VI, § 3 App. A, Art. VI, § 1- 
App. A, Art. VI, § 3 app. A, art. VII, § 1- 
app. A, art. VII, § 3 App. A, Art. VII, § 1- 
App. A, Art. VII, § 3 app. A, art. VIII App. A, Art. VIII app. B, § 1- 
app. B, § 19 App. B, § 1- 
App. B, § 19 app. C App. C, § C-6  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE LOCAL LAWS 
This table gives the location within the Code of the local laws that are included in the Code. Local laws through Local Law No. 2-2009, adopted October 5, 2009, were included in the 1978 Code, as supplemented. 
Local Law 
Number Section Section  
in Code 1-1968 20-1, 20-2 14-16, 14-17 20-4 14-18, 14-19 14-21 14-23, 14-24 20-5 14-17 14-20 14-22 14-25 20-6 14-26 2-1968 21-1 5-1 21-2 5-16 21-3 5-18 21-3a 5-19 21-4 5-17 21-5 5-20 4-1968 40-1 6-16 40-2 6-18 40-3 6-17 40-4-40-7 6-19-6-22 40-8 6-18 40-9, 40-10 6-23, 6-24 5-1968 1 18-26, 18-27 2 18-25 3-14 18-28-18-39 6-1968 13.02, 13.03 11-35 13.04 11-39 13.05 11-19 13.06 11-40 7-1968 2-4 2-1969 6-24 3-1970 1 2-141 2 2-146 3-5 2-142-2-144 6 2-147 7 2-145 3-1971 11-19 4-1971 1-7 18-1 1-1972 2 11-35 4 11-19 2-1972 2 20-139 3, 4 20-194, 20-195 3-1972 1 8-16 2 8-2 3, 4 8-17, 8-18 5 8-19, 8-20 6-11 8-21-8-26 1-1973 App. A, Art. I- 
App. A, Art. III App. A, Art. III, § 1- 
App. A, Art. III, § 7 App. A, Art. IV, intro. ¶ App. A, Art. IV, § 1, 
App. A, Art. IV, § 2 App. A, Art. V App. A, Art. VI, § 1- 
App. A, Art. IV, § 3 App. A, Art. VII, § 1- 
App. A, Art. IV, § 3 App. A. Art. VIII App. B, § 1- 
App. B, § 8 App. B, § 10- 
App. B, § 19 2-1973 1 App. B, § 10 6-1973 1, 2 11-35 3 11-37 4 11-17 5 11-19 9-1973 1-3 App. B, § 9 2-1974 2 20-139 3, 4 20-194, 20-195 3-1974 1 11-36 2-4 11-19 5 11-41 1-1975 1(1) 19-19 1(2) 19-59 1(3) 19-66 1(4) 19-73 1(5) 19-60 1(6) 19-33 19-63, 19-64 19-68, 19-69 19-71 1(7) 19-67 1(8) 19-65 19-72 1(9) 19-65 1(10) 19-62 1(11) 19-61 1(12) 19-70 1(13) 19-21 1(14) 19-71 1(15) 19-105 1(16) 19-107 1(17) 19-106 1(18)-1(20) 19-108-19-110 1(21) 19-111, 19-112 19-116, 19-117 1(22) 19-111 19-116 1(23)-1(25) 19-113-19-115 1(26) 19-114 1(27), 1(28) 19-22, 19-23 1(29) 19-20, 19-21 1(30) 19-25 1(31) 19-24 1(32)-1(38) 19-26-19-32 1(39), 1(40) 19-34, 19-35 2-1975 2 11-1 3 11-19 3-1975 1 2-46 2-114 1, 2 11-35 6-1975 1, 2 2-3 8-1975 1, 2 15-17 9-1975 1 2-46 2-114 11-1975 1 11-40 12-1975 1-3 11-19 4 11-16 13-1975 1, 2 11-77, 11-78 1-1976 1 11-17 2-1976 3 11-19 4 11-17 4-1976 1 11-19 5-1976 1-5 15-1 2-1977 1-4 15-43-15-46 5 15-48 6(a) 15-49 6(b) 15-60 7 15-47 8-10 15-49-15-51 10-15 15-52-15-57 16-18 15-57-15-59 19 15-61 3-1977 1 App. B, § 12 2 App. B, § 9 5-1977 1 20-139 6-1977 1 2-46 2-114 7-1977 1 11-35 1-1978 1-9 15-100-15-108 11 15-109 3-1978 1 11-35 2 11-17 3 11-19 4 11-35 5-1978 1 2-8 1-1979 1 20-139 2-1979 2 2-184, 2-185 3-1979 1, 2 11-35 3 11-19 4 11-23 4-1979 1 15-104 5-1979 1 20-21-20-23 20-50-20-53 20-80, 20-81 20-106-20-110 6-1979 1 App. B, § 3 App. B, § 9 2 App. B, § 10 3 App. B, § 7 4 App. B, § 11 5 App. B, § 12 9 App. B, § 8 10 App. B, § 10 7-1979 2 2-181-2-183 8-1979 4 App. B, § 10 5 15-103 1-1980 1 13-36-13-42 3-1980 1 13-1 2-6 13-6-13-10 7, 8 13-2, 13-3 8A 13-4 9 13-5 4-1980 1 App. B, § 10 5-1980 2 12-70-12-75 6-1980 1 2-3 7-1980 1, 2 15-102, 15-103 3, 4 15-105 5 15-106 8-1980 1 2-67 9-1980 1 20-139 3 20-194 12-1980 1 2-46 2 2-114 1-1981 1 App. B, § 10 3-1981 1 11-19 4-1981 2 3-48-3-53 3-1982 1 15-107 4-1982 7-11, 7-12 5-1982 1, 2 3-49 3 3-50 1-1983 1 11-42, 11-43 2-1983 1-3 App. B, § 10 3-1983 1 13-37 5-1983 2 11-40 3 11-73 7-1983 1 App. B, § 9 2 App. B, § 9 8-1983 1 App. B, § 9 2 App. B, § 9 9-1983 1 20-140 2 20-196-20-199 10-1983 1 11-44, 11-45 2, 3 11-35 11-1983 1, 2 11-19 14-1983 1 20-140 2 20-196 1-1984 1 App. B, § 10 2-1984 1 11-35 3-1984 2 App. B, § 9 5-1984 1 App. B, § 10 6-1984 1 8-41-8-43 7-1984 1 10-25-10-28 8-1984 1 App. B, § 10 9-1984 1 App. B, § 10 11-1984 1 App. B, § 9 13-1984 3-6 App. B, § 9 3-1985 1, 2 20-139, 20-140 3 20-194 4 20-196 4-1985 1 6-40, 6-41 6-1985 1 12-70 7-1985 1 11-19 8-1985 1 14-1 14-1985 2 App. B, § 10 1-1986 2, 3 20-21 4 20-52 5-7 20-53 8 20-107 2-1986 1 11-40 3-1986 1 11-19 4-1986 1 20-139 2 20-194 5-1986 1 App. B, § 9 6-1986 1 3-54 9-1986 1 20-1 2-1987 1 11-19 3-1987 1 App. B, § 9 2 App. B, § 9 4-1987 1 App. B, § 9 5-1987 1 20-139 7-1987 1 11-19 10-1987 1 11-19 1-1988 1 11-21 2-1988 1 11-16 3-1988 1 11-35 4-1988 1 3-49 5-1988 1 12-76 2 12-74 6-1988 1 11-19 7-1988 1-6 3-84-3-89 2-1989 1 13-11 3-1989 2 2-9 4-1989 1 13-37 5-1989 1, 2 15-103, 15-104 3 App. B, § 10 6-1989 1 11-19 7-1989 1 15-19 2 15-43 3, 4 15-45, 15-46 6, 7 15-49 8 15-50 9 15-53 10, 11 15-57 12 15-58 8-1989 1 11-23 8-18-1989 1 15-104 9-1989 1 App. B, § 1 2 App. B, § 3 3-5 App. B, § 9 6, 7 App. B, § 10 1-1990 1 11-19 2-1990 1 11-40 3-1990 1-4 18-3 6-1990 1 15-101 2-4 15-102 5, 6 15-103 7 15-104 8-10 15-105 11-14 15-106 15, 16 15-107, 15-108 7-1990 1 App. B, § 10 8-1990 1 2-87 9-1990 1 20-50 14-1990 1 11-19 1-1991 1 App. B, § 8 2 App. B, § 10 2-1991 1 App. B, § 9 3-1991 1 20-139 2 20-194 6-1991 2-5 App. B, § 9 8-1991 3 9-1-9-4 9-30, 9-31 9-57-9-67 9-96-9-100 11-1991 1 App. B, § 9 9-92 App. C, § C-6 1-1992 1 20-139 2 20-194 4-1992 1 9-62 7-1992 1 9-68, 9-69 9-1992 1 15-2 1-1993 1 19-62 3-1993 1 11-35 5-1993 15-103 6-1993 1, 2 15-103 5-1994 1 18-2 1-1996 6-40, 6-41 2-1996 1 15-103 1-1997 A 11-35 B 11-46 1-1998 20-139 20-194 2-1998 11-35 4-1998 2-88 1-1999 20-139 20-194 2-1999 2-68, 2-69 1-2000 9-60 App. B, § 10 2-2001 12-19-12-26 01-2002 3-49 02-2002 App. B, § 10 03-2002 12-100-12-112 03-2003 6-40, 6-41 02-2004 20-194 01-2005 App. B, § 8 App. B, § 10 02-2005 20-194 01-2006 9-64 02-2006 11-40 11-40 01-2007 20-139 02-2007 11-40 3-2007 3 20-21 4 20-222-20-238 5-8 20-51 9, 10 20-53 04-2007 2(16-1)-2(16-8) 16-1-16-8 14-16 App. A, Art. III, § 1 17, 18 App. A, Art. III, § 2 18 App. A, Art. IV, § 2 19 App. A, Art. III, § 3 20 App. A, Art. IV, § 2 25, 26 App. A, Art. V 28, 29 App. A, Art. VI, § 2, 
App. A, Art. VI, § 3 3-5 App. B, § 2 6-13 App. B, § 10 1-2008 20-51 02-2008 20-194 1-2009 20-111(b)(3) App. C, § C-6 2-2009 17-7 2-2010 15-110 01-2011 11-47 02-2011 1 20-139 2 20-194 01-2013 1 20-139 2 20-194 02-2013 App. B, §§ 7, 8 App. B, § 10 03-2013       Added 9-62(7) 1-2015 1, 2 20-139 20-194 2-2015 11-19 3-2015 11-16(b) 1-2017 11-19 2-2017 App. B § 13 1-2018       Added 17-7A 2-2018       Added 17-9, 17-10 4-2018 App. C, §§ C-1, C-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES/RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances and resolutions that were included in the 1978 Code as supplemented through Local Law No. 2-2009, adopted October 5, 2009. 
Ordinance/ 
Resolution 
Number Date Section Section 
in Code  3- 2-1942(Res.) 12-7  7- 6-1942(Res.) 20-170 11-16-1953(Res.) 12-1  8- 5-1957(Ord.) 1.00 17-94  3-17-1958(Ord.) 300.00 3-19 300.10 3-19 300.20 3-21 300.30 3-20 300.40 3-22 12-21-1959(Ord.) 9.200-9.207 20-136-20-143  4-17-1961(Mo.) 2-40  6-26-1962(Mo.) 20-194  4-15-1963(Res.) 3-19 3-21  3- 1-1965(Res.) 10-1  5-26-1966(Ord.) 1.00 11-16 1.10 11-16 2.00 11-17 2.10 11-17 3.00 11-35 4.00 11-37 5.00 11-38 6.00 11-39 7.00 11-19, 11-20 7.10 11-36 8.00 11-21 9(f) 11-78 9.00(a)-(c) 11-73 9.00(d) 11-74 11-77 9.00(e) 11-75, 11-76 9.00(f) 11-41 8.2 10- 3-1966(Ord.) 1-3 15-16-15-18 4-6 15-19  4- 1-1969(Res.) 2-70  5-19-1970(Res.) 2-72  5- 7-1973(Res.) 2-1, 2-2  5-30-1973(Res.) 2-73  6- 1-1974(Res.) 2-74-2-84  9-16-1974(Res.) 1 2-39 2-113 2 2-39 2-113 5 2-68, 2-69 10- 7-1974(Res.) 11-18  3-17-1975(Res.) 1 2-209 4 2-210  4- 7-1975(Res.) 2-40  4-17-1975(Res.) 8-3  6-16-1975(Res.) 2-85  5- 3-1976(Res.) 15-2  5-27-1976(Res.) 10-2  4-17-1978(Res.) 2-74-2-86  7-16-1979(Res.) 2-86  6-16-1980(Res.) 2-79, 2-80 2-82, 2-83 10-21-1980(Res.) 20-143  5-28-1981(Res.) 2-74 2-76 2-86 12-21-1981(Res.) 2-74 11-15-1982(Res.) 2-79  6- 1-1983(Res.) 2-79 9-1983 (Res.) App. C, § C-6  5- 7-1984(Res.) 2-46 2-76 2-79 2-82, 2-83 2-114  6-18-1984(Ord.) 10-2  5-20-1985(Res.) 2-83 3-1987 (Ord.) 4, 5 App. B, § 9  4-18-1988(Res.) 2-85  1-23-1989(Res.) 2-83  5-31-1989(Res.) 2-83  3-19-1990(Res.) 2-82  4-15-1991(Res.) 2-83  5-29-1992(Res.) 2-86 App. C, § C-6 11-16-1992(Res.) App. C, § C-6  3-21-1994(Res.) 2-78 12-18-1995(Res.) 2-83  5-20-1996(Res.) 2-209, 2-210 20-194  8-18-1997(Amd.) 20-139 10- 4-1999(Res.) App. C, § C-6 11- 1-1999(Res.) 2-68, 2-69  7-15-2002(Res.) 20-194  3-22-2004(Res.) 2-83  4- 4-2011(Res.)       Added App. C, § C-5(6)-(9)  1- 6-2014(Amd.) App. B, § 13  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the New York Consolidated Laws. 
Agricultural and 
Markets Law 
Section Section 
this Code 353 4-4  
Alcoholic Beverage 
Control Law 
Section Section 
this Code 65 et seq. 12-76  
Civil Practice Law and Rules 
Section Section 
this Code art. 78 12-105 18-31 18-34  
Correction Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 6-C 12-135 168-a 12-136  
Criminal Procedure Law 
Section Section 
this Code 160.10(1.(b)) 4-4  
Election Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 15 7-11 15-100 et seq. Ch. 7 15-126 Ch. 7, Art. II 7-12  
Environmental Conservation Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 8 15-61 8-0105 15-43 15-0101 et seq. App. A, Art. IV, § 2 art. 24 15-1 24-0105 15-1 24-0107 15-1 24-0701 15-1 24-0705 15-1 27-0101 et seq. Ch. 9 27-0903 9-1 29-0101 9-1 34-0703 15-1  
Executive Law 
Section Section 
this Code 290 et seq. 2-88 373 Ch. 6  
General Business Law 
Section Section 
this Code 21 et seq. Ch. 5 25 5-3 32 et seq. Ch. 14 69-l et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V  
General Construction Law 
Section Section 
this Code 10 et seq. 1-3 90 et seq. 1-5  
General Municipal Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 9-A 3-86 3-89, 3-90 art. 12-A 15-18, 15-19 art. 14-G 3-21 art. 14-H 3-19-3-22 art. 18 2-141 50 2-185 78-b Ch. 6, Art. II 119-aa et seq. Ch. 15, Art. IV 119-bb 15-102 181 Ch. 19 185 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. IV 186(3.), 186(4.) 3-85 187-189 3-90 191 3-90 195-c 3-90 199 3-90 234 15-16, 15-17 App. A, Art. II 234 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 15-19 239-f App. A, Art. III, § 2 241 Ch. 13 452(3), 452(4) 20-141, 20-142 452(4) 20-198 453 20-138 475 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II 806 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3  
Municipal Home Rule Law 
Section Section 
this Code 10(1.(ii)e.(3)) 2-9 10(4.)(b.) 1-7 10-28 12-25 12-75 12-143 13-3 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 20(3.) 1-1  
Penal Law 
Section Section 
this Code 7.15 10-28 55.10 1-7 10-28 12-25 12-75 12-143 13-3 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 70.15 1-7 12-25 12-75 13-3 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 80.05 1-7 10-28 12-25 12-75 13-3 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 80.10 1-7 10-28 12-25 12-75 13-3 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 145.00 et seq. 12-5 13-9 175.20 1-6 175.25 1-6 195.05 2-71 240.20(2) 12-24 265.00 et seq. 12-4 12-6 270.10 12-1  
Public Health Law 
Section Section 
this Code 225 10-25 341(3) 10-1 4173 et seq. 10-2  
Public Officers Law 
Section Section 
this Code 3 2-87 18 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 30 2-87 84 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV  
Public 
Service Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 3-B 18-26  
Real Property Tax Law 
Section Section 
this Code 1400-1412 18-1 1402(3.) 18-3 1420(1) 18-1 1420-1442 18-1 1450-1464 18-2  
Retirement and 
Social Security Law 
Section Section 
this Code 75-b 2-72 360-b 2-73  
State Finance Law 
Section Section 
this Code art. 7 2-183  
Tax Law 
Section Section 
this Code 1 et seq. Ch. 18 186-a Ch. 18, Art. II 18-36  
Vehicle and Traffic Law 
Section Section 
this Code 1101, 1102 Ch. 11 1200 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. III 1203 11-39 1203-c 11-40 1220 Ch. 9, Art. IV 1600 Ch. 11 1604 Ch. 11 1640 et seq. Ch. 11 1640(a)1 11-19 1640(a)4 11-17 1640(a)(2) 11-23 1640(a)(20) 11-21 1640-a 11-73 1643 11-16  
Village Law 
Section Section 
this Code 1-102 2-2 3-302 2-68, 2-69 2-113 3-302(1.) 2-44 4-400 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 4-402 2-69 4-408 2-68 4-412 Ch. 2, Art. II 4-412(2.) 2-42 5-518 17-70 5-530 Ch. 18, Art. II 6-600 et seq. Ch. 17 7-706(2.) 2-9 7-722 App. A, Art. II 7-724 App. A, Art. II 7-728 App. A, Art. III, § 1, App. A, Art. III, § 2 7-728 et seq. App. A, Art. I 7-730 App. A, Art. III, § 1 App. A, Art. III, § 3 7-738 App. A, Art. III, § 1 App. A, Art. IV, § 2 14-1400 et seq. Ch. 20 20-2006 1-7 10-28 12-75 12-143 13-11 15-109 16-8 20-108 20-232 712 App. B, § 2 712-a, 712-b App. B, § 2  
