Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 8.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-21-1994 as L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 205, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference
is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in
the "Code of the Village of Lloyd Harbor" to any other local law, ordinance
or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution
had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, and it is
the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor in force on the date of the adoption of this local
law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Lloyd Harbor prior to the effective
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Lloyd Harbor providing for
the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Lloyd Harbor or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Lloyd Harbor appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law establishing a building moratorium, which moratorium
has not already expired.
M. A resolution adopted 6-18-1984 establishing an Ambulance District.
N. A resolution adopted 6-20-1988 creating the position of Code
Enforcement Officer.
O. A resolution adopted 10-26-1986 establishing a fee schedule for
mooring and overnight occupancy permits.
P. A resolution adopted 3-20-1989 providing requirements for a license
and fees for providers of commercial marine services within the waters
of the jurisdiction of the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
§ 1-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Lloyd Harbor and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the
Village Clerk of the Village of Lloyd Harbor by impressing thereon the Seal
of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Lloyd Harbor" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
Q. A resolution adopted 4-18-1988 providing for the pickup of certain
types of garbage on certain days.
R. A resolution adopted 3-20-1989 providing a fee for the pickup of
recyclable metal items.
S. Any legislation adopted subsequent to 8-15-1994.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Lloyd Harbor required to
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village of
Lloyd Harbor upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of
this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) or
imprisonment for a term of not more than fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B, C and D
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one (1) or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. General nomenclature changes. In the following sections of the Code of
the Village of Lloyd Harbor, wherever the words "Building Inspector"
appeared in the text, the phrase "or Code Enforcement Officer" has
been added: §§ 77-8, 120-6C, 120-8A, 175-57, 183-6, 205-36, 205-59,
205-60 and 205-71.
C. Gender neutral language. Throughout the Code of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor gender neutral language has been utilized.
§ 1-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
D. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11D, the following provisions were amended or added:
§§ 1-14B, 1-15A, B and C, 8-2, 8-3, 8-12A, 8-13, 8-32, 8-33A, 8-38, 8-39, 8-40, 44-10, 55-1,
55-4A and B, 55-8A and C, 55-9, 59-2, 59-7, 62-2, 62-3, 62-4, 62-5, 62-6, 62-8, 62-9, 71-3,
71-20, 77-1, 77-3E and F, 103-1, 103-3, 106-1, 109-2, 114-2A, Ch. 116, § 141-4B, Article II
of Ch. 156, §§ 163-1, 168-1, 168-4A, 172-2D and F, 175-8C(1), 175-47A, 175-56, Ch. 190,
§§ 197-4, 197-5, 205-2, 205-7D(1)(d), 205-12B(16), 205-19B(2), 205-41, 205-45, 205-47B,
205-51, 205-57C, 205-71, 205-73 and 205-75. The following original provisions were
deleted: Article 1 of L.L. No. 1-1983, with the exception of Sections 110.07, 110.08, 110.09
and 110.10; Article 9 of L.L. No. 1-1983; Article 12 of L.L. No. 1-1983 and Section 10.9. A
complete description of each change is included in L.L. No. 2-1994, on file in the office of
the Village Clerk.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 1 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 1-14. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly defined or unless the context or subject
matter requires otherwise, the terms used herein shall have the
meanings set forth in the General Construction Law of the State of New
York.
B. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — Any appeal made to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to Chapter 205, Zoning. 2
APPELLANT or EACH APPELLANT — An individual, corporation or
partnership or group thereof submitting an appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals. 3
APPLICANT or EACH APPLICANT — An individual, corporation or
partnership or group thereof submitting an application to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, the Planning Board or the Board of Trustees. 4
APPLICATION — Any application made to the Board of Zoning Appeals,
Planning Board or Board of Trustees. 5
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code
Enforcement Officer of the Village of Lloyd Harbor.[Added
11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, an association or a
corporation.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
POLICE OFFICER — A sworn uniformed member of the Police
Department.[Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
2. Editor's Note: This definition was originally adopted 2-28-1983 as a part of L.L. No.
1-1983, which local law established the Administrative Code of the village. (See Chapter
8.) Said definition was incorporated into this Article 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
3. Editor's Note: This definition was originally adopted 2-28-1983 as a part of L.L. No.
1-1983, which local law established the Administrative Code of the village. (See Chapter
8.) Said definition was incorporated into this Article 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
4. Editor's Note: This definition was originally adopted 2-28-1983 as a part of L.L. No.
1-1983, which local law established the Administrative Code of the village. (See Chapter
8.) Said definition was incorporated into this Article 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
5. Editor's Note: This definition was originally adopted 2-28-1983 as a part of L.L. No.
1-1983, which local law established the Administrative Code of the village. (See Chapter
8.) Said definition was incorporated into this Article 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
§ 1-15. Penalties for offenses.
§ 1-16. Enforcement.
The Village Engineer, Village Highway Superintendent, Village Building
Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer and any other public servant who,
by virtue of office, title or position is authorized or required to enforce
any statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to parking,
licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention and safety, health
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, Suffolk County,
New York.
C. Words in the singular shall be deemed to be plural and words in the
masculine shall be deemed to be in the feminine when the sense of any
circumstance, sentence, clause or phrase so requires.
A. General violations. Any person who violates or fails to perform any duty
imposed by any provision of this Code shall, unless otherwise provided
and except as limited by the Vehicle and Traffic Law, be punished by a
fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) and
imprisonment for a term of not more than fifteen (15) days, or both, for
each and every offense, and in addition thereto, each such violation
shall constitute and is hereby declared to be an offense against such
provisions of this Code. Each day that a violation under any provision of
this Code continues after the violator is provided written notice of the
violation from the village or enforcement officer, such violation on each
such separate day shall be deemed a separate offense. [Amended
11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Zoning violations. A violation of Chapter 205, entitled "Zoning," which
was initially adopted by the Village on January 9, 1927, is hereby
declared to be an offense, punishable by a fine not exceeding three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
five (5) days, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five (5)
years, punishable by a fine not less than three hundred fifty dollars
($350.) nor more than seven hundred dollars ($700.) or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, or both; and upon conviction
for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than seven
hundred dollars ($700.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.)
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both.
Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation. [Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
C. Injunction or civil remedy. In addition, the Board of Trustees may
enforce obedience to any provisions of this Code by injunction or any
other civil remedy. The Board of Trustees may prescribe a civil fine for
each violation of an ordinance or local law not to exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.). [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 1-14 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 1-16
1:10
and sanitation and building, zoning and planning is hereby authorized to
issue appearance tickets relating to enforcement of said statutes, local laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations; provided, however, that peace officers are
hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets relating to enforcement of
any statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation affecting the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Provisions applicable to entire Code — See
Ch. 1, Art. II.
Investment policy — See Ch. 25.
Procurement policy — See Ch. 34.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 106.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 1-16 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 1-16
1:12
ARTICLE I
Accident Review Committee6
§ 8-1. Establishment; membership.
§ 8-2. Chairperson. [Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The Committee shall select a Chairperson, who shall preside at all meetings
and hearings of the Committee.
§ 8-3. Issuance of report. [Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The Committee shall issue a report to the Board of Trustees, which shall
contain findings and recommendations relating to the accident.
A. There is hereby established an Accident Review Committee which shall
review each accident that involves a Village-owned vehicle.
B. Such Committee shall consist of three Village Trustees, the two Police
Commissioners and the Trustee overseeing the Highway and Refuse
Departments.
6. Editor's Note: Original Article I, General Provisions, which immediately preceded this
article, was repealed 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994, with the exception of Sections
110.07, definition of "Appeal"; 110.08, definition of "Appellant" or "Each Appellant";
110.09, definition of "Application"; and 110.10, definition of "Applicant" or "Each
Applicant," which definitions have been incorporated into Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. II. Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted 7-18-1988 as a resolution and
was made a part of this chapter 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:13

ARTICLE II
Historic Commission
§ 8-4. Creation.
The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to create and
to discontinue, by resolution, as a department of the Village government a
Commission to be known as the "Lloyd Harbor Historic Commission."
§ 8-5. Membership; vacancies; compensation; Chairperson.
Such Commission shall consist of not more than seven members who shall
be residents of said Village, to be appointed by the Mayor, each for a
term of one year; and each member of this Commission shall be eligible
for reappointment. Every appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the
unexpired term. Every member of this Commission shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor shall each year designate a Chairperson of said
Commission.
§ 8-6. Powers and functions.
Such Historic Commission shall be vested with the following powers and
functions:
§ 8-7. Employment of professionals.
The Board of Trustees is further authorized to retain or employ professional
consultants, secretaries, clerks or such other personnel as may be
necessary to assist said Commission in carrying out its functions.
A. To investigate, analyze and evaluate all records and matters pertaining
to the history of the Village, the properties therein and the inhabitants
thereof.
B. To ascertain the historical background of all landmarks within the
Village and to make recommendations for the restoration and
preservation of landmarks deemed of historical significance.
C. To obtain, classify and record for safekeeping all old maps, diaries,
letters, deeds, legal documents, works of art, memorabilia,
photographs, paintings, artifacts and all other articles and items of
historical significance relating to the Village.
D. In general, to conserve the historic heritage of the area and to develop,
synthesize and impart to Village residents and to the general public any
and all matters considered worthy of discussion and derived from its
authorized investigations.
E. To exercise such other powers and functions not inconsistent with law
as may, from time to time, be assigned to it by the Board of Trustees.
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8
1:15
§ 8-8. Funds for work.
The Commission shall, from time to time, determine the amount of funds
necessary for its work and request from the Board of Trustees the
appropriation of such funds; provided, however, that no expenditures shall
be made by or contracted for on behalf of said Commission unless and until
the Board of Trustees has appropriated the funds therefor.
§ 8-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-8
1:16
ARTICLE III
Designation of West Neck Road as Historic Site
§ 8-9. Declaration as scenic and historic roadway; preservation.
West Neck Road shall be and hereby is declared to be a scenic and historic
roadway in the Village, and its historic, scenic and cultural resources and
its natural beauty shall be preserved and protected for the benefit and
enjoyment of the inhabitants of the Village.
§ 8-10. Actions with adverse affect prohibited.
No person or governmental entity shall do anything or perform any act
which will adversely affect the historic, scenic and natural beauty of West
Neck Road.
§ 8-11. Maintenance and repairs.
The provisions of § 8-10 shall not be deemed to prohibit normal and usual
maintenance and repairs for West Neck Road.
§ 8-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-11
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Tax on Utility Services
§ 8-12. Imposition of tax.
From, on and after June 1, 1967, there is hereby imposed a tax of 1% on the
gross income or gross operating income of the following:
§ 8-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes:
A. Every utility doing business in the Village which is subject to the
supervision of the New York State Department of Public Service and
which has an annual gross income in excess of $500, except motor
carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under § 240 et seq. of
the Transportation Law. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Every other utility doing business in the Village which has an annual
gross operating income in excess of $500.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated
within the Village.
A.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph
service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the
Village.
B.
In the case of any utility other than described in Subsections A and B
hereof:
Receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or
otherwise, made (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included
in gross income) or service rendered for ultimate consumption
or use by the purchaser in the Village, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is
made or such service is rendered for profit) without any deductions
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost
of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or
discount paid or any other expense whatsoever.
(1)
(2) Profits from the sale of securities.
Profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
or use of or interest in such property.
(3)
Profits from the sale of personal property (other than property
of a kind which properly would be included in the inventory of a
(4)
C.
§ 8-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-13
1:19
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by
the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the
cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount
paid or any other expense whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity; and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by
any other means, except the state, municipality, public districts and
corporations and associations organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of
which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
UTILITY — Includes:
§ 8-14. Applicability.
This article and the tax imposed thereby shall:
taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is
made).
Receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from
sources within the Village (other than such as are received from
a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the
taxpaying utility) without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt
thereof.
(5)
Profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals)
within the Village whatsoever.
(6)
Every person subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Public Service, except omnibus corporations subject to supervision
under § 150 et seq. of the Transportation Law. [Amended 11-21-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A.
Every person who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration,
telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or wires.
B.
Every person who furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration
or telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such
person or are only incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the
public streets.
C.
A. Apply only within the territorial limits of the Village.
§ 8-13 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-14
1:20
§ 8-15. Disposition of revenues.
All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax imposed by this article
shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 8-16. Collection and enforcement; rules and regulations.
§ 8-17. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may reasonably require,
and such records shall be preserved for a period of three years unless the
Village Treasurer directs otherwise.
§ 8-18. Filing of returns; contents.
B. Not apply to and the tax shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the
Village, notwithstanding that some act is necessarily performed with
respect to such transaction within such limits.
C. Be in addition to any and all other taxes.
D. Apply to all subject income received on and after June 1, 1967.
A. The Village Treasurer shall be the chief enforcement officer of this
article and shall make and be responsible for all collections hereunder.
B. The Village Treasurer shall also have the power and authority to make
any rules or regulations or directives not inconsistent with law which, in
his/her discretion, are reasonably necessary to facilitate the
administration of this article and the collection of the taxes imposed
hereby. Copies of all such rules and regulations and directives as may,
from time to time, be promulgated shall be sent, by registered mail, to
all utilities subject to this article which register as such with the Village
Treasurer. All such rules, regulations and directives shall be deemed a
portion of this article.
A. Time of filing. Every utility subject to a tax hereunder shall file on or
before December 24 and June 24 a return for the six calendar months
preceding each return date, including any period for which the tax
imposed hereby or any amendment hereof is effective. Notwithstanding
any of the foregoing provisions of this section, any utility whose average
gross income or gross operating income for the aforesaid six-month
period is less than $3,000 may file a return annually on June 25 for the
12 calendar months preceding each return date, including any period
for which the tax imposed hereby or any amendment hereof is effective.
Any utility, whether subject to tax under this article or not, may be
required by the Village Treasurer to file an annual return.
§ 8-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-18
1:21
§ 8-19. Payment.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed hereby for the period covered by
such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of
the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 8-20. Penalties and interest.
Any utility failing to file a return or a corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Board
of Trustees, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may authorize the
Treasurer to remit all or any portion of such penalty.
§ 8-21. Tax to constitute on operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 8-22. Incorrect returns; failure to file.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, he/she may require at any time a
further or supplemental return which shall contain any data that may be
specified by him/her, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within
20 days after the same is required by notice from him/her or if no return
is made for any period, the Village Treasurer shall determine the amount
due from such information as he/she is able to obtain and, if necessary, may
estimate the tax on the basis of external indexes or otherwise. The Village
Treasurer shall give notification of such determination to the utility liable
for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax
unless the utility against which it is assessed shall, within one year after the
giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a
hearing or unless the Village Treasurer, of his/her own motion, shall reduce
B. Contents. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to
be furnished by him/her for such purpose and shall show thereon the
gross income or gross operating income for the period covered by the
return and such other information, data or matter as the Village
Treasurer may require to be included therein. Every return shall have
annexed thereto a certification by the head of the utility making the
same or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
corporate officer to the effect that the statements contained therein are
true.
§ 8-18 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-22
1:22
the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his/
her decision to the utility liable for such tax.
§ 8-23. Review of final determination.
Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall
be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other reason
whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules if the proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the giving
of notice of such final determination; provided, however, that any such
proceeding under said Article 78 shall not be instituted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon
as may be provided for by local law or resolution, shall be first deposited
and an undertaking filed in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice
of the Supreme Court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding is
dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges
which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 8-24. Notices.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the utility for which it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such utility at the address given by it in
the last return filed by it under this article or, if no return has been filed,
then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the utility to
which addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this section by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 8-25. Refunds.
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the utility liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously
or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be
so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no refund
shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the
Village Treasurer, as hereinbefore provided, unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing, as hereinbefore provided, or of his/her own motion, shall
have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a
proceeding in the manner provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules that
such determination was erroneous or illegal. An application for a refund,
made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the
revision of any tax or penalty complained of, and the Village Treasurer
may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his/her
determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the utility
interested, and it shall be entitled to commence a proceeding to review such
§ 8-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-25
1:23
determination in accordance with the provisions of the following section
hereof.
§ 8-26. Review of proceedings for refunds.
Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally
or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund thereof duly
made to the Village Treasurer and he/she shall have made a determination
denying such refund, such determination shall be reviewable by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules; provided,
however, that such proceeding is instituted within 90 days after the giving
of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was not
previously made and that an undertaking is filed with the Village Treasurer
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 8-27. Time limit on assessment or additional tax; exceptions.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with the intent to
evade the tax, no assessment or additional tax shall be made with respect
to taxes imposed under this article after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that where no
return has been filed as required hereby, the tax may be assessed at any
time.
§ 8-28. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In addition to any other powers herein given the Village Treasurer and in
order to further ensure payment of the tax imposed hereby, he/she shall
have the power to:
§ 8-29. Enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
A. Prescribe the form of all reports and returns required to be made
hereunder.
B. Take testimony and proofs under oath with reference to any matter
hereby entrusted to him/her.
C. Subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books, papers, records and documents.
§ 8-25 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-29
1:24
ARTICLE V
Environmental Quality Review
§ 8-30. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of this Village to exercise its authority
pursuant to Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law (the State
Environmental Quality Review Act).
§ 8-31. Adoption of standards.
The terms and procedures set forth in Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
(Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations) are
hereby adopted by reference by this Village, to be followed in the
implementation of Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law,
reserving the right to adopt, from time to time, after public hearing, such
additional procedures as may be necessary for such implementation.
§ 8-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-31
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Indemnification of Officers and Employees
§ 8-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Court Clerk, Deputy Court Clerk or temporary worker
permitted to perform the duties of the Court Clerk as authorized by the
Board of Trustees or any person working for the Village for wages or a
salary which is subject to the withholding of taxes or any independent
contractor given employee status for the purpose of this chapter by
resolution duly adopted by the Board of Trustees.
OFFICER — The Mayor, Trustee, Planning Board member, Board of Zoning
Appeals member, any duly appointed Commissioner or Deputy
Commissioner, Treasurer, Village Clerk, Village Justice, Acting Village
Justice, Prosecutor, Deputy Prosecutor, Code Enforcement Officer and such
other officers, including deputies, as the Board of Trustees shall
determine.[Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 8-33. Village to indemnify; procedure.
§ 8-34. Effect on insurers and rights and immunities.
This article shall not in any way impair, limit or modify the rights and
obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance or the common law
rights or immunities of a Village Justice, Acting Village Justice, Prosecutor
and Deputy Prosecutor or a Court Clerk, Deputy Court or temporary worker
permitted to perform the duties of the Court Clerk as authorized by the
Board of Trustees.
A. The Village shall save harmless and indemnify all officers and
employees of the Village from financial loss and legal expense arising
out of any claim, demand, suit or judgment by reason of alleged past or
future negligence or other act by such officer or employee, provided
that such officer or employee, at the time damages were sustained, was
acting in the discharge of his/her duties and within the scope of his/her
employment and that such damages did not result from the willful and
wrongful act or gross negligence of such officer or employee and
provided further that such officer or employee shall, within 10 days of
the time he/she is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, deliver the original copy thereof to the attorneys
for the Village. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Upon such delivery, the attorney for the Village or such other attorney
selected by the Board of Trustees may assume control of the
representation of such officer or employee. Such officer or employee
shall cooperate fully with the Village Attorney's defense.
§ 8-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-35
1:27
§ 8-35. Applicability.
The benefits of this article shall inure only to officers and employees of the
Village and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party.
§ 8-36. Benefits to be in addition to statutory benefits.
The benefits provided by this article shall be in addition to the benefits
provided by § 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New York, which
are hereby made applicable to Village officers and employees as defined in
§ 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New York.
§ 8-35 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-36
1:28
ARTICLE VII
Application and Hearing Fees
[Amended 1-20-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
§ 8-37. Charges for consultant services established. [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No. 2-20007]
§ 8-38. Establishment of fees and deposits. [Amended 11-21-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994]
All fees and deposits payable to the Village shall be set forth, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.8
§ 8-38.1. Escrow accounts. [Added 4-17-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
At the time of submission of any application or thereafter, the reviewing
Board may require the establishment of an escrow account, from which
withdrawals shall be made to reimburse the Village for the costs of
A. The Board of Trustees, the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Appeals, in the review of any application, may refer any such
application presented to it for review and consultation to an
engineering, planning, legal, technical or environmental consultant(s)
or professional(s) as such Board shall deem reasonably necessary to
enable it to review such application as required by law. Charges made
by such consultants shall be in accordance with charges usually made
for such services in the metropolitan New York region or pursuant to an
existing contractual agreement between the Village and such
consultant. Charges incurred by the Village in utilizing Village
employees shall be in accordance with the hourly rates upon which the
employee's actual salary is based, including fringe benefits and
reasonable overhead. All such charges shall be paid by the applicant on
submission of a Village voucher.
B. The applicant shall reimburse the Village for the cost of such consultant
services upon submission of a copy of the voucher. In the event that an
application is required to be reviewed by more than one Board, then, in
such event and to the extent practicable, both Boards shall use the
same consultant who shall, in such case, to the extent practicable,
prepare one report providing data, information and recommendations
requested. In all instances, duplications of consultants' reports or
services shall be sought to be avoided wherever practicable in order to
minimize the cost of such consultants' report or services to the
applicant. The above fees are in addition to any and all other fees
required by any other law, rule or regulation or the Village Code.
7. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 8-37, Findings.
8. Editor's Note: Original Article 9, Amendment to § 7-706 of the Village Law to Permit
Publication of Abstract of Zoning Ordinances, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994. For current provisions, see § 7-706,
Subdivision 5, of the Village Law.
§ 8-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-38.1
1:29
consultant services. The applicant shall then provide funds to the Village for
deposit into such account in an amount to be determined by the reviewing
Board based on its evaluation of the nature and complexity of the
application. The applicant shall be provided with copies of any Village
voucher for such services as they are submitted to the Village. When the
balance in such escrow account is reduced to 1/3 of its initial amount,
the applicant shall deposit additional funds into such account to bring the
balance up to the amount of the initial deposit. If such account is not
replenished within 30 days after the applicant is notified, in writing, of the
requirement for such additional deposit, the reviewing Board may suspend
its review of the application. An application shall be deemed incomplete
if any amount shall be outstanding. A building permit or certificate of
occupancy or use shall not be issued unless all consultant services fees
charged in connection with the applicant's project have been reimbursed
to the Village. After all pertinent costs, fees and charges under this section
have been paid, the Village shall refund to the applicant any funds
remaining on deposit.
§ 8-38.2. Collection of fees. [Added 4-17-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
All fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be collected by the Clerk of
the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
§ 8-38.3. Applicability. [Added 4-17-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
This article shall be applicable to the applications pending at the time it
shall become effective, unless the reviewing Board shall determine that
its application would be impracticable, unfair or unjust in the particular
circumstances. Where this article shall be applicable to a pending
application, it shall, in such event, require an applicant only to pay for
consultant services rendered after it shall have become effective.
§ 8-38.1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-38.3
1:30
ARTICLE VIII
Approval of Plats; Development of Filed Plats; Additional Requisites
§ 8-39. Amendment of statute. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
A. Subsection 1 of § 7-730 of the Village Law, as last amended by Chapter
894, Laws of 1972,9 is hereby amended in its application to the Village
of Lloyd Harbor, New York, to read as follows:
§ 7-730 Approval of plats; development of filed plats;
additional requisites
(1) Before the approval by the Planning Board of a plat showing lots,
blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, or the approval
of the development of a plat entirely or partially undeveloped and
which has been filed in the office of the Clerk of the county wherein
such plat is situated prior to the appointment of such Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to approve plats,
such plat or plan of proposed development shall also show, in
proper cases and when required by the Planning Board and
approved by the Board of Trustees, a park or parks suitably located
for playground or other recreation purposes or conservation areas
(for the protection of flora, fauna, trees and wildlife), provided that
such parks or conservation areas do not exceed 10% of the land
area shown on the plat. In the alternative to requiring parks or
conservation areas, the Planning Board may require, subject to the
provisions of § 247 of the General Municipal Law, the granting of an
open space easement to the Village for any space or area on the
plat characterized by natural scenic beauty or whose existing
openness, natural condition or present state, if retained, would
enhance the present or potential value of neighboring properties or
enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources and
habitat. Such open space easement may cover an area in excess of
10% of the area of the development site, provided that its economic
effect on the subdivision does not diminish the value thereof by an
amount more than that which would result if 10% of the area of the
site shown on the plat were dedicated for park purposes. If the
Planning Board determines that a suitable park or parks of
adequate size cannot be properly located in any such plat or are
otherwise not practical or that the establishment of a conservation
area or the granting of an open space easement is not feasible due
to the physical characteristics of the property or that the size of the
park or conservation area or the area of the open space easement is
less than the maximum amount that could be required, the Board
may require, as a condition to approval of any such plat, a payment
to the Village of fees to be determined by the Board of Trustees by
9. Editor's Note: Said § 7-730 of the Village Law was repealed by L. 1992, c. 727, said repeal
to be effective 7-1-1993. Laws of 1992, Chapter 727 also enacted a new § 7-730, effective
7-1-1993.
§ 8-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-39
1:31
resolution or local law, which fees shall constitute a trust fund to be
used by the Board of Trustees exclusively for Village-owned park,
playground, recreation, conservation and open space purposes,
including the acquisition of land. The fees required by the Board
of Trustees shall not exceed 5% of the market value of the
development site at the time of approval. A fee schedule may be
established to provide that where the size of parks or conservation
areas or the area covered by an open-space easement is less than
the maximum amount that could be required, the fees shall be
less than the fees required in cases where no parks, conservation
areas or open space easements are established. In approving such
plats, the Planning Board shall require that the streets, highways
and driveways shall be of sufficient width and suitable grade and
shall be suitably located to accommodate the prospective traffic,
to afford adequate light and air, to facilitate fire protection and
to provide access of fire-fighting equipment to buildings and to be
coordinated so as to compose a convenient system conforming to
the Official Map and properly related to the proposals shown by the
Planning Board on the Master Plan; that the land shown on such
plats shall be of such a character that it can be used safely for
building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood
or other menace; that the plots shown on said plat shall at least
comply with the requirements of the Village zoning ordinances and
regulations; that suitable monuments have been placed at such
block corners and other necessary points as may be required by the
Board, and the location thereof is shown on the map or such plat;
that the parks, conservation areas or open space areas shall be
of reasonable size for Village playgrounds or other recreation and
conservation uses; that all streets or other public places shown on
such plats shall be suitably graded and paved and that sidewalks,
streetlighting standards, curbs, curb cuts, gutters, street trees,
water mains, fire alarm signal devices, including necessary ducts
and cables or other connecting facilities, water mains, sanitary
sewers and storm drains or combined sewers and storm drains
shall be installed all in accordance with standards, specifications
and procedures acceptable to the appropriate Village departments,
except as hereinafter provided, or alternatively that a performance
bond and cash deposit sufficient to cover the full cost of the same
at the expected time of installation and all unpaid Village expenses
relating thereto as estimated by the Planning Board or other
appropriate Village departments designated by the Planning Board
shall be furnished to the Village by the owner; provided, however,
that the amount of cash deposit to be provided shall not exceed
25% of the total estimated cost of said public improvements and
all Village expenses relating thereto. The term "cash deposit" shall
mean the deposit of cash, securities, letters of credit or other
readily negotiable instruments approved by the Village Attorney.
Any interest earned on said cash deposit shall become part of the
cash deposit and inure to the benefit of the cash deposit fund
§ 8-39 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-39
1:32
and follow the disposition of the fund. Said bond and cash deposit
shall be used to insure satisfactory completion and maintenance
of required public improvements until they are accepted by the
municipalities or agencies having jurisdiction thereof, to insure
compliance with the Planning Board decision approving the plat
and to cover the cost of Village engineering inspection and legal
fees necessary to enforce any default thereunder. Upon satisfactory
completion of all of the aforesaid requirements, the bond shall be
canceled and the cash deposit or remaining balance thereof shall
be returned to the owner. The Planning Board may also waive,
subject to appropriate conditions and guaranties, for such period
as it may determine, the provision of any or all such improvements
as, in its judgment of the special circumstances of a particular
plat or plats, are not requisite in the interest of the public health,
safety and general welfare. In the event that the owner shall be
authorized to file the approved plat in sections as provided in
Subdivision 6 of § 7-72810of this article, approval of the plat may
be granted upon the installation of the required improvements in
the section of the plat filed in the office of the County Clerk or
Register or the posting of a performance bond and cash deposit
covering the cost of such improvements. The owner shall not be
permitted to begin construction of buildings in any other section
until such section has been filed in the office of the County Clerk
or Register and the required improvements have been installed in
such section or a performance bond and cash deposit covering the
cost of such improvements is posted. Such performance bond shall
be issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the Board
of Trustees, and such performance bond shall also be approved
by the Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of
execution. Such performance bond shall run and such cash deposit
shall be held for a term to be fixed by the Planning Board, but
in no case for a longer term than three years; provided, however,
that the term of such performance bond and cash deposit may be
extended by the Planning Board with the consent of the parties
thereto. If the Planning Board shall decide at any time during the
term of the performance bond or cash deposit that the extent of
building development that has taken place in the subdivision is
not sufficient to warrant all the improvements covered by such
performance bond and cash deposit or that required improvements
have been installed, as provided in this section and by the Planning
Board, in sufficient amount to warrant reduction in the face amount
of said bond or cash deposit or that the character and extent
of such development required additional improvements previously
waived for a period stated at the time of fixing the original terms
of such bond and cash deposit, the Planning Board may modify
its requirements for any or all such improvements; and the face
10.Editor's Note: Said § 7-728 of the Village Law was repealed by L. 1992, c. 727, said repeal
to be effective 7-1-1993. For provisions on approval of plats in sections effective after
7-1-1993, see § 7-728, Subdivision 9.
§ 8-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-39
1:33
value of such performance bond and cash deposit shall thereupon
be reduced or increased by an appropriate amount so that the
new face value will cover the cost in full of the amended list of
improvements required by the Planning Board, and any security
deposited with the bond and cash deposit may be reduced or
increased proportionately. In the event that any required
improvements have not been installed, as provided in this section,
within the term of such performance bond and cash deposit, the
Village Board may thereupon expend so much of the cash deposit
necessary to complete the required improvements and declare said
performance bond to be in default and to collect the sum remaining
payable thereunder; and upon the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
the Village shall install such improvements as are required and
are covered by such performance bond and cash deposit, but not
exceeding in cost the amount of such proceeds. In making such
determination regarding streets, highways, parks and required
improvements, the Planning Board shall take into consideration
the prospective character of the development, whether dense
residence, open residence, business or industrial.
§ 8-39 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-39
1:34
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement of Legislation
§ 8-40. Amendment of statute. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
A. Subsection 1 of § 20-2006 of the Village Law as last amended by
Chapters 1028 and 1029, Laws of 1974,11 is hereby amended in its
application to the Village of Lloyd Harbor, New York, to read as follows:
§ 20-2006 Violation of ordinances and local laws
(1) Unless otherwise provided by statute, the Board of Trustees may
enforce obedience to its ordinances and to its local laws as follows:
(a) By prescribing therefor civil fines for each violation thereof not
to exceed $250. Each day a violation is continued after the
violator is provided written notice of the violation from the
Village or enforcement officer shall constitute a separate
violation;
(b) By prescribing therefor that each violation thereof shall
constitute a separate violation pursuant to the Penal Law.
However, in no case shall the fine imposed exceed $250 and
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both, for
each separate violation; and each day a violation is continued
after the violator is provided written notice of the violation
from the Village or enforcement officer shall constitute a
separate violation;
(c) In all cases the Board of Trustees may enforce obedience to its
ordinances and local laws by injunction.12
11.Editor's Note: Section 20-2006 of the Village Law has been subsequently amended by L.
1977, c. 961, §§ 1, 2; and by L. 1985, c. 488, § 1.
12.Editor's Note: Original Article 12, Amendment to § 21-2100 of the Village Law to Prescribe
the Contents of a Notice of Hearing, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 8-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-40
1:35

ARTICLE X
Board of Appeals
[Added 2-21-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
§ 8-41. Amendment of statute.
A. The following subsections of § 7-712 of the Village Law, as last amended
by Chapter 80, Laws of 1983,13 are hereby amended in their application
to the Village of Lloyd Harbor, New York, as follows:
§ 7-712 Board of Appeals
(1) Such Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, establish a Board of
Appeals consisting of three or five members, one of whom shall be
appointed Chairperson and another Deputy Chairperson, who shall
act in the absence or inability of the Chairperson for a period of
three years in the case of a three-member board and for five years
in the case of a five-member board. In addition, the Board of
Trustees may appoint, for a one-year term, two alternate members
to the Board of Appeals who shall be entitled to serve and function
in the place and stead of a regular member on account of the
absence or inability of a regular member to serve or function. The
first appointments of members thereto shall be for terms so fixed
that at least one will expire at the end of each official year
commencing at the end of the current such year and continuing in
succeeding years until the entire original appointments run out. At
the expiration of each original appointment, the succeeding
members shall be appointed for three-year terms in the case of a
three-member board and five-year terms in the case of a fivemember
board. No such term shall exceed five years. No person
who is a member of the Village Board of Trustees shall be eligible
for membership on such Board of Appeals. Any member of the
Board may be removed by the Mayor for cause and after public
hearing. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may
determine. Such Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. Meetings of such Board shall be open to
the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the Pubic Officers
Law. Such Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examination and other official actions. Every rule and regulation,
every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in
the office of the Board with the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record. [Amended 7-15-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
13.Editor's Note: Said § 7-712 of the Village Law was repealed by L. 1991, c. 692, § 5, said
repeal to be effective 7-1-1992. The Laws of 1991, Chapter 692, Section 5, also enacted a
new § 7-712, effective 7-1-1992.
§ 8-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-41
1:37
(2) Such Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official charged with the enforcement of any
ordinances or local laws adopted pursuant to this article. It shall
also hear and decide all matters referred to it upon which it is
required to pass under any such local law or ordinance. The
concurring vote of a majority of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant
any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
ordinance or local law or to effect any variation in such local law or
ordinance. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village.
(a) Such appeal shall be taken, within such time as shall be
prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing
with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the
Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(b) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, except actions or proceedings pending in
Village Court or any court of record, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Appeals,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his/her opinion, create a nuisance or cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties
and, not less than 10 days prior to the hearing date, publish
such notice at least once in the official newspaper of the Village
or, if there is no official newspaper designated, the newspaper
designated by the Village Board of Trustees for such purposes
and decide the same within 62 days after the conclusion of the
final hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney. The Board of Appeals may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the premises and to that
end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or
§ 8-41 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-41
1:38
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the local law
or ordinance, the Board of Appeals shall have the power, in
passing upon appeals, to vary or modify the application of any
of the provisions of such local law or ordinance relating to the
use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the
use of land so that the spirit of the local law or ordinance shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial
justice done.
(d) The Board of Appeals may render its decision on any appeal or
application in a short form format, setting forth the Board's
determination and conditions, if any, without enumerating the
findings which formed the basis for its determination. Any
appellant, applicant or person or persons, jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision of the Board, may, within 30 days after
the filing of the short form decision in the office of the Village
Clerk, file a written demand with the Village Clerk requesting
that the Board of Appeals render its decision in a long form
containing findings which were the basis for the Board's
determination. The Village Clerk shall promptly deliver this
written demand to the Chairperson of the Board of Appeals.
The Chairperson shall then cause the long form to be prepared
and, upon its approval by the Board, file it with the Village
Clerk.
In cases where the Board renders a short form decision and no
written demand requesting a long form decision is filed within
the required thirty-day period, the date of filing of the short
form decision with the Village Clerk shall be deemed the date
of the filing of the Board's decision for all purposes. In cases
where the Board renders or is required to render a long form
decision, the date of filing of the long form decision with the
Clerk shall be deemed the date of filing of the Board's decision
for all purposes.
(3) Any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village, with the
approval of the Board of Trustees, or any person or persons jointly
or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may
apply to the State Supreme Court for relief by a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. It must be instituted
within 30 days after the filing of a decision in the office of the
Village Clerk. The Court may take evidence or appoint a referee to
take such evidence as it may direct and to report the same with his/
her findings of fact and conclusions of law if it shall appear that
testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter. The
Court at Special Term shall itself dispose of the cause on the merits,
determining all questions which may be presented for
determination.
§ 8-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-41
1:39
(4) Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear
to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or
with malice in making the decision appealed from.
§ 8-41 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-41
1:40
ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)14
§ 8-42. (Reserved)
§ 8-43. (Reserved)
§ 8-44. (Reserved)
§ 8-45. (Reserved)
§ 8-46. (Reserved)
14.Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Board of Police Commissioners, added 4-15-1985 by L.L. No.
1-1985, was repealed 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.
§ 8-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-46
1:41

ARTICLE XII
Waterfront Consistency Review Law
[Added 10-16-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 8-47. Title.
This article will be known as the "Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor
(Village) Waterfront Consistency Review Law, Article XII of Chapter 8,
Administrative Code."
§ 8-48. Authority and purpose.
§ 8-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIONS — Either Type I or unlisted actions as defined in SEQRA
regulations (6 N.Y.C.R.R. 617.2) which are undertaken by an agency and
which include:
A. This article is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of the
State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive Law).
B. The purpose of this article is to provide a framework for agencies of the
Village to consider the policies and purposes contained in the Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program when reviewing applications for
actions or direct agency actions located in the coastal area; and to
ensure that such actions and direct action are consistent with said
policies and purposes.
C. It is the intention of the Village that the preservation, enhancement and
utilization of the natural and manmade resources of the unique coastal
area of the Village take place in a coordinated and comprehensive
manner to ensure a proper balance between natural resources and the
need to accommodate population growth and economic development.
Accordingly, this article is intended to achieve such a balance,
permitting the beneficial use of coastal resources while preventing loss
of living estuarine resources and wildlife; diminution of open space
areas or public access to the waterfront; erosion of shoreline;
impairment of scenic beauty; losses due to flooding, erosion and
sedimentation; or permanent adverse changes to ecological systems.
D. The provisions of this article shall only apply while there is in existence
a Village Local Waterfront Revitalization Program which has been
adopted in accordance with Article 42 of the Executive Law of the State
of New York.
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or other activities
that may affect the environment by changing the use, appearance or
condition of any natural resource or structure, that:
A.
§ 8-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-49
1:43
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or officer of
the Village.
BOARD — The Board of Trustees or any board of the Village which has been
designated by the Board of Trustees to be responsible for administering the
provisions of this article.
COASTAL AREA — That portion of New York State coastal waters and
adjacent shorelands as defined in Article 42 of the Executive Law which is
located within the boundaries of the Village, as shown on the Coastal Area
map on file in the office of the Secretary of State and as delineated in the
Village of Lloyd Harbor Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form, contained in Appendix
A,15 used by an agency to assist it in determining the consistency of an
action with the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
CONSISTENT — That the action will fully comply with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions and, whenever practicable, will advance one or
more of them.
DIRECT ACTIONS — Actions planned and proposed for implementation
by an agency, such as, but not limited to a capital project, rule making,
procedure making and policy making.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Village, approved by the Secretary
of State pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources
Act (Executive Law, Article 42), a copy of which is on file in the office of the
Clerk of the Village.
§ 8-50. Consistency determination.
Each board, having jurisdiction over an application, shall conduct LWRP
consistency reviews of actions within the LWRP, in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this article.
(1) Are directly undertaken by an agency;
(2) Involve funding by an agency; or
Require one or more new or modified approvals from an agency or
agencies.
(3)
Agency planning and policy making activities that may affect the
environment and commit the agency to a definite course of future
decisions.
B.
Adoption of agency rules, regulations and procedures, including local
laws, codes, ordinances, executive orders and resolutions that may
affect the environment.
C.
D. Any combinations of the above.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 8-49 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-51
1:44
§ 8-51. Review of actions.
A. Whenever a proposed action is located in the Village's coastal area, the
Board shall, prior to approving, funding or undertaking the action,
make a determination that it is consistent with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions set forth in Subsection E herein.
B. Whenever the Board receives an application for approval or funding of
an action or as early as possible in the agency's formulation of a direct
action to be located in the Coastal Area, the applicant, or in the case of
a direct action, the agency, shall prepare a Coastal Assessment Form
(CAF) to assist with the consistency review.
C. The Board shall make the determination of consistency based on the
CAF and such other information as is deemed to be necessary in its
determination. The Board shall have the authority, in its finding of
consistency, to impose practicable and reasonable conditions on an
action to ensure that it is carried out in accordance with this article.
D. Actions to be undertaken within the Coastal Area shall be evaluated for
consistency in accordance with the following LWRP policy standards
and conditions, which are derived from and further explained and
described in Section III of the Village's LWRP, a copy of which is on file
in the Village Clerk's office and available for action during normal
business hours. Agencies which undertake direct actions shall also
consult with Section IV of the LWRP in making their consistency
determination. The action shall be consistent with the following
policies, as applicable:
(1) Revitalize deteriorated and underutilized waterfront areas (Policy
1).
(2) Retain and promote recreational water-dependent uses (Policy 2).
(3) Develop the state's major ports (Policy 3).
(4) Strengthen economic base of smaller harbor areas by encouraging
traditional uses and activities (Policy 4).
(5) Ensure that development occurs where adequate public
infrastructure is available to reduce health and pollution hazards
(Policy 5).
(6) Streamline development permit procedures (Policy 6).
(7) Protect significant and locally important fish and wildlife habitats
from human disruption and chemical contamination (Policies 7 and
8).
(8) Maintain and expand commercial fishing facilities to promote
commercial and recreational fishing opportunities (Policies 9 and
10).
§ 8-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-51
1:45
(9) Minimize flooding and erosion hazards through nonstructural
means, carefully selected, long-term structural measures and
appropriate siting of structures (Policies 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17 and
28).
(10) Safeguard economic, social and environmental interests in the
coastal area when major actions are undertaken (Policy 18).
(11) Maintain and improve public access to the shoreline and to waterrelated
recreational facilities while protecting the environment
(Policies 2, 19, 20, 21 and 22).
(12) Protect and restore historic and archeological resources (Policy
23).
(13) Protect and upgrade scenic resources (Policy 25).
(14) Conserve and protect agricultural lands (Policy 26).
(15) Site and construct energy facilities in a manner which will be
compatible with the environment and contingent upon the need for
a waterfront or water location (Policies 27, 29 and 40).
(16) Prevent ice management practices which could damage significant
fish and wildlife and their habitats (Policy 28).
(17) Protect surface and groundwaters from direct and
indirect discharge of pollutants and from overuse (Policies 30, 31,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37 and 38).
(18) Perform dredging and dredge spoil disposal in a manner protective
of natural resources (Policies 15 and 35).
(19) Handle and dispose of hazardous wastes and effluents in a manner
which will not adversely affect the environment nor expand existing
landfills (Policy 39).
(20) Protect air quality (Policies 41, 42 and 43).
(21) Protect tidal and freshwater wetlands (Policy 44).
E. Consistency findings.
(1) If the Board determines that the action would not be consistent
with one or more of the LWRP policy standards and conditions,
such action shall not be undertaken unless the Board makes a
written finding with respect to the proposed action that:
(a) No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action
to be undertaken in a manner which will not substantially
hinder the achievement of such LWRP policy standards and
conditions;
§ 8-51 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-51
1:46
§ 8-52. Enforcement; stop-work orders.
The Village Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing this article.
No work or activity on a project in the coastal area which is subject
to review under this article shall be commenced or undertaken until the
Village Building Inspector has been presented with a written determination
from the Board that the action is consistent with the Village's LWRP policy
standards and conditions. In the event that an activity is not being
performed in accordance with this article or any conditions imposed
thereunder, the Village Building Inspector shall issue a stop-work order
and all work shall immediately cease. No further work or activity shall be
undertaken on the project so long as a stop-work order is in effect.
§ 8-53. Penalties for offenses.
§ 8-54. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the adoption of the Village's
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP).
(b) The action would be undertaken in a manner which will
minimize all adverse effects on such LWRP policy standards
and conditions;
(c) The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP policy
standards and conditions; and
(d) The action will result in an overriding Village, regional or
statewide public benefit.
(2) Such a finding shall constitute a determination that the action is
consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions.
F. Each Board shall maintain a file for each action made the subject of a
consistency determination. Such files shall be made available for public
inspection upon request.
A. A person who violates any of the provision of, or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by, this article shall have committed a
violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for a conviction of a
first offense and punishable by a fine of $1,000 for a conviction of a
second or subsequent offense. For the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, each week of continuing
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The Village Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this article. Any civil
penalty shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
§ 8-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-54
1:47

ARTICLE XIII
Site and Building Permit Review Board
[Added 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
§ 8-55. Establishment.
§ 8-56. Meetings.
A. There is created a Site and Building Permit Review Board (Permit
Review Board) which shall consist of five members and two alternate
members. [Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
B. The members and alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the consent of the Board of Trustees. The term of office of
each member shall be for a one-year term. [Amended 6-17-2002 by
L.L. No. 2-2002]
C. The alternate members may attend all functions of the Board and may
serve and vote in all matters as their number is needed in the absence
of any regular member or members. [Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
D. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
E. The Mayor shall appoint a Chairman from the members of the Permit
Review Board.
F. The Board of Trustees may designate or retain one or more architects,
engineers, designers or technically skilled individuals to advise and
participate in the Permit Review Board proceedings, including review
of plans and deliberations. The fees of such professionals or individuals
shall be reimbursed to the Village by the applicant. The designated
technical advisor shall not vote in regard to any application, unless he is
an appointed member of the Permit Review Board.
G. The Permit Review Board may adopt, amend or repeal rules,
regulations and procedures subject to approval by the Board of
Trustees that are necessary and reasonable for the implementation,
interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
article.
H. Until such time as the Permit Review Board has been fully appointed
and constituted, all powers granted hereunder and all the functions and
duties to be performed pursuant to the provisions of this article will be
vested with the Village Planning Board.
A. Meetings of the Permit Review Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board determines.
B. The meetings of the Permit Review Board will be open to the public.
§ 8-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-56
1:49
§ 8-57. Jurisdiction and referral procedures.
C. Three members of the Permit Review Board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
D. The Permit Review Board will keep minutes of its proceedings and the
vote of each member, which minutes shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.
A. Jurisdiction. The Permit Review Board shall have the exclusive
authority to review and approve proposed construction and other
activities within the Village pursuant to Article IV, Article VII, Article
VIII, Article XVI and Article XVII of Chapter 205 of the Code of the
Village, and grading, earth removal or other activities requiring a
permit under Article XXI of Chapter 205.
§ 8-56 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-57
1:50
ARTICLE XIV
Employees
[Added 7-16-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 8-58. Reimbursement of Village employees for accumulated sick
and vacation time.
The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, permit employees who have
provided 10 years of continued service to the Village and who are not
subject to a collective bargaining agreement, to be reimbursed for their
accumulated sick time and vacation time upon severance or resignation
on such terms and conditions the Board deems, from time to time, to be
appropriate and in the interest of the Village.
§ 8-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-58
1:51
Chapter 13
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment policy — See Ch. 25. Procurement policy — See Ch. 34.
§ 8-58 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 8-58
13:52
ARTICLE I
Payment Prior to Audit
[Adopted 10-16-1991]
§ 13-1. Payment of certain claims permitted.
Vendor claims for public utility services, postage, freight and express
charges may be paid by the Chief Fiscal Officer, on approval of the official
whose department has received such goods and services, prior to audit by
the Board of Trustees.
§ 13-2. Payment to obtain discount or avoid penalty.
In view of the fact that Village Board meetings are held once a month and in
order to take advantage of discounts offered by vendors for prompt payment
and in order to avoid the accrual of penalties for lack of timely payment, any
claim where a discount would be lost or where a penalty would be incurred
should payment of such claim await the regular monthly meeting of the
Village Board may be paid by the Chief Fiscal Officer prior to such audit
on the written approval of the official whose department has received the
goods or services for which claim is made.
§ 13-3. Presentation for audit.
All such claims which have been paid prior to audit by the Board of Trustees
must be presented for audit at the next regular Village Board meeting, and
the claimant and the official approving payment of the same shall be jointly
and severally liable for any amount disallowed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 13-1 CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF § 13-3
13:53
Chapter 25
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procurement policy — See Ch. 34.
§ 25-1. Applicability.
This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any other entity or
individual.
§ 25-2. Objectives.
The primary objectives of the village's investment activities are, in priority
order, to:
§ 25-3. Delegation of authority.
The Village Board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Treasurer, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on a data base or records incorporating description and amounts of
investments, transaction dates and other relevant information and regulate
the activities of subordinate employees.
§ 25-4. Prudence.
A. Conform to all applicable federal, state and other legal requirements
(legal).
B. Adequately safeguard principal (safety).
C. Provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity).
D. Obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the village to govern effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
§ 13-3 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 25-4
25:54
§ 25-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the village to diversify its deposits and investments by
financial institution, by investment instrument and by maturity scheduling.
§ 25-6. Internal controls.
§ 25-7. Designation of depositories.
The banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys up to
the maximum amounts are:
Depository Name Maximum Amount Officer
Chemical Bank ---- John Materazo
Bank of New York ---- Cathi Davignon
§ 25-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law § 10, all
deposits of the village, including certificates of deposit and special time
deposits, in excess of the amount insured under the provisions of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be secured:
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of
the investment program or which could impair their ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
A. It is the policy of the village, for all moneys collected by any officer or
employee of the village, to transfer those funds to the Treasurer within
five (5) days of deposit or within the time period specified in law,
whichever is shorter.
B. The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute,
assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss
from unauthorized use or disposition and that transactions are
executed in accordance with management's authorization and recorded
properly and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.
A. By a pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value as
provided by General Municipal Law § 10 equal to the aggregate amount
of deposits from the categories designated in Appendix A to the policy.16
16.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 25-4 INVESTMENT POLICY § 25-8
25:55
§ 25-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
§ 25-10. Permitted investments.
B. By an eligible irrevocable letter of credit issued by a qualified bank
other than the bank with the deposits in favor of the village for a term
not to exceed ninety (90) days with an aggregate value equal to one
hundred forty percent (140%) of the aggregate amount of deposits and
the agreed-upon interest, if any. A qualified bank is one whose
commercial paper and other unsecured short-term debt obligations are
rated in one (1) of the three (3) highest rating categories by at least one
(1) nationally recognized statistical rating organization or by a bank
that is in compliance with applicable federal minimum risk-based
capital requirements.
C. By an eligible surety bond payable to the village for an amount at least
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the aggregate amount of
deposits and the agreed-upon interest, if any, executed by an insurance
company authorized to do business in New York State, whose claimspaying
ability is rated in the highest rating category by at least two (2)
nationally recognized statistical rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by
Chemical Bank and Bank of New York (the depository and/or a thirdparty
bank or trust company) subject to security and custodial
agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure village deposits, together with agreed-upon interest,
if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of such
deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under which
the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the village to exercise its
rights against the pledged securities. In the event that the securities
are not registered or inscribed in the name of the village, such
securities shall be delivered in a form suitable for transfer or with an
assignment in blank to the village or its custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company or agent of and custodian for the village will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or
trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with
or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other liabilities.
The agreement should also describe that the custodian shall confirm
the receipt, substitution or release of the securities. The agreement
shall provide for the frequency of revaluation of eligible securities and
for the substitution of securities when a change in the rating of a
security may cause ineligibility. Such agreement shall include all
provisions necessary to provide the village a perfected interest in the
securities.
§ 25-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 25-10
25:56
§ 25-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
The village shall maintain a list of financial institutions and dealers
approved for investment purposes and establish appropriate limits to the
amount of investments which can be made with each financial institution
or dealer. All financial institutions with which the village conducts business
must be credit worthy. Banks shall provide their most recent consolidated
report of condition (call report) at the request of the village. Security
dealers not affiliated with a bank shall be required to be classified as
reporting dealers affiliated with the New York Federal Reserve Bank as
primary dealers. The Treasurer is responsible for evaluating the financial
position and maintaining a listing of proposed depositories, trading partners
and custodians. Such listing shall be evaluated at least annually.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the village authorizes the
Treasurer to invest moneys not required for immediate expenditure for
terms not to exceed its projected cash flow needs in the following types
of investments:
(1) Special time deposit accounts.
(2) Certificates of deposit.
(3) Obligations of the United States of America.
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America.
(5) Obligations of the State of New York.
(6) Obligations issued pursuant to Local Finance Law § 24.00 or 25.00
(with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality, school
district or district corporation other than the village.
(7) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the
general state statutes governing such entities or whose specific
enabling legislation authorizes such investments.
(8) Certificates of participation (COP's) issued pursuant to General
Municipal Law § 109-b.
(9) Obligations of this local government but only with any moneys in a
reserve fund established pursuant to General Municipal Law § 6-c,
6-d, 6-e, 6-h, 6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m or 6-n.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the village within such times as the proceeds will be needed to meet
expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were provided and, in
the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of bonds or notes,
shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the village within two
(2) years of the date of purchase.
§ 25-10 INVESTMENT POLICY § 25-12
25:57
§ 25-12. Purchase of investments.
§ 25-13. Repurchase agreements.
Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the following restrictions:
A. The Treasurer is authorized to contract for the purchase of
investments:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5G of the
General Municipal Law where such program meets all the
requirements set forth in the Office of the State Comptroller
Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been authorized
by the governing board.
(3) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized
trading partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the governing
board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the village, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held in the
custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only n accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the village by the bank or
trust company. Any obligation held in the custody of a bank or trust
company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial agreement as
described in General Municipal Law § 10.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent of and custodian for the village, will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or
trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with
or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other liabilities.
The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall confirm the
receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall include all
provisions necessary to provide the village a perfected interest in the
securities.
A. All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a master
repurchase agreement.
B. Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to
do business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
§ 25-12 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 25-13
25:58
Chapter 32
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 116.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 205.
C. Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United States of
America and obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America.
D. No substitution of securities will be allowed.
E. The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
§ 25-13 PLANNING BOARD § 25-13
32:59

ARTICLE I
Alternate Members
[Adopted 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 32-1. Supersession of statute.
Subdivision 16 of § 7-718 of the Village Law, which section was last
amended by Chapter 137 of the Laws of 1998, is hereby superseded and
amended in its application to the Village of Lloyd Harbor to read, in part, as
follows:
§ 7-718
16. Alternate members. a. A village board of trustees may, by local law or
as a part of the local law creating the planning board, establish alternate
planning board member positions for purposes of substituting for a
member in the event such member is unable to participate because of a
conflict of interest or is otherwise absent. Alternate members of the
planning board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of
the board of trustees, for terms established by the village board of
trustees.
b. The chairperson of the planning board may designate an alternate
member to substitute for a member when such member is unable to
participate because of conflict of interest or is otherwise absent on an
application or matter before the board. When so designated, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member
of the board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of the
initial planning board meeting at which the substitution is made.
c. All provisions of this section relating to planning board member
training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest,
compensation, eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, and service on other
boards, shall also apply to alternate members.
§ 32-2. Establishment of position.
Pursuant to § 7-718, Subdivision 16, of the Village Law as amended above,
the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor hereby
establishes the position of alternate member of the Planning Board.
§ 32-1 PLANNING BOARD § 32-2
32:61
Chapter 34
PROCUREMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims — See Ch. 13. Investment policy — See Ch. 25.
§ 34-1. Adoption of policy; applicability. [Amended 7-18-2011 by
L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 34-2. Determination of type of purchase.
§ 34-3. Most economical purchases to be sought.
The village will seek the most economical purchases, including purchases
under state and county contracts, where the latter are suitable and
practicable.
§ 34-4. Items not subject to competitive bidding. [Amended
7-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
A. The Village of Lloyd Harbor does hereby adopt pursuant to the
requirements set forth in § 104-b of the General Municipal Law the
following procurement policy which is intended to apply to all goods
and services which are not required by law to be publicly bid.
B. The Mayor, Village Treasurer, Village Clerk, or such individual so
designated by resolution of the Board of Trustees ("Reviewing Party")
shall determine whether the purchase of any goods or services on
behalf of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, is subject to §§ 103 or 104 of the
General Municipal Law, or any general, special or local law legislation.
A. Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine
whether it is a purchase contract or a public works contract. Once that
determination is made, a good faith effort will be made to determine
whether it is known or can be reasonably expected that the aggregate
amount to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject to
competitive bidding, taking into account past purchases and the
aggregate amount to be spent in a year.
B. Purchase contracts involve the purchase of goods, supplies or
equipment. Public works contracts involve services, labor or
construction. Where a contract includes both goods and services, the
general rule is that if the contract involves substantial services or
specialized skills, it will be considered a public works contract. But, if
service or labor is only a minimal or incidental part of the contract, it
will be considered a purchase contract.
§ 32-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 34-4
32:62
§ 34-5. Methods of purchase.
A. The following items are not subject to competitive bidding pursuant to §
103 of the General Municipal Law: purchase contracts in either a single
purchase or when the aggregate cost of total purchases of identical
products reasonably anticipated to occur in a single fiscal year is under
$20,000, and public works contracts for a single contract or for
identical public works contracts reasonably anticipated to occur in a
single fiscal year under $35,000; emergency purchases; professional
services or services requiring special skill and expertise; the acquisition
of goods or services available only from one source; purchases off of
state and county contracts; and surplus and secondhand purchases
from another governmental entity.
B. The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding
pursuant to the exceptions contained in § 103 of the General Municipal
Law will be documented, in writing, by the reviewing party when
making the purchase. This documentation may include written or
verbal quotes from vendors, a memo from the purchaser indicating how
the decision was arrived at, a copy of the contract indicating the source
which makes the item or service exempt, a memo from the purchaser
detailing the circumstances which led to an emergency purchase or any
other written documentation that is appropriate. To document an
emergency purchase, it must be shown that the purchase was
necessary because of an accident or other unforeseen occurrence and
that public buildings, public property or the life, health, safety or
property of the residents would have been adversely affected if
immediate action had not been taken.
A. The following method of purchase will be used, when required by this
chapter, in order to achieve the highest savings: [Amended 7-18-2011
by L.L. No. 1-2011]
Estimated Amount of Purchase
Contract Method
$500 to $4,999 Verbal quotations
$5,000 to $19,999 Written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
Estimated Amount of Public
Works Contract Method
$1,000 to $14,999 Verbal quotations
$15,000 to $34,999 Written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
B. A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
§ 34-4 PLANNING BOARD § 34-5
32:63
§ 34-6. Documentation of actions.
§ 34-7. Exceptions.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the
procurement policy may contain circumstances when or types of
procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body, the
solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interests of the municipality. In the following circumstances it may not be
in the best interests of the Village of Lloyd Harbor to solicit quotations or
document the basis for not accepting the lowest bid.
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement.
A. Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement made under § 34-4B.
B. Documentation and an explanation are required whenever a contract is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offerer. This
documentation will include an explanation of how the award will
achieve savings or how the offerer was not responsible. A determination
that the offerer is not responsible shall be made by the purchaser and
may not be challenged under any circumstances.
A. Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise.
(1) The individual or company must be chosen based on accountability,
reliability, responsibility, skill, education and training, judgment,
integrity and moral worth. These qualifications are not necessarily
found in the individual or company that offers the lowest price, and
the nature of these services is such that they do not readily lend
themselves to competitive procurement procedures.
(2) In determining whether a service fits into this category, the Board
of Trustees shall take into consideration the following guidelines:
(a) Whether the services are subject to state licensing or testing
requirements.
(b) Whether substantial formal education or training is a
prerequisite to the performance the of services.
(c) Whether the services require a personal relationship between
the individual and municipal officials.
(3) Professional or technical services shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Services of an attorney.
(b) Services of a physician.
§ 34-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 34-7
32:64
§ 34-8. Effective date; annual review. [Amended 7-18-2011 by L.L.
No. 1-2011]
(c) Technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans,
maps and estimates.
(d) Securing insurance coverage and/or services of an insurance
broker.
(e) Services of a certified public accountant.
(f) Investment management services.
(g) Printing services involving extensive writing, editing or
artwork.
(h) Computer software or programming services for customized
programs or services involved in substantial modification and
customizing of prepackaged software.
B. Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately, and a delay in order to seek
alternate proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of
the residents. This subsection does not preclude alternate proposals if
time permits.
C. Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods from any source. If
alternate proposals are required, the village is precluded from
purchasing surplus and secondhand goods at auctions or through
specific advertised sources where the best prices are usually obtained.
It is also difficult to try to compare prices of used goods, and a lower
price may indicate an older product.
D. Goods under five hundred dollars ($500.) and services under one
thousand dollars ($1,000.). The time and documentation required to
purchase through this chapter may be excessively burdensome from an
administrative point of view, considering the quantity of purchases
made throughout the year, and would, therefore, not be in the best
interests of the village. In addition, it is not likely that such de minimus
contracts would be awarded based on favoritism.
E. There is only a single source from which the product or service is
readily available. [Added 7-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
F. There are no other goods or services available in the marketplace that
do, or will provide substantially equivalent or similar service or
products. [Added 7-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
G. There is no reasonable possibility of local competition for the purchase.
[Added 7-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 34-7 PLANNING BOARD § 34-8
32:65
Chapter 44
SMOKING POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 8.
§ 44-1. Smoking prohibited except in designated areas.
Smoking is prohibited throughout the facilities, except in designated areas
identified by SMOKING PERMITTED signs.
§ 44-2. Indoor enclosed work areas.
Smoking is prohibited in any indoor enclosed work area occupied by more
than one (1) person unless all employees in such an area agree to allow
smoking. The rights of a nonsmoker to a smoke-free work area shall prevail.
§ 44-3. Common areas.
Smoking is also prohibited in all employee rest rooms, hallways and areas
containing office equipment used in common.
§ 44-4. Conference and meeting rooms; vehicles.
Smoking is also prohibited in conference or meeting rooms and municipal
vehicles used by more than one (1) person unless all occupants agree to
allow smoking.
§ 44-5. Designation of enclosed smoking room.
An enclosed smoking room may be designated upon request if space is
available.
§ 44-6. Lunchrooms and lounges.
Employee lunchrooms and lounges will contain nonsmoking areas large
enough to meet demand.
A. This chapter shall go into effect July 18, 2011, and will be reviewed
annually.
B. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, make future changes to the
procurement policy to conform to the General Municipal Law.
§ 34-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 44-7
44:66
§ 44-7. Conflicts; complaints.
Conflicts should be brought to the attention of the appropriate supervisory
personnel. Employees may also file a formal complaint with the Suffolk
County Department of Health Enforcement Officer.
§ 44-8. Penalties for offenses.
Employees found smoking outside of designated smoking areas will be
considered in violation of this chapter and may be subject to penalties.
§ 44-9. Posting and distribution of chapter.
Copies of this chapter will be posted and distributed to all employees and to
all prospective employees upon request.
§ 44-10. Agent for enforcement.17
A person shall be designated as an agent to assist in the enforcement of this
chapter by notifying employees who are in violation.
§ 44-11. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor. All amendments shall be in conformance with New
York State law, and employees will be notified accordingly.
Chapter 47
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 47-1. Authorization for establishment.
The Village Justice is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic Violations
Bureau for the village.
§ 47-2. Powers and duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau, when so established, shall be authorized to
dispose of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, when
such offenses shall not constitute a misdemeanor or a felony, as follows:
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 44-7 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 47-2
47:67
§ 47-3. Service of summons.
Any summons charging a parking violation may be served upon the violator
in person or may be affixed to the motor vehicle involved in the violation.
§ 47-4. Failure to answer summons.
A. By permitting a person charged with an offense within the limitations
hereinabove stated to answer within a period of ten (10) days at the
Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or by written power of
attorney in the form hereinafter set forth, by paying the fine designated
by the Village Justice for such violation and, in writing, waiving a
hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the
person in charge of the Traffic Violations Bureau to make such a plea
and pay such a fine in court; provided, however, that any person who
shall have been, within the preceding twelve (12) months, adjudged
guilty of a number of parking violations in excess of such number as
may be designated by the Village Justice or of three (3) or more traffic
violations, other than parking violations, shall not be permitted to
appear and answer to a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations
Bureau but shall be required to appear in court at a time to be specified
by the Bureau.
B. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Traffic
Violations Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the
violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
A. If, in any parking violation case where the summons was affixed to the
motor vehicle and not served personally, no one answers, as
hereinabove provided, within the time designated in the summons, the
Traffic Violations Bureau shall send a letter by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the registered owner of such vehicle as disclosed
by the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles, enclosing a copy of
the summons and warning the registered owner:
(1) To answer the summons in the manner hereinabove provided
within a designated time which shall not be less than six (6) days
from the date of mailing of said letter.
(2) That if the registered owner is not the offender, the registered
owner will be held responsible for the appearance of the offender.
(3) That if the summons is not answered in the designated time, a
warrant shall be issued for the registered owner's arrest fifteen
(15) days from the date of receipt of said letter.
B. If any person served personally with a summons under this chapter or if
any registered owner of the motor vehicle involved who is served and
notified as provided in Subsection A does not answer, as hereinabove
provided, within the designated time, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall
cause a complaint to be entered against said person forthwith and shall
§ 47-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 47-4
47:68
§ 47-5. Additional duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall perform such other or additional duties
as shall be prescribed by law, by the Village Justice or by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 47-6. Power of attorney.
The power of attorney referred to in this chapter shall be in the following
form:
POWER OF ATTORNEY
The undersigned hereby acknowledges service of the summons herein,
waives a hearing in court, pleads guilty to the offense charged in said
summons and authorizes the Village Clerk of the Traffic Violations Bureau
of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor to appear in court for me, to
make such plea of guilty on my behalf and to pay the prescribed fine using
the money enclosed.
Signed___________________________________
Print your name__________________________
Address__________________________________
§ 47-7. Scope.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the Traffic
Violations Bureau to deprive a person of his/her right to counsel or to
prevent him/her from exercising his/her right to appear in court to answer
to, explain or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance,
rule or regulation.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 55
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 103. Noise — See Ch. 141.
§ 55-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
apply for a warrant to be issued for said person's arrest and appearance
before the court.
§ 47-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 55-1
55:69
ALARM SYSTEM — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented
which is used to transmit an emergency signal directly or indirectly to the
Police Department or Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM — Any emergency message or signal which is transmitted
directly or indirectly to the Police Department or Fire Department to which
the Police Department or Fire Department responds and which signal or
message is not the result of a robbery, burglary, other crime, fire or
emergency.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department or Fire District which protects
a designated area of the village. 18
POLICE COMMISSIONER — The Chairperson of the Board of Police
Commissioners. 19
§ 55-2. Permit required. [Amended 2-3-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
No person, firm or corporation shall install, sell, lease, operate or maintain
an alarm system in the village unless a permit has first been obtained for
the installation, operation or maintenance of such system.
§ 55-3. Termination of audible sound after certain time required.
[Added 2-3-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of real property in the
village to:
§ 55-4. Permit application.
A. Install, maintain or use upon said real property an audible burglar
alarm or audible fire alarm that is not provided with a device that will
automatically terminate such alarm after fifteen (15) minutes of
continuous sound audible beyond the boundaries of such property; or
B. Suffer or permit such burglar alarm or fire alarm to emit sound audible
beyond the boundaries of such real property for a continuous period of
more than fifteen (15) minutes, whether or not said alarm has been
equipped with the automatic cutoff device required by Subsection A
above.
A. Type of permit. Any owner, lessee or occupant of property located in the
village who wishes to operate, maintain or install an alarm system on
said property shall file an application with the Police Department on a
form to be prescribed by the village. If such application is approved by
the Police Department or, in the case of a fire alarm system, by the Fire
Department, the Police Department shall grant a revocable permit to
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 55-1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 55-4
55:70
§ 55-5. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees may promulgate rules and regulations that may
reasonably be necessary for the purpose of assuring the efficiency and
effectiveness of alarm systems and for the proper administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 55-6. Revocation of permit.
The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall have the power to suspend or
revoke any permit issued for violation of this chapter or of any rules and
regulations or for the failure of an owner or lessee of an alarm system
to maintain the efficiency and effectiveness of such alarm equipment and
alarm installation which may place any unreasonable and undue burden or
hardship on the Police Department or Fire Department. No part of a permit
fee shall be refunded when a permit is suspended or revoked.
§ 55-7. Installation and removal of facilities.
the owner, lessee or occupant for such operation, maintenance or
installation.20
B. Permit fees. Each applicant shall pay to the village a permit fee as shall
be set forth, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
upon the filing of the application.21
C. A permit shall expire only when an alarm system is replaced or
modified.
D. Existing alarm systems. Application for permits for alarm systems
existing in premises on the effective date hereof shall be made to the
village within ninety (90) days of said date.
A. Telephone connections. No alarm system shall be connected to or use
any telephone line connected, either directly or indirectly, to Police or
Fire Department headquarters, except those lines authorized by the
Police Department or the Fire District.
B. Cost of installation and removal of equipment. The installation, rental
and maintenance or removal of alarm systems permitted by this
chapter, including the connection to or removal of equipment from
Police Department or Fire Department headquarters, shall be made at
no cost to the village.
C. Relocation of Police Department headquarters. The village shall not be
responsible for any expense incurred by the owner or lessee or licensee
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 55-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 55-7
55:71
§ 55-8. False alarms.
for moving or reconnecting alarm systems to a relocated Police
Department headquarters.
D. Installation of system at Police Department headquarters. The Police
Department is hereby authorized to prescribe the location and the
manner of installation of all telephone lines, cabinets, accessories,
connections and equipment of an approved alarm system into or within
police headquarters. Actual expenses incurred by the Police
Department for the maintenance of panel boards, cabinets and other
equipment to facilitate any alarm system shall be paid by the permit
holder in addition to any permit fees.
A. 22Charges. Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm system on
his/her or its premises shall pay to the village a charge as set forth, from
time to time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees for each and every
false alarm to which the Police Department or, in the case of a fire alarm
system, the Fire Department responds in each calendar year, as follows:
(1) First and second false alarm in the first month after issuance of the
permit: no charge.
(2) Thereafter:
(a) First false alarm of each calendar year: no charge.
(b) Second false alarm of each calendar year: See Board of
Trustees resolution.
(c) Third and each subsequent false alarm of each calendar year:
See Board of Trustees resolution.
B. Whenever the village receives notice that a person has a first false
alarm under Subsection A(2) above, the Police Department shall mail a
written notice, by regular mail, to the person's mailing address stating
the prescribed penalties for false alarms.
C. Thereafter, for each and every chargeable false alarm, the Police
Department shall mail a notice to said person by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the person's mailing address requesting payment
of the monetary charge for each and every chargeable false alarm. The
notice shall state that if payment is not received by the village within
thirty (30) days from the date the person receives the notice (or if the
person refuses delivery of the notice, thirty (30) days from the date of
the refusal), the person will be subject to the maximum fine as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.23
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 55-7 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 55-8
55:72
§ 55-9. Penalties for offenses.24
Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be punishable by a fine
as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, of this Code to
the extent permitted by law. It shall be a separate violation of this chapter
if the owner, lessee or user of any alarm system fails to pay any separate
charge within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of the same or
refuses to accept delivery of said notice.
Chapter 59
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 141.
D. The full monetary charge shall become the property of the village thirty
(30) days after payment of the same unless before such time the person
elects to make application to the Mayor or the Mayor's designee for
review of said charge. If the Mayor or the Mayor's designee sustains
said charge or refuses to review the same, then the person may, within
twenty (20) days of such determination, make application to the Village
Court requesting a hearing concerning said charge.
E. The above charges shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 55-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 55-9
55:73

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 15 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 59-1. Findings.
It is hereby declared and found that the health, welfare and safety of the
residents of the Village of Lloyd Harbor require the control of dogs which
have heretofore run at large in the Village.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris.[Amended 11-21-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994]
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog.
OWNER'S PREMISES — The premises of the owner of a dog or the premises
owned by any other person who has given permission for the use of his/her
premises. The term "premises" excludes any portion of the property lying in
the bed of every private road open to public motor vehicle traffic.
§ 59-3. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow said dog, whether or
not licensed, to be off said owner's premises unless said dog is accompanied
by a person and is restrained by a leash or any other physical restraint.
§ 59-4. Seizure of dogs running at large.
A Dog Warden or any peace officer shall seize any dog found off the owner's
premises and not accompanied by a person and restrained by a leash or
other physical restraint. All proceedings by the Dog Warden or peace officer
subsequent to seizure shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
§ 59-5. Redemption; sale or destruction of unredeemed dogs.
A. The owner of a dog seized may redeem the dog within seven days of the
seizure upon payment to the Town Clerk of the Town of Huntington of a
fee in the amount prescribed by the Clerk for the cost of said seizure.
B. If the dog is not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog
and the dog shall be sold or destroyed by the Dog Warden or peace
officer. In the case of sale, the purchaser must pay a purchase price as
prescribed by law to the Town Clerk and also obtain a license for the
dog.
§ 59-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-6
55:75
§ 59-6. Ownership. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
For the purpose of this article, it shall be presumptive evidence that any dog
found off the premises of the owner is owned by all adults residing at the
residence of the owner.
§ 59-7. Liability. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
No action shall be maintained to recover the possession or value of a dog
or for damages for injury or for compensation for destruction of a dog
destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this article. No liability shall be
imposed on the Dog Warden of the Town of Huntington nor the Town of
Huntington nor any employee of the Town of Huntington for destruction of
any animal or animals pursuant to the provisions of Town of Huntington
laws or this article.
§ 59-7.1. Invisible fences. [Added 4-17-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
A. For the safety of pedestrians, all fencing, electronic or otherwise,
installed beneath the ground on private property within the Village for
the purpose of restraining dogs or other animals on the premises may
not be installed less than 30 feet from the edge of any paved roadway
adjoining the premises, and not less than 20 feet from every other
boundary line of the property.
B. Underground fence, electronic or otherwise installed prior to the
enactment of this section which does not comply with these setback
requirements shall be brought into compliance within 18 months of the
enactment of the section.
§ 59-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 59-7.1
55:76
ARTICLE II
Animal Waste
[Adopted 10-29-2013 by L.L. No. 4-201325]
§ 59-8. Animal waste; penalties for offenses.
A. No person owning, possessing, harboring or having custody or control
of any animal shall permit such animal to deposit any animal waste, as
that term is commonly understood, on any public street, road, or
highway, including the rights-of-way thereof, or other public places
located within the Village unless such waste is immediately removed in
a sanitary manner.
B. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 or more than $500.
25.Editor's Note: This local law was adopted as Ch. 60 but was renumbered to include it in
the existing Animals Chapter.
§ 59-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-8
55:77
Chapter 62
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 98.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Trespassing — See Ch. 186.
§ 62-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees hereby finds that excessive traffic has been
generated by certain events held by nonresidential uses permitted under
Article V and Article IX of Chapter 205, Zoning; that streets of the village
are inadequate to handle the flow of traffic thereby generated; that access
for fire apparatus and police vehicles and other emergency vehicles on
the streets of the village has been and would be adversely affected; and
that village laws regulating the parking of motor vehicles on village roads
have been violated by reason of excessive traffic and the congestion caused
thereby which would require a concentration of police officers in a given
area to the detriment of the other areas of the village.
§ 62-2. Permit required.
No owner or occupant of any premises in the village which are permitted
uses under Article V, § 205-9E, F, G, H, and I, and Article IX of Chapter 205,
Zoning, shall use or permit the use of such premises for any assemblage,
private or public, whether or not there is a charge for admission, at which
there is attendance by more than five hundred (500) persons unless he/she
shall previously secure a permit from the Police Commissioner.
§ 62-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER or OCCUPANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind. 26
§ 62-4. Application for permit.
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Police Commissioner not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date for which a permit
is sought. The applicant shall submit a written application, duly verified,
which shall state:
26.Editor's Note: The definition of "Chief of Police" which immediately preceded this
definition was repealed at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 59-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 62-4
62:78
§ 62-5. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The Police Commissioner shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder
when, from a consideration of the application and from such information as
may otherwise be obtained, he/she finds that:
A. The location of the premises.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
C. If the permit is sought by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the principal officer of the organization.
D. The date and hours for which the permit is sought.
E. The number of persons whose attendance is anticipated and the
number of motor vehicles expected to be involved.
F. The measures adopted to ensure that the number of persons and motor
vehicles anticipated and set forth in any permit granted under this
chapter is not exceeded.
G. A detailed description of the facilities available for parking on the
premises and, if such facilities are inadequate or insufficient, a request
for a waiver of the village parking regulations for the occasion, which
waiver may be granted only by the Board of Trustees.
H. The number of parking attendants to be provided by the applicant. If
the Police Commissioner determines that the attendance of police
officers is necessary for the safety of persons and property, the Police
Commissioner shall require the applicant to pay to the Village Clerk a
sum equal to the reasonable value of the use of equipment and the
furnishing of the necessary personnel for such time as will be required
in order to reimburse the village for such expense.
I. In the case of an assemblage for which admission is to be charged, a
statement of the methods of publicizing the event.
A. The traffic anticipated will not place an undue burden on village roads,
including private roads open to public motor vehicle traffic.
B. The applicant has taken the necessary precautions so that the means of
ingress and egress will be kept clear at all times to facilitate the
departure of vehicles and to permit the entrance of emergency vehicles.
A sufficient number of parking attendants shall be provided by the
permittee to ensure the even flow of traffic entering and leaving the
premises and to ensure that entrances and exits are kept free from
congestion.
C. The applicant has taken reasonable precautions to ensure against
violation of any village laws and any other applicable law of the State of
New York.
§ 62-4 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 62-5
62:79
§ 62-6. Action upon application.
The Police Commissioner shall act upon the application for a permit within
five (5) days after the filing thereof. If the Police Commissioner disapproves
the application, he/she shall mail to the applicant, within seven (7) days
after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his/her
action, stating the reasons for his/her denial of the permit, provided that if
an emergency exists, he/she shall act upon the application within twentyfour
(24) hours and if he/she disapproves the same, he/she shall notify the
applicant immediately.
§ 62-7. Appeal of action.
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of permit to the Board
of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within five (5) days after written
notice of said denial, served personally or by ordinary mail, by filing a notice
of appeal, in writing, with the Village Clerk. The Board of Trustees shall act
upon said appeal within fifteen (15) days thereafter.
§ 62-8. Revocation of permit.
The Police Commissioner shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued
hereunder upon a finding that the standards for issuance of the permit as
set forth in § 62-5 are no longer met.
§ 62-9. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to customary religious observances and churchrelated
activities, provided that written notice containing the information
required by § 62-4 is given to the Police Commissioner twenty-four (24)
hours before the event.
Chapter 64
BAMBOO
§ 64-1. Purpose and intent.
D. The conduct of the event will not substantially interfere with the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the premises.
E. The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers to properly police the line of movement in the
area contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
village.
F. The concentration of persons and motor vehicles at the premises will
not interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance
service to or other emergency services to areas contiguous to the
premises of applicant.
§ 62-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 64-1
62:80
§ 64-2. General provisions.
§ 64-3. Prohibition.
The planting of bamboo shall be prohibited within the Village of Lloyd
Harbor upon the effective date of this chapter. Any person who plants, or
causes to be planted, bamboo within the Village shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section, and shall be subject to such penalties as are set
forth hereunder.
§ 64-4. Regulation of existing bamboo.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the
property, property values and welfare of the residents of the Village of
Lloyd Harbor, their guests and visitors to the Village, and to protect the
property and preserve the ecology and aesthetic qualities of the
environment of the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
B. Intent. It is the finding of the Board of Trustees that the planting and
the growing of bamboo within the Village of Lloyd Harbor has been and
will continue to be destructive to the natural environment, including
indigenous flora, and destructive to properties in any manner within the
Village adjoining and neighboring those properties where bamboo has
been planted and permitted to grow; that because of these effects the
planting and the growing of bamboo threatens the safety, value and
physical integrity of both public and private property in the Village; and
that therefore, in order to protect and preserve the ecology,
environment and property values, the Village declares it necessary to
regulate and/or prohibit the planting and growing of bamboo within the
Village.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BAMBOO — Any tropical or semitropical grass of the genera Bambusa,
Dendrocalamus or of any other related genera.
BAMBOO PROPERTY OWNER — A property owner in the Village who
has bamboo on his property.
A. Any bamboo which has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow in
any property within the Village of Lloyd Harbor prior to the effective
date of this chapter may remain on such property subject to compliance
with this chapter. Each bamboo property owner shall be responsible to
ensure that the bamboo planted or growing on his property prior to the
effective date of this chapter does not grow, encroach or grow upon any
adjoining or neighboring properties, including public property and
rights-of-way held by the Village, and shall be required to take such
measures as are necessary to prevent such bamboo from invading or
growing onto adjoining or neighboring properties.
§ 64-1 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 64-4
62:81
§ 64-5. Removal from Village property.
§ 64-6. Replanting.
Replanting shall be prohibited, unless otherwise permitted and approved by
the Board of Trustees. Any bamboo either planted or caused to be planted
or existing on a property prior to the effective date of this section may not
be replanted or replaced in kind once such bamboo is or has become, for
any reason, dead, destroyed, uprooted or otherwise removed.
§ 64-7. Violations and penalties.
B. No bamboo property owner within the Village of Lloyd Harbor shall
cause, suffer, or allow bamboo to be planted, maintained, grow, spread
or otherwise be permitted to exist outside of any property line, or within
any street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way.
A. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo property owner's
property invades or grows onto property that is owned or held on behalf
of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, the Village shall notify the bamboo
property owner that the bamboo has invaded such property, and that
the bamboo property owner is responsible for the removal of such
bamboo. This notice shall be sent by certified mail return receipt
requested and regular mail to the latest address of the bamboo
property owner on file with the Village Clerk's records.
B. In the event that the bamboo property owner does not remove said
bamboo from the Village property within 30 days from the date the
Village first deposited the notice as provided in § 64-5A above, then the
Village, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for the removal of such
bamboo from the Village property, and the bamboo property owner
shall be liable and responsible to the Village for the Village's costs of
removing the bamboo. Such costs may be assessed against the property
of the bamboo property owner. In the event that the costs remain
unpaid more than 30 days after demand for payment has been made by
the Village, such costs may be assessed upon and collected with the
next tax levy of the Village.
A. Any property owner convicted of an offense shall be guilty of a violation
as defined in the Penal Law.
B. A violation of two or more sections of this chapter, or provisions within a
section, shall be separate and distinct offenses for which a fine may be
levied.
C. Each and every week a violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation conviction for which shall be an
additional offense.
D. Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$350.
§ 64-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 64-7
62:82
§ 64-8. Severability.
In the event that any portion or portions of this chapter shall be determined
to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the chapter
and its provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 67
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards — See Ch. 163.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
E. Any violation of this chapter may be enjoined pursuant to law.
F. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative, and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law, including injunctive
relief.
§ 64-7 BICYCLES § 64-8
67:83

ARTICLE I
Bicycle Paths
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Section 270 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 67-1. Use by vehicles other than bicycles.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to operate
any vehicle other than a bicycle propelled only by muscular power upon
any bicycle path maintained by this village and designated as such by
appropriate signs.
§ 67-2. Enforcement.
Any police officer is hereby empowered to remove any such unauthorized
vehicle found upon any such bicycle path or to require the operator or other
person in charge of such vehicle to move the same to a garage, automobile
pound or other place of safety; and the owner or other person lawfully in
possession of such vehicle may be charged with the reasonable cost for the
removal and storage, payable before the vehicle is released.
§ 67-1 BICYCLES § 67-2
67:85
Chapter 71
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 141. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 146.
§ 71-1. Purpose.
The following regulations, adopted pursuant to § 46-a of the Navigation Law
of the State of New York, are necessary in order to protect and secure
navigation, bathing, fishing and other recreational uses and the natural
beauty, ecological values and wildlife habitat and healthful, safe, full and
equable enjoyment of the waters bounding the Village by the inhabitants
of the Village and the community; to secure safety from flood, fire, panic,
explosions and other dangers; to protect the inhabitants of the Village
from unreasonable odors, smoke, vapor, gas, dust, noise and vibrations;
to promote and protect the good order, peace, health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village and the community; and to
protect and secure the property of the same.
§ 71-2. Applicability.
Except when prohibited by reason of laws of the United States or where
otherwise expressly provided herein, the following provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all waters within the Village and to all waters
bounding the Village to a distance of 1,500 feet from the shore of the
Village, except that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
waters within Huntington Harbor or Huntington Inlet lying to the east of
the easterly boundary line of this Village nor to the waters of Huntington
Bay lying to the east of that portion of the easterly boundary line of this
Village which extends across the waters of Huntington Bay from West Neck
to Lloyd Neck.
§ 71-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANCHOR or ANCHORING — The attachment of or to attach a vessel to the
ground by means of equipment so designed that, when such attachment is
terminated, the equipment in its entirety is removed from the ground and
taken under the control of the vessel.
DESIGNATED WATER SKI AREA — That area as designated, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.[Added 11-21-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
§ 67-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 71-3
67:86
HARBOR MASTER — The person designated as such by the Board of
Trustees or any of his/her duly appointed deputies.
INNER HARBOR — That portion of Lloyd Harbor lying west of the western
end of the Channel.[Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
LLOYD HARBOR — The body of tidal water lying west of a line connecting
the Lloyd Harbor Lighthouse and Nun 2 marking the entrance of said
harbor extended north and south and lying within the boundaries of the
Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor.[Amended 1-22-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
LLOYD HARBOR CHANNEL — That portion of Lloyd Harbor lying west of
the Lloyd Harbor Lighthouse and bounded by a line projected 280º true
passing through Nun 4; and a parallel line to the south passing through
Can 3; and a line running true north at a distance of 1,500 meters (1,640
yards) west of the Lloyd Harbor Lighthouse. Said reference points are those
shown on United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Charts for purposes of
navigation.
MOOR or MOORING — The attachment of or to attach a vessel to a pier or
dock or other structure; or the attachment of or to attach a vessel to the
ground by means of equipment so designed that, when such attachment is
terminated, some portion of the equipment remains attached to the ground
and is not taken under the control of the vessel.
MOORING AREA — That portion of Lloyd Harbor lying north of the Channel,
west of East Beach and east of the designated water ski area and that
portion lying south of the Channel, west of the transient anchorage area
and east of the west end of the Channel.[Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
OWNER — Includes the person in whose name the vessel was last
registered in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Boating Act, as
amended, or the laws of the State of New York, if requiring registration, and
in any other case the last known owner, or the person who claims lawful
possession of such vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein
which entitles said person to such possession.
RAFT or RAFTING — To secure two or more vessels to each other so that
they share attachment to a mooring or anchor.[Added 1-19-1988 by L.L.
No. 1-1988]
SKIN DIVING — Includes the use by any person of any underwater
breathing apparatus similar in function to an Aqualung but shall not include
bona fide salvage operations displaying proper signals.
SWIMMING AREA — An area designated as such by signs, lifelines or
buoys.
TRANSIENT ANCHORAGE AREA — That area designated from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.[Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
§ 71-3 BICYCLES § 71-3
67:87
VESSEL — Includes all craft intended to carry persons or materials at any
time during the use thereof in, on or under water.
VESSEL REGULATION ZONE — The area within 1,500 feet from the
shoreline of the Village of Lloyd Harbor measured from the low-water
mark.[Added 10-15-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
§ 71-4. Mooring and anchoring. [Amended 6-18-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984; 3-16-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987; 1-19-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988]
A. The location and types of mooring facilities and the anchoring of vessels
in Lloyd Harbor shall be regulated by the Harbor Master.
B. The Harbor Master is hereby authorized and empowered to issue
written use permits pursuant to Subsection A, upon written application
by the owner, charterer or operator responsible for a vessel, for periods
not extending beyond the end of the calendar year in which the permit
is issued, provided that in acting upon any such application, no
consideration shall be given to the race, color, creed, sex, nationality,
citizenship or residence of the applicant. Application may be made by
individuals or by clubs or associations representing several individuals,
provided that a separate permit is obtained for each vessel.
C. Each vessel governed by a use permit shall display a current decal or
other device as specified by the Harbor Master, and:
(1) No vessel shall be attached to a dock or a mooring, singly or in a
raft, in Lloyd Harbor unless evidence of the issuance of a use
permit is displayed. [Amended 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(2) No vessel over 16 feet in length shall be anchored, singly or in a
raft, in Lloyd Harbor outside of the designated transient anchorage
area unless evidence of the issuance of a use permit is displayed.
(3) No vessel over 16 feet in length, though properly moored or
anchored, shall be occupied between two hours past sundown and
one hour past sunrise:
(a) Within 100 yards of the mean high-water line.
(b) Within the inner harbor west of the western end of the
Channel.
(c) If rafted together with more than two other vessels.
D. No mooring shall be placed, and no vessel shall anchor:
(1) Within the boundaries of the Channel or within 50 feet thereof.
(2) Within the boundaries of the water ski area or within 50 feet
thereof.
(3) Within 50 feet of any other vessel on a mooring or at anchor.
§ 71-3 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 71-4
67:88
(4) Within 50 feet of an unoccupied mooring marked by a buoy, a
navigation aid, a swimming area marked by safety lines, a dock,
pier or float.
E. No mooring shall be placed within the transient anchorage area or
within 50 feet of the boundaries thereof.
F. The Harbor Master may issue a use permit for placement of a mooring
in Lloyd Harbor to a yacht club or other noncommercial boating
association in such number as may be authorized by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, provided that: [Amended 5-15-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000; 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
(1) Club moorings are designed to hold a raft of 30 average cruising
vessels in a wind gust of 30 knots.
(2) Club moorings are placed south of and 200 feet to 500 feet distant
from the Channel boundary.
(3) No other moorings shall be placed nor vessels anchored within 200
feet of a club mooring.
(4) Each club mooring shall be attached to a permanent buoy clearly
marked with the designation of the permit-holding organization.
(5) Individual vessels attached to a club mooring shall not be required
to display a use permit decal.
G. All floats shall be anchored or moored in such a way as to be secure at
all times and under all conditions, and such anchoring and mooring
shall be subject to regulation by the Harbor Master, provided that:
[Amended 2-28-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
(1) A float may be no more than 140 square feet in area or longer than
20 feet along any outside dimension;
(2) Floats shall at no time rest on tidal wetland;
(3) No person shall store flammable, noxious or hazardous material,
bait, or debris on floats;
(4) Floats may only be placed directly in front of the owner's property,
or an association's right-of-way, and no further than 200 feet
offshore;
(5) No float shall be used for commercial purposes;
(6) The preceding subsection notwithstanding, the Harbor Master may
refuse a permit application if the proposed float location could be a
hazard to navigation, if overcrowding of the area is a problem, or if
there are other safety issues.
H. The preceding subsections notwithstanding, a vessel may anchor or
moor in any portion of Lloyd Harbor if compelled to do so by a
§ 71-4 BICYCLES § 71-4
67:89
§ 71-5. Deposit of refuse into waters or on beaches.
No person shall cast, deposit, dump, discharge or place or cause or suffer to
be cast, deposited, dumped, discharged or placed any oil, garbage or refuse
matter of any kind into any waters or on any beach of the Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
§ 71-6. Hazards to navigation.
Any vessel (including for the purposes of this section a rowboat or skiff
regardless of the manner in which it may be propelled) or any other object
which becomes a menace to navigation or unseaworthy or sinks, grounds
or becomes otherwise disabled shall be removed by the owner or person
in charge thereof on order of any enforcing officer described in § 71-18 of
this chapter. If said vessel or other object is not removed after an order so
to remove it, it may be removed by or at the direction of such enforcing
officer at the expense of the owner or person in charge of said vessel, to be
enforced by civil suit, such expense to be in addition to such penalties as
may be prescribed or imposed under this Code27 or the laws of the State of
New York.
§ 71-7. Speed limits. [Amended 3-16-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987;
3-20-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 71-8. Areas of operation. [Amended 3-16-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
temporary disability and then only during the period of such disability
or by an emergency arising out of the perils of the sea and then only
during such emergency.
A. No vessel shall be operated at a speed in excess of 45 miles per hour in
any waters as defined in § 71-2 or as further limited by Subsection B of
this section.
B. No vessel shall be operated at a speed in excess of five miles per hour in
any part of Lloyd Harbor, as defined in § 71-2, except within the
designated water ski area; and no vessel, unless propelled exclusively
by hand or sail, shall be operated at a speed in excess of five miles per
hour in:
(1) Any portion of Huntington Harbor and Huntington Inlet within the
boundary lines of the Village.
(2) Any portion of the Lloyd Point Sandspit.
(3) Any portion of Cold Spring Harbor within 300 feet of the mean
high-water shoreline.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 71-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 71-8
67:90
§ 71-9. Tying of vessels in bathing or swimming areas.
No person shall tie a vessel to the lifeline designating a bathing or
swimming area.
§ 71-10. Operation not to disturb or endanger others.
Every person operating or driving a vessel and every person riding water
skis, a surfboard or similar device shall at all times operate the same in a
manner (including, without limitation, the throwing of its wake) so as not
A. No vessel shall be propelled by other than hand or sail in the portion of
Lloyd Harbor west of the Lloyd Harbor Channel, except: [Amended
1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(1) If such vessel for which a current use permit has been issued is
approaching or departing from a permit-related mooring or dock;
(2) If the operator of such vessel is actively engaged in shellfishing
under a permit issued by the Town of Huntington; or
(3) If the operator of such vessel is a certified handicapped person and
has obtained a special permit under § 71-14 of this chapter.
B. No person shall operate or drive any vessel propelled other than by
hand within 100 feet of any lifelines or bathing float or if there are no
lifelines or bathing float, then within 200 feet of any beach used for
bathing or swimming, except at inlets or where a channel affording
entrance to a harbor approaches the lifelines, bathing float or beach, as
the case may be, closer than such applicable distances.
C. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may adopt rules and regulations
restricting or prohibiting the use and operation of certain motor-driven
vessels in the water ski area which, by reason of their size, length,
displacement, design or power plant, are determined to be hazardous to
public safety and to interfere with the proper and reasonable enjoyment
of the harbor. [Added 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
D. No vessel over 25 feet shall be operated in the water ski area. [Added
1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; amended 11-16-1998]
E. All personal watercraft and specialty prop-craft shall be prohibited from
operating within the Vessel Regulation Zone; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this article shall prevent a personal watercraft
and/or specialty prop-craft of the adjacent upland owner, or of any other
person with the permission of the upland owner, from departing from,
returning to, or beaching at the shore of such owner, but only if they
depart and continue to travel perpendicular to the shore until they are
beyond the fifteen-hundred-feet limit, and if they are not within 150 feet
of any beach used for bathing and swimming and marked as such, and
further provided that they shall travel at a speed not to exceed five
miles per hour. [Added 10-15-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
§ 71-8 BICYCLES § 71-10
67:91
to disturb or endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any
person or so as to interfere with the free and proper use of the waters of
any channel affording entrance to a harbor.
§ 71-11. Operation while intoxicated.
No person shall operate or drive any vessel while in an intoxicated
condition. Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of acts
alleged to have been committed by any person charged with operating a
vessel while in an intoxicated condition, the court may admit evidence of
the amount of alcohol in the defendant's blood taken within two hours of the
time of the arrest, as shown by a medical or chemical analysis of his breath,
blood, urine or saliva. For the purpose of this section:
§ 71-12. Use of muffler.
No person shall operate or drive a vessel propelled wholly or partly by an
engine operated by gas, gasoline, naphtha, diesel oil or other substance
without having the exhaust from the engine run through a muffler or so
controlled by the introduction of water into the exhaust pipe or line as to
muffle the noise of exhaust in a reasonable manner.
§ 71-13. Commercial operation of vessels.
A. Evidence that there was .05 of 1% or less by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood shall be prima facie evidence that the ability of such
person to operate a vessel was not impaired by the consumption of
alcohol and that such person was not in an intoxicated condition.
B. Evidence that there was more than .05 of 1% but not more than .07 of
1% by weight of alcohol in such person's blood shall be prima facie
evidence that such person was not in an intoxicated condition, but such
evidence shall be relevant evidence but shall not be given prima facie
effect in determining whether the ability of such person to operate a
vessel was impaired by the consumption of alcohol.
C. Evidence that there was more than .07 of 1% but less than .10 of 1% by
weight of alcohol in such person's blood shall be prima facie evidence
that such person was not in an intoxicated condition, but such evidence
shall be given prima facie effect in determining whether the ability of
such person to operate a vessel was impaired by the consumption of
alcohol.
A. No person shall operate, drive, moor or anchor any vessel in connection
with or in the pursuit of any business operated for profit (except as
otherwise may be specifically permitted by Chapter 205, Zoning, and
except those vessels and person engaged in the cultivation and
harvesting of shellfish) within the waters to which this chapter is
applicable without having first obtained a written permit from the
Board of Trustees.
§ 71-10 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 71-13
67:92
§ 71-14. Special permits for handicapped persons.
When the provisions of this chapter create unnecessary hardship and
difficulties for the operation of vessels by handicapped persons, the Board
of Trustees may, upon written application, grant a special permit to any
handicapped person exempting said person from particular provisions of
this chapter.
B. All applications to the Board of Trustees for a permit pursuant to this
section shall be made by the applicant, in writing, under oath, and shall
contain a full and complete statement of the proposed operation and
business, including, without limitation, the proposed duration of the
stay, the location, nature and extent and the dates and hours thereof
and the vessels and personnel involved. A fee in an amount to be
prescribed by resolution of the Board of Trustees shall be paid to the
Village by the applicant at the time of the submission of the application.
[Amended 3-20-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
C. Upon receipt of any such application, the Board of Trustees may, in its
discretion, call a hearing open to the public for the consideration
thereof and may at such hearing take such testimony and receive such
exhibits from such witnesses as it may deem necessary or advisable to
assist in its determination with respect to the application.
D. The Board of Trustees may grant such a permit, permanently or
temporarily, if it finds affirmatively that the proposed operation and
business protect and secure the inhabitants of the Village and the
community from unreasonable odors, smoke, vapor, gas, dust, noise and
vibrations; that they protect and secure the property of the Village and
its inhabitants from damage and injury; that they are consistent with
and protect the good order, peace, health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Village and the community; that they
do not create problems relating to obstructions to navigation; and that
they do not spoil or threaten to spoil the natural beauty and healthful,
safe, full and proper enjoyment of the waters by the inhabitants of the
Village and the community. If the Board of Trustees shall determine to
grant such permit, it shall state therein such restrictions and conditions
(including, without limitation, time limits and duration of the stay when
a vessel is used or occupied as living or sleeping quarters and other
limits and restrictions as to hours, days, months, extent and area of
operation) as it may deem necessary to protect and secure all of the
same.
E. Any business permit issued for the commercial placement, maintenance
or leasing of moorings shall be subject to immediate revocation by the
Mayor upon a finding that such permit holder has placed a mooring for
which a current mooring permit has not been granted to the owner
thereof. [Added 3-16-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
§ 71-13 BICYCLES § 71-15
67:93
§ 71-15. Special permits for aquatic events.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, the Board of
Trustees may, in its discretion, issue special permits for aquatic events, boat
races or other similar events under proper supervision in limited areas for
limited periods after prior approval by the United States Coast Guard.
§ 71-16. Skin diving; weapons.
§ 71-17. Water skis and surfboards.
§ 71-17.1. Safety equipment. [Added 5-18-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
Within all Village waters, including the tidal waters lying west of the line
running north and south extending from East Beach to Coindre Hall, and to
a distance of 1,500 feet from the shoreline of the Village, all vessels shall be
equipped and lighted as required by the rules and regulations of § 40 of the
Navigation Law.
§ 71-18. Enforcement.
A. No skin diving shall be undertaken in any channel affording entrance to
a harbor or in any waters where the same may interfere with
reasonable and proper operation of vessels.
B. No person shall engage in skin diving without a person of at least 16
years of age, other than the skin diver, in a position as lookout.
C. No person shall use, operate or discharge under water any spear, spear
gun or similar weapon or apparatus within the Village waters.
A. No person shall operate a vessel for towing a person on water skies, a
surfboard or similar device unless there is in such vessel a person, other
than the operator, who is at least 10 years old or who has been awarded
a boat safety certificate by the State of New York in a position to
observe the progress of the person being towed.
B. No person shall ride on water skis, a surfboard or similar device or use
or operate a vessel to tow a person thereon between the period from
one hour after sunset to one hour after sunrise.
A. Any member of the Police Department, the United States Coast Guard,
the New York State Park Police, the Huntington Bay Constable, the
Harbor Master or any of his/her duly appointed deputies, any member
of the Marine Division of the Suffolk County Police Department and any
other peace officer having authority (each of whom is hereinafter
referred to as "such enforcing officer") is hereby empowered to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Every person in charge of or who owns, charters or is operating a vessel
shall at all times obey the lawful orders of any such enforcing officer.
§ 71-15 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 71-18
67:94
§ 71-19. Display of decal or other device. [Added 3-16-1987 by L.L.
No. 4-1987]
Persons holding mooring or overnight occupancy permits must display a
decal or other device as specified by the permit. Failure to do so shall be
treated as a failure to obtain a permit and constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 71-20. Permit fees. [Added 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A fee schedule shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Trustees for the following permits:
C. Any vessel or float, anchored or moored or attached to another vessel in
violation of any part of this chapter, and any mooring for which a
written permit has not been secured from the Harbor Master shall be
removed or detached, as the case may be, by the owner, charterer or
person in charge thereof on order of any such enforcing officer. If any
such vessel, float or mooring is not removed after an order so to remove
it, the same may be removed by or at the direction of any such enforcing
officer at the expense of the owner, charterer or person in charge of
such vessel, float or mooring, to be enforced by civil suit, such expense
to be in addition to such penalties as may be prescribed or imposed
under this Code28 or the Laws of the State of New York.
D. Any such enforcing officer shall have the right to stop any vessel, when
such officer has reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this
chapter is being violated, to board, enter upon and inspect any such
vessel for any of the following purposes:
(1) To determine whether such vessel is subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
(2) To ensure compliance therewith.
(3) To enforce the same.
(4) To issue an appearance ticket or other process for any violation
thereof.
E. The Harbor Master shall be and he/she hereby is empowered to install
buoys, appropriately worded signs and other markers at any point on
land or water within the jurisdiction of the Village when, in his/her
opinion, the placing of any such buoys, signs or markers would give
practical effect to the intent of this chapter or any provision thereof,
provided that prior consent to the installation of such buoys or signs
placed on or in the water is given by the United States Coast Guard and
that they shall be installed in accordance with the uniform marking
system as adopted by the United States Coast Guard and § 35 of the
New York State Navigation Law.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 71-18 BICYCLES § 71-20
67:95
Chapter 77
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
§ 77-1. Purpose. 29
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the health, safety,
welfare and property of residents and owners of property located within
the village by providing a method for the removal or repair of buildings
and structures within the limits of said village that, may now be or shall
hereafter become unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary, which might tend to
constitute a fire menace and which are a nuisance.
§ 77-2. Inspection authorized; report.
The Building Inspector is authorized to inspect any building or structure
within the limits of the village which he/she has reason to believe is or may
be, from any cause, from any cause, dangerous or unsafe to the public and
to file with the Board of Trustees a report, in writing, as to the condition of
any building or structure that he/she inspected which he/she believes to be,
from any cause, dangerous or unsafe to the public, specifying in such report
the date of the inspection, the condition found which he/she deems to be
dangerous or unsafe, his/her opinion as to the cause of such condition and
his/her recommendations with reference to the correction of such condition.
Such report shall be filed with the Board of Trustees not more than fourteen
(14) days from the date of inspection.
§ 77-3. Service of notice; contents.
Thereafter and if the Board of Trustees shall so order, it shall cause a
notice to be served on the owner or some one (1) of the owner's executors,
legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested
or contingent interest in the same, either personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner or some one (1)
of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or other
person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as shown by the
A. A resident harbor use permit.
B. A nonresident harbor use permit.
C. A yacht club mooring permit.
D. A commercial marine service permit for placing, hauling and
maintenance of privately owned moorings.
E. A commercial marine service permit for rental or lease of commercially
owned moorings.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 71-20 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 77-3
77:96
records of the Assessor and/or in the office of the Suffolk County Clerk,
which said notice shall contain the following:
§ 77-4. Posting of notice.
In the event that such notice is served by certified mail, a copy thereof shall
be posted on the premises on the day of mailing of such notice.
§ 77-5. Service of survey report.
A signed copy of the report of the survey shall be served personally or by
certified mail upon the person to whom such notice is directed, and a signed
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous.
C. An order requiring the same to be made safe and secure or removed.
D. The time within which the person served with such notice shall
commence the securing or removal of the building or structure.
E. A statement that the premises will be surveyed in the event of the
neglect or refusal of the person served with notice to comply with the
requirements of the same, said survey to be made by such official of the
village and by such practical builder, engineer or architect as may be
designated, named and appointed by the Board of Trustees and by a
practical builder, engineer or architect to be appointed by the person or
persons so notified as above; and in the event of the refusal of or
neglect of the person or persons so notified to appoint such surveyor or
within five (5) days of the service upon him/her of such notice, the two
(2) surveyors named shall make the survey and report; and the survey
provided for herein shall be made on or before a date to be included in
said notice; and the report of the survey shall be filed with the Board of
Trustees on or before a day to be fixed in said notice.30
F. A statement that in the event that the building or structure shall be
reported unsafe or dangerous under such survey, an application will be
made, returnable at a Special Term of the Supreme Court in Suffolk
County on a date and at a time and place to be specified in such notice
[which said date shall be not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30)
days from the day fixed for the filing of such report], for an order
determining the building or structure to be a public nuisance and
directing that it shall be repaired and secured or taken down and
removed.31
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 77-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 77-5
77:97
copy thereof shall be posted on the building or structure on the day of the
filing of such report of survey.
§ 77-6. Assessment of costs.
The costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the
proceedings to remove or secure the building or structure, including the
cost of actually removing said building or structure, shall be assessed
against the land on which said building or structure is located. Within ten
(10) days of the date that the Building Inspector is able to determine the
extent of such costs and expenses, he/she shall submit a report, in writing,
to the Board of Trustees which shall include a compilation of said costs and
expenses incurred by the village in taking the action described above. At
its next regularly scheduled meeting, said Board of Trustees shall confirm
said costs and expenses as an assessment against the real property involved
by duly adopted resolution. A copy of said resolution shall be mailed to the
person or persons who receive notice under § 77-3 hereof. A lien of special
assessment shall thereupon arise as provided for by the Village Law of the
State of New York.
§ 77-7. Determination of dates in notices; designation of officials.
The Board of Trustees shall determine the respective dates to be inserted
in each such notice and shall appoint and designate the appropriate village
officials and practical builder, engineer or architect in each instance.
§ 77-8. Emergency situations.
In cases of great emergency, where the delay of proceedings, as
hereinabove provided, would result in probable loss of life or property, the
Mayor of the village shall have the power to direct the Building Inspector
or Code Enforcement Officer to proceed at once to take such action as is
needed to guard the safety of persons and property.
Chapter 98
DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND CRIMINAL MISCHIEF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 62.
Firearms — See Ch. 114.
Trespassing — See Ch. 186.
§ 77-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 77-8
98:98
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 10 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 98-1. Prohibited activities.
No person shall, within the village and with intent to cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or clamor or to recklessly create a risk thereof:
A. Engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.
B. Make unreasonable noise.
C. In a public place, as defined in § 240.00 of the Penal Law, use abusive or
obscene language or make an obscene gesture under circumstances
that threaten an imminent breach of the peace.
D. Without lawful authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of
persons.
E. Obstruct vehicular, equestrian or pedestrian traffic.
F. Congregate with other persons in a public place and refuse to comply
with a lawful order of the police to disperse.
G. Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which
serves no legitimate purpose.
§ 98-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND CRIMINAL § 98-1
98:99

ARTICLE II
Criminal Mischief
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 21 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 98-2. Damage of property.
No person shall:
A. Intentionally damage property of another person or of the village.
B. Recklessly damage property of another person or of the village in an
amount exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.).
§ 98-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND CRIMINAL § 98-2
98:101
Chapter 103
ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 77.
§ 103-1. Inspectors.32
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New
York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency are hereby
authorized and deputized as agents of the village to make inspections
and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and hereafter
described and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event, however,
will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be a charge
against the village.
§ 103-2. Duties of inspectors.
§ 103-3. Offenses.33
A. It shall be the duty of the inspector to report, in writing, to the Building
Inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of this chapter,
all violations or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions
of the building code applicable to the village and of all local laws,
ordinances and building code as referred to in this chapter insofar as
any of the same apply to electrical wiring. The inspector shall make
inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on
properties in the village upon the written request of an authorized
official of the village or as herein provided. The inspector is authorized
to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring, installations,
devices, appliances and equipment in or on properties within the village
where said inspector deems it necessary for the protection of life and
property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to
make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official of the
village.
B. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the village and owners and/or lessees of property
where defective electrical installations and equipment are found upon
inspection. The inspector shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with this chapter. He/she shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the village to the attention of the
Building Inspector.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 98-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 103-3
103:102
Chapter 106
ENVIRONMENTAL AREAS, CRITICAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 8, Art. V. Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
§ 106-1. Designation. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994;
9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996]
The following lands are hereby designated as critical environmental areas
under the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act and
Part 617.4(h) of NYCRR:
§ 106-2. Actions to be Type I.
Any action, as defined by SEQRA, taken within said critical environmental
area shall be deemed to be a Type I action requiring:
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties in the village until an application for
inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other authorized agency.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized
agency.
A. All areas of the village within two hundred (200) feet landward of the
mean high water mark.
B. All upland areas and coastal waters lying within the limits of NYS DECdesignated
tidal wetlands and in the three (3) state-designated
significant coastal fish and wildlife habitats within the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Area (LWRA), i.e. Lloyd Point, Lloyd Harbor and Cold
Spring Harbor.
C. Lefferts Mill Tidal Pond.
A. The filing of a full environmental assessment form (EAF) with the
village agency or department having jurisdiction over said action.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 103-3 ENVIRONMENTAL AREAS, CRITICAL § 106-2
106:103
§ 106-3. Planning Board to be lead agency.
The Planning Board shall be and hereby is appointed lead agency to review
all EAF's for any actions requiring the issuance of building permits within
the critical environmental area.
Chapter 109
(RESERVED)
Chapter 114
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct and criminal
mischief — See Ch. 98.
Noise — See Ch. 141.
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — A shotgun, rifle, revolver, pistol or any other device which
emits a projectile by the force of an explosion.
WEAPON — A bow and arrow, crossbow, blowgun, slingshot, CO2 gun, air
gun, BB gun or any other device which emits a projectile with a force other
than an explosion.
§ 114-2. Discharge restricted.
B. Compliance with all other SEQRA regulations.
A. No person shall discharge any firearm or weapon from, on or over any
bay, cove, harbor, inlet or other public body of water within the
boundaries of the Village except as provided in Subsection B.
[Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. No person shall discharge any firearm or weapon from, on or over any
land above the low-water mark within the boundaries of the Village
unless such person:
(1) Is the owner or lessee of such land; or
(2) Has written permission from such owner or lessee to discharge a
firearm or weapon from, on or over such land. [Amended
12-16-2013 by L.L. No. 6-2013]
§ 106-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 114-3
109:104
§ 114-3. Exceptions.
The foregoing provisions of § 114-2A and B shall not apply to a police officer
acting in discharge of his/her duties.
Chapter 116
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 116-1. Standards.
The terms and procedures of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
shall be the controlling fire prevention and building construction
regulations in the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
§ 116-2. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer and Police Department of
the Village of Lloyd Harbor and the Fire Inspectors of the respective Fire
Districts serving the Village of Lloyd Harbor are authorized to enforce the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Chapter 120
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 8,
Art. V, and Ch. 106.
§ 120-1. Findings; intent.
A. The Village of Lloyd Harbor finds that freshwater wetlands are
invaluable resources for flood protection, wildlife habitat, open space,
water resources and other benefits associated therewith which, if
preserved and maintained in an undisturbed natural condition,
constitute important social, economic and aesthetic assets to existing
and future residents of the village.
B. Intent.
(1) It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to protect the residents of
the village by preserving, protecting and conserving freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the
despoliation and destruction of freshwater wetlands and to
regulate use and development of such wetlands consistent with the
general welfare of the village under its general police power and
§ 114-3 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING § 120-1
116:105
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADJACENT AREA — All lands within one hundred (100) feet horizontally of
the vegetative boundary of any freshwater wetland.
APPLICANT — Includes the owner of the affected property, his agent or
contract vendee who files an application for a permit pursuant to this
chapter.
BOUNDARY — The outer limit of vegetation specified in Subsections A and
B of the definition of "freshwater wetlands" and the waters specified in
Subsection C of the definition of "freshwater wetlands" below.
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW BOARD — The Board of Trustees or any board
of the village which has been designated by the Board of Trustees to
be responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter and
promulgating rules, regulations and procedures necessary to implement
and administer properly the provisions herein.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
— Lands, submerged lands and waters in the village as may be shown on
the Freshwater Wetlands Map prepared by or for the State of New York
and filed with the village pursuant to § 24-0301 of NYSECL and as may be
shown on freshwater wetlands maps the village shall prepare and any lands,
submerged lands and waters which contain any or all of the following:
pursuant to Article 24 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law (NYSECL). [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988]
(2) It is also the intent of the Board of Trustees to promote the public
purpose and the health, safety and general welfare of present and
future residents of the village by providing for the protection,
proper maintenance and use of wetlands, water bodies and
watercourses located within the village by preventing or
minimizing erosion due to flooding and stormwater runoff,
maintaining the natural groundwater supplies, protecting
subsurface water resources and providing valuable watersheds,
preserving and protecting the purity, utility, water-retention
capability, ecological functions and natural beauty of all wetlands,
waterbodies, watercourses and other related natural features of
the terrain, and by providing and protecting wildlife habitat.
Lands and submerged lands commonly called "marshes," "swamps,"
"sloughs," "bogs" and "flats," supporting aquatic or semiaquatic
vegetation of the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees, which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(1)
A.
§ 120-1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 120-2
120:106
(Acer rubrum), willows (salix species), black spruce (Picea
mariana), swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), red ash (Fraxinus
pennsylvanica), American elm (Ulmus americana) and larch (Larix
laricina).
Wetland shrubs, which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
species), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bog rosemary
(Andromeda glaucophylla) and leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne
calyculata).
(2)
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
species), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus
species), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria
species), reed (Phragmites communis), wild rice (Zizania aquatica),
burreeds (Sparganium species), purple loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water
plantain (Alisma plantago-aquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating-leaved vegetation, including, among others,
waterlily (Nymphaea odorata), water shield (Brasenia schreberi)
and spatterdock (Nuphar species).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemma species), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and
watermeal (Wolffia species).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation, which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give it a
competitive advantage over other openland vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex species), rushes (Juncus species),
cattails (Typha species), rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), reed
canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea), swamp loosestrife (Decodon
verticillatus) and spike rush (Eleocharis species).
(6)
Bog mat vegetation, including, among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum species), bog rosemary (Andromeda glaucophylla),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), pitcher plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) and cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium
oxycoccos).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamogeton species), naiads (Naias species), bladderworts
(Utricularia species), wild celery (Vallisneria americana), coontail
(Ceratophyllum demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum species),
muskgrass (Chara species), stonewort (Nitella species),
waterweeds (Elodea species) and water smartweed (Polygonum
amphibium).
(8)
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
B.
§ 120-2 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 120-2
120:107
FRESHWATER WETLANDS BOARD OF APPEALS — The member board
established by Article 24 of the NYSECL.
PARTY IN INTEREST — Includes the applicant, any person who is permitted
to intervene pursuant to Article 24 of the NYSECL, the village or an
adjoining municipality within which is located the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area which is the subject of an application for a permit.
PERMIT — A freshwater wetlands permit for the conduct of a regulated
activity.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate,
one (1) or more individuals and any unit of state or local government,
agency or subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may
be injurious to humans, vegetation, wildlife or property.
PROJECT — Any action resulting in direct or indirect physical impact on a
freshwater wetland, including but not limited to any regulated activity.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any form of draining, dredging, excavation,
removal of soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate, either directly
or indirectly; any form of dumping, filling or deposition of any soil, stones,
sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill of any kind, either directly or indirectly;
erecting any structures, constructing roads, the driving of pilings or placing
of any other obstructions, whether or not changing the ebb and flow of
the water; any form of pollution, including but not limited to installing a
septic tank, running a sewer outfall, discharging sewage treatment effluent
or other liquid wastes into or so as to drain into a freshwater wetland; and
any other activity which substantially impairs any of the several functions
served by the freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which
are set forth in § 24-0105 of the NYSECL.
§ 120-3. Permit required; exceptions.
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do not
exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six (6) feet and provided
further that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention.
Lands and waters enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as set
forth herein in Subsection A above and dead vegetation as set forth in
Subsection B above, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation.
C.
The waters overlying the areas set forth in Subsections A and B, above
the lands underlying Subsection C and all other ponds, streams and
watercourses.
D.
A. No person shall conduct a regulated activity in any freshwater wetland
or adjacent areas in the village without first obtaining a permit issued
by the Environmental Review Board.
§ 120-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 120-3
120:108
§ 120-4. Application for permit; notices; hearing.
B. Exceptions.
(1) As are otherwise legally permitted within the village, the
depositing or removal of the natural products of freshwater
wetlands and adjacent areas as enumerated in § 24-0701,
Subdivision 3, of the NYSECL and agricultural activities within said
areas as are enumerated and defined in § 24-0701, Subdivision 4, of
the NYSECL shall not be considered regulated activities.
(2) In addition, public health activities, orders and regulations of the
Department of Health shall be excluded from regulated activities.
This agency shall notify the Environmental Review Board, in
writing, of the proposed activity which it will conduct.
(3) If the Environmental Review Board shall determine an emergency
activity is immediately necessary to protect the health, safety and
well-being of any person or to immediately prevent substantial
damage to personal or real property, it may exempt such activity
from regulation.
A. Any person proposing, permitting or causing to be conducted a
regulated activity upon any freshwater wetland or adjacent area shall
file an application for a permit with the Village Clerk. The application
shall include a detailed description of the proposed activity, a map
showing the area of freshwater wetland directly affected, with the
location of the proposed activity thereon, and a current list of record
owners of lands and claimants of water rights within one hundred (100)
feet of the property on which the regulated activity is located.
B. After submission of the completed application, the applicant shall
publish, at his/her expense, a notice of application, indicating that the
applicant intends to file an application, in the official village newspaper.
The Environmental Review Board may waive the publishing of the
notice of application and require the publication of the appropriate
notice of hearing. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
C. If no notice of objection has been filed by any party in interest in
response to the notice of application or if the Environmental Review
Board finds that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature as not to
affect or endanger the balance of systems within the freshwater
wetland, it may dispense with a public hearing. If the Environmental
Review Board determines that a hearing is not to be held, the Board
shall publish, in the village newspaper, its decision setting forth its
findings and reasons therefor.
D. If a hearing is to be held, it shall be scheduled no sooner than thirty (30)
days and not later than sixty (60) days after the receipt of the completed
application by the village and the publishing of the notice of application.
The applicant shall publish the notice of hearing at his/her expense in
§ 120-3 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 120-4
120:109
§ 120-5. Standards for issuance of permits.
No permit shall be issued by the Environmental Review Board pursuant to
this chapter unless it shall find that:
§ 120-6. Permit conditions; bond; inspections; suspension or
revocation; fee.
the official village newspaper not more than twenty-eight (28) days
nor less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The
applicant shall also send, by certified mail, not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date set for the hearing, the notice of hearing to owners of
record of adjacent lands within one hundred (100) feet of the premises
containing the wetlands and known claimants to water rights which will
be affected. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
A. The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the policy of this
chapter to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and the
benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the despoliation and destruction
of freshwater wetlands and to regulate the development of such
wetlands in order to secure the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands,
consistent with the general welfare and beneficial economic, social and
agricultural development of the village.
B. The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the village's land use
regulations.
C. The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public health
and welfare.
D. The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary.
E. There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated activity
on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent area.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are necessary to assure
the preservation and protection of affected freshwater wetlands and to
assure compliance with the policy and provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the Environmental Review Board rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Environmental Review Board may require a performance bond in
such form and sureties as it deems necessary. Said bond shall
guarantee compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other
conditions and requirements imposed on the approval of the permit.
C. Operations conducted under the permit shall be open to inspection at
any time by the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer or
Village Engineer. The issuance of a permit by the Environmental Review
Board does not relieve the applicant from obtaining all other necessary
authorizations.
§ 120-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 120-6
120:110
§ 120-7. Rules and regulations.
After a public hearing the Environmental Review Board may adopt, amend
and repeal rules and regulations consistent with this chapter as it deems
necessary and proper to administer this chapter.
§ 120-8. Penalties for offenses.
D. The Environmental Review Board may suspend or revoke a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter where it finds that the permittee has not
complied with any or all terms of such permit, has exceeded the
authority granted in the permit or has failed to undertake the project in
the manner set forth in the application.
E. The Environmental Review Board may impose a permit fee in an
amount required by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees and
may charge such fees and expenses to an applicant for official action as
shall enable it to recover the costs incurred by reason of such
application. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
A. Any person who violates, disobeys or disregards any provision of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed three thousand
dollars ($3,000.) for every such violation to be assessed. Each and every
day a violation continues after written notice has been served on the
violator by the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer shall be
deemed a separate violation. Before assessment of the civil penalty, the
alleged violator shall be afforded a hearing or opportunity to be heard
before the Environmental Review Board upon due notice and with the
rights to specifications of the charges and representation by counsel.
B. The Environmental Review Board shall also have the power, following a
hearing, to direct a violator to cease violation of this chapter and to
satisfactorily restore the affected freshwater wetland to its condition
prior to the violation under the Board's supervision.
C. Any civil penalty or order issued by the village shall be reviewable
pursuant to the New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In addition to the above civil fine, any person who violates an order
issued pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall be guilty of a
violation, pursuant to the Penal Law, punishable by a fine of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.). For a second and each subsequent offense, the violator shall
be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) nor more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.).
E. The Environmental Review Board shall have the right to seek equitable
relief to restrain any violation or threatened violation of any provisions
of this chapter.
§ 120-6 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 120-9
120:111
§ 120-9. Review and appeal.
§ 120-10. Freshwater Wetlands Map; new areas.
Chapter 128
HELICOPTER LANDING PROHIBITION
A. Any decision or order of the Environmental Review Board may be
reviewed by the Freshwater Wetlands Board of Appeals in accordance
with Title 11 of Article 24 of the NYSECL, provided that, within thirty
(30) days after service of such order or notice of such decision, such
review is commenced by the filing with the Freshwater Wetlands Board
of Appeals of a notice of review or commencement of a proceeding
pursuant to Article 78 of the New York State Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
B. The institution of a judicial proceeding to review a determination or
order of the Environmental Review Board shall preclude the institution
of a proceeding before the Freshwater Wetlands Board of Appeals to
review such a determination or order.
A. After a public hearing, the Board of Trustees may adopt a Freshwater
Wetlands Map indicating the boundaries of any freshwater wetlands in
the village, as defined herein, provided that said Freshwater Wetlands
Map is no less restrictive than that which may be filed by the State
Department of Environmental Conservation. The Board of Trustees
may, after a public hearing, so amend, modify or update an adopted
Freshwater Wetlands Map as it deems necessary and proper to carry
out the intent of this chapter. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988]
B. Any land and water not appearing on the above map or maps but which
is found after a field inspection by the village to contain any or all of the
above vegetation, lands or water shall be a freshwater wetland
pursuant to this chapter. The Board of Trustees shall thereafter hold a
public hearing on whether the Village Freshwater Wetlands Map shall
be amended to include said designated area. [Amended 4-18-1988 by
L.L. No. 3-1988]
C. Any freshwater wetland area so designated upon the filed map which
upon field inspection by the village representative is found not to
contain any or all of the above vegetation, land or water shall not be
deemed to be a freshwater wetland and the owner of said land shall be
so notified, in writing, by the village.34
34.Editor's Note: Original Section 1990, Effective date, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988.
§ 120-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 128-1
120:112
§ 128-1. Intent and purpose.
The use of property for the landing or taking off of helicopters within
the Village of Lloyd Harbor is found to constitute a nuisance, creating
unacceptable noise and disruption to the quiet use and enjoyment of
property reasonably expected by Village residents. Such use is found not to
be customarily incidental or accessory to any primary permitted use in the
Village. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prohibit the landing or
taking off of helicopters except the single previously permitted user within
the Village as a means of transportation other than for uses specifically
associated with the health, safety and welfare of Village residents.
§ 128-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and entitled as the "Helicopter Landing
Prohibition."
§ 128-3. Prohibition of use.
The use of helicopters for landing or taking off within the Village of Lloyd
Harbor is prohibited except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 128-4. Prohibition of heliports and helipads.
Heliports, helipads or any other structure and/or area intended for use as a
landing or taking-off point for helicopters are prohibited within the Village
of Lloyd Harbor except as may necessarily be required in association with
the exceptions stated in this chapter.
§ 128-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the use of helicopters as may be required
for military or governmental purposes or for medical or police emergencies
or as may, upon application, specifically be authorized by the Board of
Trustees. Existing heliports may continue to be used only for the personal
use by the owner of the premises on which it is located.
§ 128-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. Each offense against any provision of this chapter shall be a violation
punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000. Each landing and takeoff in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth hereinabove, the Village may
institute appropriate proceedings in the Supreme Court to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate a violation of this chapter.
§ 128-1 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 128-6
120:113
Chapter 135
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 135-1. Restrictions on installation and operation.
No person, firm or corporation, or their respective agents, servants or
employees, shall install, repair, alter, replace, relocate, operate or maintain
any permanent outdoor light fixture, lamp or other artificial means of
radiating light ("exterior lighting") on private property in the Village which
is not in compliance with the following requirements:
A. All exterior lighting shall be either fully shielded or fitted with opaque
hoods, shields, louvers, shades, and other devices to insure that all light
generated by the light source is directed downward and not outward
horizontally, and so fitted that no portion of the light source is visible
when the light fixture is viewed from the property line. The term "light
source" includes the light bulb and all refractive, reflective, and
translucent light-transmitting parts of the fixture.
B. No exterior light source, including fixtures not mounted on the primary
structure, shall be mounted higher than 12 feet measured from the
actual grade immediately beneath the light source.
C. No exterior lighting shall illuminate any public or private road, public
waterway, public beach, conservation easement, or public right-of-way.
D. No exterior light source shall illuminate, reflect, spill over, or otherwise
create a nuisance upon an adjoining property.
E. No flashing, laser, searchlight, strobe, tracing, pulsating, or neon
exterior lighting is permitted.
F. No recreational court, including tennis courts, basketball courts, or
sports courts, shall be artificially illuminated.
G. Lighting intended to illuminate foliage, trees, landscape, or
architectural structures is prohibited. Holiday lighting and lighting for
doorways and walks are excluded.
H. No outdoor light fixture shall be operated by a "dusk-to-dawn" timer or
sensor, unless motion-sensor activated. Motion-sensor light fixtures
shall be operable to shut off after 10 minutes and shall not be triggered
by activity located off the property.
I. Lighting that is determined by municipal law enforcement personnel to
contribute to a condition of disabling or distracting glare into a public
§ 128-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 135-1
120:114
§ 135-2. Existing lights.
Any exterior lighting existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be
extinguished or brought into compliance with its provisions on or before
November 25, 2011.
§ 135-3. Variances.
The Board of Zoning Appeals, after a public hearing, may grant variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
Chapter 141
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 55.
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 62.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 98.
Firearms — See Ch. 114.
§ 141-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
It is found and declared that:
§ 141-2. General prohibition.
No person shall make or cause to be made or continued nor shall any
owner, lessee or occupant of any land in the village permit to be made or
continued on his/her premises any loud, unnecessary, unusual or annoying,
intermittent or prolonged noise or any noise which either annoys or
destroys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety
of others within the village, except as permitted in Chapter 114, relating to
roadway from a light source may be ordered to be extinguished at any
time.
A. The making, creating or maintaining of noises which are loud,
intermittent, prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place or use
adversely affects and is detrimental to public health, comfort,
convenience, safety and welfare and constitutes a disturbance to the
peace and repose of the residents of the village.
B. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the village and its
inhabitants.
§ 135-1 NOISE § 141-2
141:115
the regulation of firearms. Any such noise which is audible at a point thirty
(30) feet beyond the property line of the premises or street where it is being
created shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 141-3. Specific noises restricted.
The following acts, without limiting the provisions of § 141-2, are expressly
declared to be noises in violation of this chapter if audible at a point thirty
(30) feet beyond the property line of the premises or street where such
noise is being created:
A. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horns or signaling
devices, except as a danger signal or warning signal; the creation, by
means of any such signaling device, of any unreasonable or harsh
sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or
intermittent or unreasonable length of time.
B. Loudspeakers; amplifiers for advertising or broadcasting. The using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio or
television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing
of sound which is cast upon private property from the public streets or
other public places for the purpose of advertising or broadcasting.
C. Unnecessary amplification. The using, operating or permitting to be
used or operated of any radio, television set, phonograph, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound.
D. Animals. The keeping of any animals which, by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person or
persons in the vicinity.
E. Exhausts.
(1) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal
combustion engine, except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises emanating
therefrom. Nothing herein shall be constructed to prohibit the use
of small power tools and machinery for the maintenance of a
person's property, provided that said tools or machinery are in
proper operating condition and used during reasonable hours of
the day so as not to disturb adjacent property owners.
(2) The prolonged or unnecessary operation of motorcycles, trail bikes,
minibikes, go-carts and the like which create loud and annoying
noise on private property or streets.
F. Noise-making devices. The installing, using, operating, discharging or
causing the installation, use, operation or discharge of any noisemaking
device of any design or manufacture which, in its use or if used,
will disturb or tend to disturb the peace, comfort, repose, health or
§ 141-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 141-3
141:116
§ 141-4. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 146
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
safety of another or scare, frighten or disturb a domestic animal of
another or wildlife.
G. Construction and operation of machinery. The construction, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building (except interior alterations or
repairs to a building which is entirely enclosed) and the operation of
large tractors, earthmoving machines, cement mixers, cranes and other
similar construction machinery on Sundays, legal holidays and between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. prevailing time on Mondays
through Saturdays, inclusive, except in cases of urgent emergency in
the interest of health and safety and then only when a permit is issued
by the Building Inspector for the period of such emergency.
A. Upon receipt of a complaint or as the result of personal observation by a
member of the Police Department, the Police Department shall conduct
an investigation to determine if a violation of the provisions of this
chapter has been committed. If the Police Department determines there
is a violation, it may warn the violator to cease and desist from
continuing such noise or it may issue an appearance ticket for such
violation.
B. A person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.35
35.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-3 PARKS AND RECREATION § 141-4
146:117

ARTICLE I
Village Park
[Adopted 2-28-1983 by Article 9 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 146-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD — A person who maintains a home for said person
or for said person and members of his/her family or for said person and any
other individual who is dependent upon such person.
VILLAGE PARK or PARK — That tract of land, with appurtenances,
designated as Section 012, Block 02, Lot 014 on the Real Property Tax Map
of Suffolk County in District 0403, together with such parcels of land as
may, from time to time, be added thereto pursuant to action of the Board
of Trustees and shall include the waters on which any such parkland shall
front.
§ 146-2. Establishment and administration; rules and regulations.
§ 146-3. Permits required; issuance; term.
A. The Village Park is hereby established as a playground and recreation
center. The administration of the park shall be by a Recreation
Commission appointed by the Board of Trustees, consisting of either
five or seven members and one alternate member to substitute for a
regular member in the event that such regular member is unable to
participate or is otherwise absent from a meeting. The term for each
regular and alternate member shall be one year. Said Commission shall
possess all the powers and be subject to all the responsibilities as
provided by law. [Amended 1-18-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000;
10-15-2001 by L.L. No. 4-200136]
B. The Recreation Commission is hereby granted the power to promulgate
such reasonable conditions, rules and regulations, from time to time, as
it may determine for the equipment, operation and maintenance of the
park, including the designation of recreational areas for specific uses
and the regulation of fishing and other activities within such areas. Any
such rule or regulation shall be made public by posting a copy thereof in
a conspicuous place in the park and filing a copy thereof with the
Village Clerk for inspection during regular business hours.
A. Permits in the form of a tag or sticker for affixing to a motor vehicle,
permitting the holder thereof and other members of the holder's
household to enter upon the grounds and use the facilities of the Village
Park, shall be issued by the Village Clerk or by any other person
36.Editor's Note: This local law reflects an amendment to § 243 of the General Municipal Law
as it applies to the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
§ 146-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 146-3
146:119
§ 146-4. Entrance to or use of park restricted.
designated by the Board of Trustees after submission of competent
proof that such applicant is entitled thereto as provided in this article.
B. Persons entitled to permits to use the park and its facilities shall be the
following only:
(1) Any person who is the head of a household or who owns real
property of a minimum of two acres within the Village or who owns
real property within the Village which is less than two acres in
area, provided that the same constitutes part of a cohesive building
plot improved with a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
(2) Any person who is a bona fide resident of the Village.
(3) Any person who is the head of a household and who is occupying a
private dwelling within the Village under lease of a term not less
than one month.
(4) Any Village official or full-time or retired full-time employee of the
Village. [Amended 10-20-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
(5) Such organized groups on special occasions as may be authorized,
in writing, by the Mayor or the Chairperson of the Recreation
Commission.
C. Permits shall be issued for a term not exceeding one year and shall be
nontransferable. Permits shall be subject to such conditions, rules and
regulations as may be established by the Recreation Commission, and
acceptance of a permit shall constitute an agreement by the recipient
thereof that he/she, the members of his/her household and his/her
guests will comply with all conditions, rules and regulations. Permits
shall be in the form prescribed by the Recreation Commission.
D. Absence from a motor vehicle of a permit shall be presumptive evidence
that a permit has not been issued therefor and that the occupants of
such vehicle are not entitled to enter the park.
A. No person shall enter or use the park unless said person is:
(1) The holder of a valid permit duly issued under this article.
(2) A member of the household of a permit holder.
(3) A guest of and accompanied by a permit holder or a member of his/
her household.
B. No person shall remain in or return to the park on any day after said
person shall have been requested on that day by any supervisory
employee or member of the Recreation Commission or by any member
of the Police Department to leave the park.
§ 146-3 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 146-4
146:120
§ 146-5. Erection of buildings.
No buildings or facilities of any kind shall be erected or installed in the park,
except as may be authorized by the Board of Trustees.
§ 146-6. Carrying and display of valid permit required.
Carrying or displaying a permit on a vehicle after such permit has become
void or has been revoked or suspended or which was issued for a motor
vehicle other than the one on which carried or displayed shall be a violation
of this Article.
§ 146-7. Motor vehicles to be registered.
§ 146-8. Use by guests.
Guests may be permitted the use of the park while accompanied by a holder
of a permit or a member of his/her household upon the payment of such
fees and upon such other terms and conditions as may, from time to time,
be prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 146-9. Revocation or suspension of permit.
C. No person shall enter or remain in the park during hours in which the
park shall be closed to the public use by regulations of the Recreation
Commission.
A. No motor vehicle shall be operated within the park without first being
registered in accordance with the requirements respecting public
highway motor vehicle operation contained in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. Any police officer is hereby empowered to
remove any such unauthorized vehicle found in the park to a garage,
automobile pound or other place of safety; and the owner or other
person lawfully in possession of such vehicle may be charged with the
reasonable cost for the removal and storage, payable before the vehicle
is released.
B. Every person operating a motor vehicle within the park shall, upon
demand of any police officer, produce for inspection the certificate of
registration for said motor vehicle issued in accordance with the
requirements respecting public highway motor vehicle operation
contained in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York. The
failure to produce such certificate of registration for such motor vehicle
shall be presumptive evidence of operating a motor vehicle which is not
registered as required by Subsection A.
A. A permit shall automatically become void if the holder thereof ceases to
be entitled to a permit as prescribed in § 146-3.
B. A permit may be revoked or suspended by the Recreation Commission if
the holder thereof or any member of his/her household is found guilty
§ 146-4 PARKS AND RECREATION § 146-9
146:121
§ 146-10. Fees.
A fee shall be collected for each permit in the amount prescribed, from time
to time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Additional fees for use of
specific park facilities may be prescribed by said Board.
§ 146-11. Operation of motor vehicles.
§ 146-12. Hours of use.
The Recreation Commission shall, by regulation, determine the months,
days and hours in which the park shall be open for use.
§ 146-13. Personal injury, loss, damage or theft.
The Village shall not be responsible for theft or loss of or for damage to
motor vehicles or the contents thereof or to any private property or for
injuries to any person occurring within the park or in or upon the waters
abutting the park.
by said Commission, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard, of doing any act within the park that is prohibited by any law
or ordinance of the Village or by any rule or regulation adopted by
the Recreation Commission pursuant to this Article. Such revocation or
suspension shall not affect the right of any person to receive a permit
for the next subsequent permit year.
C. Any member of the household or any guest of a permit holder may be
excluded from the park by the Recreation Commission for doing any act
within the park that is prohibited by any law or by any ordinance of the
Village or by any rule or regulation adopted by the Recreation
Commission pursuant to this Article.
A. No motor vehicle shall enter the park, except by such access roads as
may, from time to time, be designated by the Board of Trustees; and
such vehicle shall be parked only in the designated parking areas and
only during the hours prescribed by regulation of the Recreation
Commission. Vehicles shall be operated only along the areas designated
as roads or drives and in compliance with road markings or signs
posted by the Recreation Commission.
B. No motor vehicle shall be operated at a speed in excess of 15 miles per
hour on the roadways of the park.
§ 146-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 146-13
146:122
ARTICLE II
Causeway
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 20 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 146-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the use of certain property known
as the "Causeway."
§ 146-15. Regulation of certain uses.
There shall be no loitering, eating, drinking, sunbathing, swimming,
camping, campfires, picnicking or placing of any shelters, tents, ground
covers, chairs, lounges, tables or other similar equipment on that portion
of the Village commonly known as the "Causeway," located between the
entrance to the property now or formerly owned by the Lloyd Neck Bath
Club and extending in a northerly direction to the entrance to property now
or formerly known as the "Fort Hill Gate Lodge," extending on both sides of
the road known as "West Neck Road."
§ 146-14 PARKS AND RECREATION § 146-15
146:123
Chapter 150
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 150-1. License required.
Except as may be otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person, organization, society, association, company or corporation or their
agents or representatives to proselytize, canvass, solicit business, take
orders for goods or services or distribute handbills, pamphlets or other
written material or solicit donations or contributions of money or property
or financial assistance of any kind upon the streets, upon private property,
by house-to-house canvass or in public places in the Village of Lloyd Harbor
without a license previously issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 150-2. Application for license.
Application for a license as provided in this chapter shall be in writing and
addressed to the Village Clerk and shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and purpose of the cause for which the license is sought.
B. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization,
firm, society, association, company or corporation.
C. Length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
D. Legal and tax status of any organization, firm, society, association,
company or corporation so applying.
E. Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such activity.
F. The name, address, date of birth, personal photograph(s) and complete
driver's license information or other satisfactory means of identification
of the person or persons who shall be conducting the solicitation or
otherwise peddling, soliciting or canvassing.
G. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be performed for which funds are to be solicited and
an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that purpose.
H. If a vehicle or vehicles are to be used in the solicitation, a description of
same, including year, make and model, together with a license plate
number, registration certification information and liability insurance
information or other satisfactory means of identification. Such
information shall be presented for inspection, upon demand, by any
Lloyd Harbor Village Code Enforcement Officer or Lloyd Harbor Village
Police Officer.
I. Such other information as the Board of Trustees may require.
§ 146-15 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 150-3
146:124
§ 150-3. License fee.
All applications must be accompanied by a processing fee of $25 payable
to the Village of Lloyd Harbor. Upon approval of the license, a fee of $200
payable to the Village of Lloyd Harbor is required.
§ 150-4. Approval of application; reasons for denial.
Upon receiving such application, the Village Clerk shall present the same
to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting. The Board of Trustees
shall approve the application of all bona fide applicants who have complied
with the above provisions. The Board of Trustees may deny the application
for any of the following reasons:
§ 150-5. Restrictions.
Any license approval granted by the Board of Trustees is subject to the
following restrictions:
A. An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the
application.
B. The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance
violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances or
any violent act against persons or property.
C. The applicant is a person against whom a judgment or administrative
agency determination has been entered or a conviction obtained within
the five years immediately preceding the date of the application based
upon fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.
D. The solicitation involves the sale of illegal substances or services.
E. The applicant does not possess any applicable licenses required by the
United States, the State of New York, the County of Suffolk or the Town
of Huntington.
A. Payment by the applicant of the license fee of $200.
B. All activity must be conducted on weekdays and Saturdays only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and dusk (i.e., 30 minutes after sunset).
C. Solicitation shall not take place at any household or premises which has
a "no solicitation" sign posted on or near the front door of the household
nor shall any solicitation take place at any household or premises that
provides notice to the Village as outlined in § 150-6.
D. The license shall be effective for no more than one calendar year from
the date of issuance, and all licenses shall terminate on December 31 in
the year in which they were issued. There shall be no proration of fees
over the calendar year.
§ 150-3 PARKS AND RECREATION § 150-5
146:125
§ 150-6. Notice by those not desiring solicitation.
Any person not desiring solicitation upon the person's private property
may advise the Board of Trustees by written notice objecting to any or
all solicitation or distributions. Such notice shall include the name of the
person filing; the address of the property affected; the date of such filing;
a statement specifically identifying the organizations or institutions which
the person filing objects to permitting entrance onto his private residential
property for the purpose of solicitation or distribution; or that all such
solicitation or distribution is objected to. The Village Clerk shall maintain a
list of those residents who have filed a written notice of objection and shall
furnish any person/entity that is issued a license to solicit with a copy.
§ 150-7. Identification cards.
All persons soliciting donations or contributions or proselytizing pursuant
to this chapter shall, at all times during such period, carry an identification
card issued by the organization, society, association, company or
corporation licensed to conduct the solicitation. Each identification card
shall be displayed on the outer garment and shall plainly show the name
of the person who is soliciting, his or her photograph and the person,
organization, society, association, company or corporation on whose behalf
such solicitation is being made.
§ 150-8. Suspension and revocation of license.
Any and all licenses which may be granted by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to any part of this chapter may, for cause, be suspended by the
Mayor and may be revoked by the Board of Trustees after notice and
hearing for any of the following causes:
§ 150-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate
and distinct offense hereunder.
E. The Board of Trustees shall not grant permission for applicants' activity
with respect to those persons who have advised the Board of Trustees
in writing that they do not desire solicitation.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for a license.
B. Violation of any of the restrictions imposed on the issuance of such
license or on the conduct of any solicitations so licensed.
§ 150-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 150-10
146:126
§ 150-10. Severability.
If any section, subsection or provision of this chapter or the application of
such section, subsection or provision to any person or circumstances shall
be held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, the validity of the remainder of
this chapter and the applicability of such section, subsection or provision to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 156
RECORDS
§ 150-10 RECORDS § 150-10
156:127

ARTICLE I
Management
[Adopted 3-20-1989]
§ 156-1. Adoption of retention schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records therein.
§ 156-2. Guidelines for disposal.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 156-1 RECORDS § 156-2
156:129

ARTICLE II
Public Access
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code37]
§ 156-3. Purpose and scope.
§ 156-4. Records access officer.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law (§ 85 et seq. of the Public
Officers Law), as well as records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflict among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lloyd Harbor is responsible for
ensuring compliance with the regulations herein and designates the
Village Clerk and, in his or her absence, the Deputy Village Clerk as
records access officer, who shall be responsible for ensuring
appropriate agency response to public requests for access to records.
The designation of a records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
B. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one (1) of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 156-10; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 156-3 RECORDS § 156-4
156:131
§ 156-5. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the
Municipal Building, 32 Middle Hollow Road, Huntington, New York.
§ 156-6. Hours for inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced between 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
§ 156-7. Requests for access.
§ 156-8. Subject matter list.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Village of Lloyd Harbor is not the custodian for such
records; or
(b) The records of which the Village of Lloyd Harbor is a custodian
cannot be found after diligent search.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted.
B. A response shall be given regarding any request reasonably describing
the record or records sought within five (5) business days of receipt of
the request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Wherever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five (5) business days of receipt of a request, he
or she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied
within ten (10) business days after the date of acknowledgment of
receipt of a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access
that may be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not records are available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
§ 156-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 156-8
156:132
§ 156-9. Denial of access; appeals.
§ 156-10. Fees.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 156-7D
of this Article, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lloyd Harbor shall hear appeals
for denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information Law.38
Such appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of denial.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the body designated to hear appeals
shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 156-7D.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The body designated to hear appeals shall transmit to the Committee on
Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of appeals. Such
copies shall be addressed to the Committee on Open Government,
Department of State, 162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12231.
F. The Board of Trustees shall inform the appellant and the Committee on
Open Government of its determination, in writing, within ten (10)
business days of receipt of an appeal. The determination shall be
transmitted to the Committee on Open Government in the same manner
as set forth in Subsection E of this section.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this Article.
38.Editor's Note: See § 85 et seq. of the Public Officers Law.
§ 156-8 RECORDS § 156-10
156:133
§ 156-11. Posting of notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records
access officer and appeals body and the location where records can be seen
or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are
kept and/or published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
B. The fee for photocopies not exceeding eight and one-half by fourteen (8
1/2 x 14) inches is as set by the Board of Trustees.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B of this
section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost (which is the
average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the
town, such as operator salaries).
§ 156-10 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 156-11
156:134
Chapter 163
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 67.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 163-1. Operation on roads prohibited.39
No person shall operate a wheeled device consisting of a strip of material
mounted over wheels, capable of being operated by a person in any manner
and moved by human power, which device is commonly called a
"skateboard," on any road in the village.
Chapter 168
SOLID WASTE
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 156-11 SKATEBOARDS § 163-1
163:135

ARTICLE I
Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 2-28-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 168-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Includes, but is not limited to, waste from the preparation,
cooking and consumption of food; metal, glass, plastic and paper containers
for food and household products; paper, cartons, rags, dead animals,
putrescible substances, sewage and similar disposable items.
RUBBISH — Dry combustible or noncombustible material which shall
include, but is not limited to, ashes, magazines, books, newspapers,
handbills, advertising circulars, clothing, wooden crates and pieces of
metal, junk, discarded furniture, rugs and carpets, inoperable or wrecked
machinery or motor vehicles, motor vehicles, more than two unregistered
vehicles not stored in a conforming building, motor vehicle parts, plumbing
fixtures and household appliances.[Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994; 6-18-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
TRASH — Includes materials such as lumber, building material, concrete,
rocks, fill and excavated earth.
§ 168-2. Prohibited actions.
No person shall throw, place, litter, deposit or dump or suffer or permit
any servant, agent, employee or person in his charge to throw, place, litter,
deposit or dump any garbage, rubbish or trash of any kind on the surface of
any street, public grounds or private property in the Village for the purpose
of abandonment or otherwise.
§ 168-3. Property to be maintained free of garbage, rubbish and
trash.
The owner of any private property in the Village shall at all times maintain
said premises free of garbage, rubbish and trash, except that this section
shall not prohibit the temporary storage for a reasonable time of garbage
and rubbish in authorized private receptacles for collection and trash in
connection with bona fide land clearing and building activity for which
appropriate permits and approvals have been granted.
§ 168-4. Clearing from private property.
A. Notice to remove. The Village shall notify, in writing, the owner of any
private property in the Village to properly dispose of any garbage,
rubbish or trash located on such owner's property. Such notice shall be
served personally upon or be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail to said owner at his last known address
or at the address of the owner as the same appears on the Village tax
§ 168-1 SKATEBOARDS § 168-4
163:137
roll for the property. Any existing accumulation of garbage, rubbish or
trash prohibited by this article, whether or not existing prior to the
enactment of this article, shall be removed or properly disposed of
within 15 days after the owner of the property receives written notice
to remove such material. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Action upon noncompliance. The failure, neglect or refusal of any such
owner so notified to properly remove or dispose of such garbage,
rubbish or trash within the period provided for in Subsection A above
shall constitute a violation of this article. If such failure, neglect or
refusal is determined by the Village to create a potential health or
safety hazard, the Village is hereby authorized and empowered to enter
the property and take appropriate action for the removal or disposal of
such garbage, rubbish or trash.
C. Collection of cost of removal. If the Village has effected the removal of
such garbage, rubbish or trash from such private property or has paid
for its removal, the actual cost of such removal, plus accrued interest at
the rate of 12% per annum from the date of the completion of the work,
if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be assessed against such
property as a special assessment, which special assessment shall
become a lien thereon when such special assessment is confirmed by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. Such special assessment shall be
collected by the Village by commencement of a proceeding in an
appropriate court of law or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 168-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 168-4
163:138
Chapter 170
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 171.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 168-4 STORM SEWERS § 168-4
170:139

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
§ 170-1. Legislative intent; objectives.
§ 170-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. It is the intent of this article to prohibit illicit discharges, activities, and
connections to the Village of Lloyd Harbor separate storm sewer system
that will satisfy the relevant part of the Phase II stormwater
management requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System regulations, administered by New York State
through the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System regulations
(SPDES), and to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the Village through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the MS4 (municipal separate storm sewer system) to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the
SPDES General Permit for MS4s.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
(2) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process, or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
(3) To prohibit illicit connections, activities, and discharges to the
MS4;
(4) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this article; and
(5) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the
improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet
waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning
products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment, and other
pollutants into the MS4.
A. For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the
singular; the word "shall" is mandatory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
§ 170-1 STORM SEWERS § 170-2
170:141
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
BMPs — Best management practices.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — An activity requiring authorization
under the SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activity, GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more
acres. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A professional engineer or architect
licensed by the state.
EPA — The federal Environmental Protection Agency.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
MS4, including but not limited to:
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge,
including treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted,
or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
(1)
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
(2)
§ 170-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-2
170:142
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater
discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — An activity requiring a SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — The municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
NYCRR — The New York Code, Rules, and Regulations.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, and industrial,
municipal, agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water which
may cause or reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters
of the state in contravention of pertinent standards promulgated by the
federal government, the state, the Village, or any other municipality or
department thereof, having legal jurisdiction to impose such standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land,
whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and
parking strips.
SMO — The Stormwater Management Officer.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
GP-02-01 — A DEC SPDES permit issued to developers of construction
activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 —
A DEC SPDES permit issued to municipalities to regulate discharges
from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA
(1) Owned or operated by the Village;
(2) Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
(3) Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined
at 40 CFR 122.2.
(4)
§ 170-2 STORM SEWERS § 170-2
170:143
established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater
control standards.
SPDES STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by
DEC that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE — The State of New York.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The designated officer of
the Village to enforce this article.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which
beneficial uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and
industrial use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the
DEC as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed
waters are estuaries, lakes, and streams that fall short of state surface
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. A condition
that applies when the Village has been notified that the discharge
of stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused
or has the potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an
applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the Village
must take necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
(1)
303(d) Listed Waters. A condition in the Village's MS4 permit that
applies when the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure
no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed
water.
(2)
Total maximum daily load strategy. A condition in the Village's
MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for control of
stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water body
or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from
the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to
September 10, 2003, the Village shall be required to modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(3)
A condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is
approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under such condition the Village
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the Village must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management
program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern
specified in the TMDL is achieved and conforms with SPDES (State
pollutant discharge elimination system).
(4)
§ 170-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-2
170:144
§ 170-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 170-4. Responsibility for administration.
The SMO shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 170-5. Discharge and illicit connection prohibitions; exceptions.
water quality standards and are not expected to improve within the
next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant
to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses
of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants, and is or will be discarded.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge, cause or
allow to be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than
stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the MS4 is prohibited, except as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless DEC or the Village has
determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants:
flushing of water line or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, airconditioning
condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from
individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
§ 170-2 STORM SEWERS § 170-5
170:145
§ 170-6. Prohibition against failing individual sewage treatment
systems.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system
in areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 170-7. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
The following activities are prohibited:
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state, county and Village
regulations is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the SMO prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of DEC, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted
for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the Village's MS4 or causes or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this subsection.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
§ 170-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-7
170:146
§ 170-8. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants
by use of BMPs.
A. Those types of activities that cause or contribute to:
(1) A violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit; and/or *(NOTE:
Upon notification to a person that such person is engaged in
activities that cause or contribute to violations of the Village's MS4
SPDES permit authorization, such person shall immediately
commence and continue thereafter with all due diligence to take all
reasonable actions to correct such activities such that such person
no longer causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.)
(2) The Village being subject to special conditions.
B. Failing individual sewage treatment systems; and
C. Improper management of pet waste; and
D. Any other activity that causes or contributes to a violation of the
Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization. *(NOTE: Upon notification
to a person that such person is engaged in activities that cause or
contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, such person shall immediately commence and continue
thereafter with all due diligence to take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that such person no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.)
A. Best management practices.
(1) Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges or activities
contaminating stormwater, the Village may require implementation
of BMPs to control those illicit discharges and activities.
(2) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
(3) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may
be the source of an illicit discharge or an activity contaminating
stormwater, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or
eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(4) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
§ 170-7 STORM SEWERS § 170-8
170:147
B. Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the Village's being subject to the special conditions, the
owner or operator of such individual sewage treatment systems shall be
required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals.
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(e) Most tanks should be pumped out every two to three years.
However, pumping may be more or less frequent depending on
use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks and blockages
should be done by the septage hauler at the time of pumping of
the tank contents.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR, Appendix 75-A, as the same
may be amended or superseded from time to time, to the
maximum extent practicable.
(b) A design professional shall prepare design plans for any type of
absorption field that involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the Village at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system.
§ 170-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-9
170:148
§ 170-9. Emergency situations; suspension of access to MS4.
§ 170-10. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the SMO prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 170-11. Access and monitoring of discharges.
A. Suspension of access to MS4. The SMO may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to
the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify
the person of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in
writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the Village's MS4 in violation of this article may have its
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The
violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if the SMO finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this subsection, without the prior approval of
the SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow reasonable access to the
SMO.
§ 170-9 STORM SEWERS § 170-11
170:149
§ 170-12. Notification of spills.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination,
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility, subject to
this article, such devices as are reasonably necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities, subject to this
article, to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article.
(5) The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the Village reasonable access to the facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(7) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the SMO is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the Village Court or, at its option, any other court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known
release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall
take necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup
of such release.
B. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services.
§ 170-11 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-12
170:150
§ 170-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
C. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall
notify the Village in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than
the next business day.
D. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Village within three business days of
the telephone notice.
E. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained
for at least three years.
A. Notice of violation. When the SMO, his designee, or other designee of
the Board of Trustees determines that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the SMO or
such designee may order compliance by written notice of violation to all
violators. Such notice may require all violators, without limitation to
take the actions listed below:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(6) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the Village may perform or have
performed by an independent contractor the remediation or
restoration, and the cost thereof shall become a lien upon the land
until paid, and if not paid, at the option of the Mayor, may be added
to the current tax bill for the subject premises and collected in the
same manner and with the annual Village real estate taxes.
B. Violations. Any activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to
this article may be enforced by injunction or as otherwise provided by
law.
C. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
§ 170-12 STORM SEWERS § 170-13
170:151
§ 170-14. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 170-15. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 170-16. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision,
or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article.
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both for conviction
of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine
not less than $350 nor more than $750 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $750 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Violations
of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 170-13 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 170-16
170:152
Chapter 171
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 171-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this legislation to adopt a stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control chapter that will satisfy the relevant part of
the Phase II stormwater regulations adopted by New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation ("DEC").
§ 171-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within the Village
and to address the findings of fact in this chapter. This chapter seeks to
meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from MS4s, Permit No.
GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities
GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 170-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-3
171:153
§ 171-3. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 171-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the
singular; the word "shall" is mandatory. Notwithstanding some
references for definitional purposes to the Village Code, the omission of
such references in other instances shall not be taken as an intent not to
use such definitions for specific terms that are not defined in this
section and are defined in said Code when it is deemed by the Building
§ 171-3 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-4
171:154
Inspector or any other official, board, or committee of the Village to be
appropriate to do so.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops,
using land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for
sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar
operation, or the construction of new structures associated with
agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has
filed an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having
walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or
property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner
for general public use.
DESIGN MANUAL — The State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, which
serves as the official guide for stormwater management principles,
methods and practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the "New
York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control"
manual, commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements, and structures
that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt, and water (e.g.,
building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, athletic courts,
etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A SPDES permit issued to
a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the
pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or
specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
§ 171-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-4
171:155
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the
subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic
vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
but not limited to clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance, and
placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater
than one acre, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total land
area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even
though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may
take place at different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person
holding proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A document legally recorded in the
office of the Suffolk County Clerk that acts as a property deed
restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
MS4s — Municipal separate stormwater sewer systems.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other
than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and
shall include but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural,
silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal, and urban
runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with
the stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the
next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality
measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids,
turbidity, or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified
as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge
from the land development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and/or
other habitats for threatened, endangered, or special concern species.
SILVICULTURE — Commercial care and cultivation of trees; forestry.
§ 171-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-4
171:156
SMO — The Stormwater Management Officer.
SMPs — Stormwater management practices.
SPDES — State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
GP-02-01 — A DEC SPDES permit issued to developers of construction
activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 —
A DEC SPDES permit issued to municipalities to regulate discharges
from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA
established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater
control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STATE — The State of New York.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all, or a
specified portion thereof, construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt, and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or
nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff
and mitigate its adverse impacts on property, natural resources, and the
environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of
stormwater management practices installed, stabilized, and operating
for the purpose of controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The designated officer of
the Village to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable Village board or committee and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either
structural, nonstructural, or a combination of the two, that are
determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing flood
damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source
pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and
after construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground,
resulting from precipitation.
§ 171-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-4
171:157
§ 171-5. Statutory authority.
The Board of Trustees has the authority to enact and amend rules,
regulations or local laws for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or
general welfare of the Village and for the protection and enhancement of its
physical environment. The Board of Trustees may include in any such rules,
regulations or local law provisions for the appointment of any municipal
officer, employees, or independent contractor to effectuate, administer, and
enforce such chapter.
§ 171-6. Applicability.
§ 171-7. Procedures.
The SMO shall accept stormwater pollution prevention plans and notify the
applicable Village board of such plans. The SMO may either:
STRUCTURE — As defined in this Code, Chapter 205, Zoning.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE — Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the
territorial seas of the state and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except
those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with
natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially
within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers
and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons
which also meet the criteria of this definition, are not surface waters of
the state. The said exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water
which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a
disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of
the state.
SWPPP — Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
VILLAGE — Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body
of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface
water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse
or to the public storm drain.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities in the
Village.
B. All other activities that are subject to review and approval by any board
of the Village shall be reviewed by such board consistent with the
standards contained in this chapter. These activities shall be required to
submit a SWPPP to the SMO who shall approve the SWPPP if it
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 171-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-7
171:158
§ 171-8. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt:
§ 171-9. Stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPP).
A. Review the plans; the Board of Trustees may engage the services of a
registered professional engineer to review the plans, specifications, and
related documents and cost to be borne by the applicant.
B. Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. Agricultural activity.
B. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the SMO.
C. Any part of a subdivision, if the subdivision has been finally approved by
the Village Planning Board on or before the effective date of this
chapter, except where the Planning Board has reserved site plan review
or other contiguous jurisdiction.
A. SWPPP requirement. No application for approval of a land development
activity shall be reviewed until the appropriate board has received a
SWPPP prepared in accordance with the specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of SWPPP.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawings for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface waters; wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow, or equipment storage areas; and locations of the
stormwater discharges. The site map should be at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
(c) Description of the soils present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation,
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the Erosion Control Manual, not
§ 171-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-9
171:159
more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless
pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing specifying the locations, sizes
and lengths of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Names of the receiving waters;
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities meeting Condition A, B, or C below
shall also include water quantity and water quality controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth below as
applicable:
§ 171-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-9
171:160
(a) Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either impaired
water identified on the DEC's 303(d) list of impaired waters, or
such superseding list as may be prepared by DEC, or a total
maximum daily load designated watershed for which pollutants
in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(b) Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C. Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing at least one but less than five acres of land during
the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of
single-family residences and construction activities at
agricultural properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Condition A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1) of this section.
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(c) Site map/construction drawings showing the specific locations
and sizes of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms.
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(f) Dimensions, material specifications, and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 171-11 of this
chapter.
§ 171-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-9
171:161
§ 171-10. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
(j) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a certified
professional or professional engineer and must be signed by
the professional who prepared the plan, who must certify that
the design of all stormwater management practices meet the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional, or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meet the requirements
in this chapter.
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address, and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statements shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with those technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
§ 171-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-10
171:162
§ 171-11. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
(1) The Design Manual.
(2) The Erosion Control Manual.
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with the technical standards, the
applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical
standards above (Subsection A) and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a
licensed professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the state.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development activities that meet Condition A, B or C of
§ 171-9B(2)(a), (b) or (c), the applicant or developer shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5
inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook.
(3) For grading, the applicant, developer or representative shall be on
site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment and control practices.
B. Maintenance easements. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has
a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the Clerk of the County of Suffolk after approval
by counsel for the Village.
§ 171-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-11
171:163
§ 171-12. Construction inspection.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall be operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this
chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as a
minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 171-10C.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding
on all subsequent landowners or benefitted landowners and recorded in
the office of the Clerk of the County of Suffolk as a deed restriction on
the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement
shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of this chapter. The
Village or another municipal entity, in lieu of a maintenance agreement,
at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future
stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets all the
requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual
access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and
regular maintenance.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The SMO may require such inspections as he deems necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve
that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein
the work fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter and
the SWPPP as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall
notify the SMO at least 48 hours before any of the following, and/or
as otherwise required by the SMO:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
§ 171-11 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-12
171:164
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until all violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the SMO.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is responsible
for conducting inspections of SMPs. All applicants are required to
submit as-built plans for any SMPs located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspections of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type
which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of
state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include
but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or
water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of
drainage control facilities and other SMPs. This inspection shall be
done by a professional engineer or a certified professional in erosion
control.
D. Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and reporting
from entities subject to this chapter as necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. To the maximum extent permitted by law,
when any new stormwater management facility is installed on private
property or when any new connection is made between private property
and the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the
Village the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
Subsection B.
§ 171-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-13
171:165
§ 171-13. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
§ 171-14. Fees for services.
The Village may require any person undertaking land development activities
regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable fees, costs and expenses at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village in its approval of
the SWPPP, the Village may require the applicant or developer to
provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit, in its discretion and in a form approved by
the Village Attorney, from a financial or surety institution approved by
the Board of Trustees which guarantees satisfactory completion of the
project and names the Village as the beneficiary. The security shall be in
an amount to be determined by the Village based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
is released from liability by the Village provided that such period shall
not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Village. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits,
if any, shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village with a cash escrow, a maintenance bond, or an
irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the Village Attorney
from a financial institution or surety approved by the Board of Trustees
to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management and erosion control facilities both during and after
construction, and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the
developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities,
the Village may draw upon the escrow, bond, or account, from time to
time, to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs. To the extent that such escrow, bond,
or letter of credit, because of such draw, is no longer sufficient to
ensure the proper operation and maintenance of the facilities, the
Village may require an additional escrow, bond, or letter of credit.
C. Recordkeeping. The Village may require entities subject to this chapter
to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
§ 171-13 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-14
171:166
performed by the Village or performed by a third party for the Village,
including engineering and legal, in accordance with such resolutions as may
be adopted from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
§ 171-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the SMO, his designee, or other designee of
the Board of Trustees determines that a land development activity is
not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, he may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner and/
or developer. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Building Inspector, his designee, or other
designee of the Board of Trustees may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land development activities, except those activities
that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stopwork
order shall be in effect until the Village confirms that the land
development activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both for conviction
of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
§ 171-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-15
171:167
§ 171-16. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 171-17. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or chapter and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
than $350 nor more than $750 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent
offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $750 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Violations
of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter the SMO may prohibit the occupancy of said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition or to such other condition as shall best protect
the property and the adjacent properties from the problems of erosion
and sediment deposits off the land that may be required by virtue of the
actions of the violator, all in the discretion of the SMO. In the event that
restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the
SMO may either:
(1) Direct that the remediation and/or restoration work be performed
with Village personnel and/or third-party contractors and the cost
thereof shall constitute a lien, charge, and levy upon the real
property where upon the violation exists until it is paid or otherwise
satisfied or discharged and shall be collected by the Village
Treasurer. Such charge shall include, among other things,
administrative, legal, and actual expenses incurred by the Village,
and shall be collected in the same manner provided by law for the
collection of delinquent taxes; or
(2) Seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property, at the
cost and expense, including those of the litigation and the fees of
witnesses and attorneys, of the violator.
§ 171-15 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 171-18
171:168
§ 171-18. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision,
or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this chapter.
Chapter 172
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 109.
§ 171-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 171-18
171:169

ARTICLE I
Excavations in Streets
[Adopted 2-28-1983 as Article 6 of L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 172-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation, including public service companies and
public authorities, shall make any excavation in any public street, highway
or bicycle path owned and maintained by the village for any purpose without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Clerk.
§ 172-2. Application; bond; insurance; fee.
A. Application for a permit under this Article shall be filed with the Village
Clerk on a form provided by the village.
B. Each application shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant to restore the street, highway or bicycle path pavement and
surrounding terrain to the condition existing before excavation.
C. A public utility company or a public authority must file with the Village
Clerk a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.)
satisfactory in form to the village to cover all applications under this
Article for work to be done within the terms of the bond. If the amount
of such bond shall be insufficient to cover all costs of performing the
restoration, such company or authority shall be responsible for the
deficiency.
D. Applications submitted by anyone except a public utility company or a
public authority must be accompanied by a cash bond in such amount
as may be required by the Village Engineer. Said bond shall be
conditioned upon proper restoration of the street, highway or bicycle
path within the time limits set by the Village Engineer. After the street
is properly restored, the cash bond, less the reasonable engineering
and inspection fees incurred by the village, as set forth, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be returned to the
applicant. If the amount of such bond shall be insufficient to cover all
costs of performing the restoration, the applicant shall be responsible
for the deficiency. In the event that the work for which application is
made is done to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, the bond shall
be released and returned to the applicant. [Amended 11-21-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
E. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of liability
insurance, issued to the applicant, evidencing that there is then in
effect a policy of liability insurance with the village as named insured
covering all risks inherent in the work to be done with a minimum limit
of three million dollars ($3,000,000.) for bodily injury, including death,
in any one (1) occurrence and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.) property damage with exclusions for excavation, collapse
and underground construction eliminated and with completed
§ 172-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 172-2
171:171
§ 172-3. Notices of work required.
§ 172-4. Guarding of excavations; fire hydrants and drainage
facilities.
§ 172-5. Inspection of completed work; release.
A permittee shall notify the Police Department and the Village Clerk when
work has been completed, after which an inspection will be made by the
operations endorsement. The applicant shall also keep such insurance
in force at all times during the term of the permit. Further, the applicant
will indemnify and hold the village harmless from all damage resulting
from activities related to his application.
F. An application fee as set forth, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Trustees shall be paid to the village in connection with each
application hereunder. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. A permittee hereunder shall give notice of any proposed excavation to
any public service companies and public authorities having lines, mains
or other property in the street and within twenty (20) feet of the
proposed work; and no work shall be commenced or done under such
permit until such requirement of notice has been fully complied with.
B. Before commencing work under any permit, the permittee shall give
twenty-four (24) hours' advance written notice thereof to the Police
Department and to the Village Clerk. Such notice shall specify the date
and hour when such work will be commenced.
A. Any permittee making an excavation under this Article shall erect
suitable barriers or guards for the protection of persons using the
streets or bicycle paths; shall set up and maintain, during the hours of
darkness, sufficient lights or flares to properly illuminate the area; shall
take all necessary precautions for the protection of all property which
may be endangered by such excavation or other work incident thereto;
shall comply with all directions given by the Highway Superintendent in
respect to such barriers, lights, flares and protective measures; and
shall keep clear at all times a sufficient and safe passageway for all
pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
B. In connection with the operations under such permit, no matter shall be
deposited or piled up within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant or
village drainage facility.
C. Upon the completion of the work, the road shall be repaired with a
minimum of 1 1/2 inches of new asphalt from one edge of the road to
the other for the full extent of the repair. The means and methods for
installing this overlay including saw cutting and sealing of seams, if
required, shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer.
[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 172-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 172-5
171:172
village; and upon approval of the work, a release will be granted to the
permittee. Until the granting of such release, the permittee shall remain
liable for proper guarding and protection as provided herein. No approval
or release shall be given by the village until a sufficient period of time, not
less than thirty (30) days, has expired in which the completed work may be
observed under normal conditions.
§ 172-6. Emergency work.
In the event that an emergency threatening damage to life or property
requires prompt beginning of work covered hereby, the person, firm or
corporation undertaking such work shall give immediate notice thereof to
the Police Department and shall make application for a permit at least on
the next business day at the office of the Village Clerk. The fact that the
work is required, because of an emergency, to be begun or to be done
without first obtaining a permit shall not, except as otherwise provided
herein, excuse noncompliance with this Article.
§ 172-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 172-6
171:173
Chapter 175
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 8,
Art. V, and Ch. 106.
Application and hearing fees — See Ch. 8, Art.
VII.
Approval of plats; development of filed
plats — See Ch. 8, Art. VIII.
Excavations — See Ch. 172, Art. I.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 172-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 172-6
175:174
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 175-1. Statutory authority; adoption.
By authority of Article 7 of the Village Law, as amended, the Planning Board
on April 18, 1991, after a public hearing, adopted these regulations for the
subdivision of land within the Village, which regulations were approved by
the Board of Trustees on July 15, 1991.
§ 175-2. Purpose; grant of power to Planning Board.
For the purpose of providing for the future growth and development of
the Village and affording adequate facilities for the housing, transportation,
distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of its
population, the Board of Trustees has authorized and empowered the
Planning Board to approve plats and to approve the development of plats,
entirely or partially undeveloped and which have been filed in the office of
the Clerk of Suffolk County prior to the appointment of the Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to approve plats.
§ 175-3. Approval required prior to sale or development.
No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or having made a
subdivision, as defined herein, within the territorial limits of the Village of
Lloyd Harbor shall make any unconditional contract for the sale of or shall
unconditionally offer to sell such subdivision or any part thereof or shall
proceed with any development, as defined herein, until he, she or it has
obtained from the Planning Board of the Village of Lloyd Harbor approval
of the proposed subdivision and/or development pursuant to the procedure
outlined in this chapter.
§ 175-4. Plats straddling municipal boundaries.
Whenever access to the subdivision can be had only across land in another
municipality or over an easement or right-of-way across land not owned
by the owner of the premises to be subdivided, the Planning Board may
request confirmation from the Village Attorney that an access road has been
legally established and shall ascertain that such access road is adequately
improved or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is
sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In
general, lot lines shall be laid out so as not to cross Village boundary lines.
§ 175-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-4
175:175

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 175-5. Word usage.
§ 175-6. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, Suffolk
County, New York.
BUFFER AREA — A vegetated area comprising the outer 40% of the
required setback area for side and rear yards.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 4-2002]
CONSTRUCTION PLAN — The maps and engineering drawings described
in § 175-46 of this chapter, accompanying a subdivision plat and showing
the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — The standards and specifications adopted
by the Board of Trustees for the construction of new streets and related
improvements.
DEVELOPMENT — The act of building structures and/or installing site
or street improvements and any land clearing or grading in connection
therewith; also, such structures, improvements, grading and dredging.
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of storm sewers,
drainage ditches or drainage systems, including land required along a
stream or watercourse for protecting the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein, to safeguard the public against flood and/or to conserve
the water supply.
EASEMENT — The authorization by a property owner for the use by another
and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the Village of Lloyd Harbor.
LOT — A parcel of land which qualifies for immediate or future transfer of
ownership, improvement or building development and which complies with
Chapter 205, Zoning.
A. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include
the singular.
B. The word "person" includes a corporation, association and a
partnership, as well as an individual. The word "building" includes
"structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof." The word "street" includes "road," "highway," "lane,"
"thoroughfare" and "way."
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
§ 175-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-6
175:177
MASTER PLAN — The Comprehensive Master Plan for the development
of the Village prepared by the Planning Board, pursuant to § 7-722 of the
Village Law, which shows, among other things, desirable streets, parks,
public reservations, sites for public buildings and such other features as will
provide for the improvement of the Village and its future growth, protection
and development, and including any part of such plan separately adopted
and any modification or parts thereof.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Board of Trustees, pursuant
to § 7-724 of the Village Law, showing the streets, highways and parks
heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments
thereto adopted by the Board of Trustees, pursuant to § 7-724 of the Village
Law, or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats
by the Planning Board and the subsequent filing of such plats pursuant to
§ 7-732 of the Village Law.
PARTITIONING — A subdivision which does not involve the layout of any
new street nor the change in lines, drainage or grade of any existing street
nor the installation of any street improvement.
PLAN, SKETCH — A sketch plan, described in § 175-44 of this chapter, of
a preliminary plat to enable the subdivider to discuss informally with the
Planning Board and Village officials the form of the proposed subdivision as
related to the objectives and requirements of these regulations.
PLAT, SUBDIVISION — The final map or drawing, described in § 175-47 of
this chapter, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to
the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted
by the subdivider to the Clerk of Suffolk County for recording in accordance
with law.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
§ 175-45 of this chapter, indicating the proposed manner and/or layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration.
STREET — A strip of public or private land devoted to movement over which
the abutting owners have the right of access.
STREET, DEAD-END — A street with only one (1) outlet.
STREET, LOCAL — A minor street which serves or will serve primarily for
access to abutting properties.
STREET, MAJOR — A principal thoroughfare of considerable continuity
which is or will be primarily a traffic artery for intercommunication between
communities or large areas.
STREET, PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET, SECONDARY — A street supplementary to the major highway
system and primarily a means of intercommunication between this system
and smaller areas or among smaller areas.
STREET, WIDTH — The street right-of-way or distance between property
lines measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
§ 175-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-6
175:178
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who or which lays out or proposes to lay out for the purpose of sale or
development any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land (including land that
comprises contiguous parcels separately acquired and held in common
ownership) by a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association as
owner, lessee or contract vendee into two or more parcels, lots, plots
or sites of land by sale, gift, devise, exchange, offer or unconditional
contract.[Amended 7-19-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor.
ZONING — Chapter 205, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Lloyd Harbor,
together with any and all amendments thereto.
§ 175-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-6
175:179

ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 175-7. Approval required.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed within the territorial
jurisdiction of the Board and before any permit for the development of
such land or for the erection of a structure thereon will be granted, the
subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure
approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with this chapter. Three
principal steps are involved, namely:
§ 175-8. Preapplication procedure.
A. The preapplication procedure.
B. The procedure for conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
C. The procedure for approval of the subdivision plat.
A. Meeting. Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of
the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the authorized
representative of the Planning Board, Conservation Board, and any
other Village Board employee or consultant having jurisdiction over the
matter to discuss his/her sketch plan, which shall comply with the
requirements of § 175-44 and the requirements for improvements and
public facilities and services. This step does not require a formal
application, fee or filing of a plat with the Board. [Amended
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. Purpose. The purpose of the preapplication procedure is to afford the
subdivider an opportunity to consult early and informally with the
Board's representative before preparation of the preliminary plat and
before formal application for its approval in order to save time and
unnecessary expense.
C. Responsibilities of subdivider. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
(1) Before preparing a sketch plan or attending the initial conference,
the subdivider should familiarize himself/herself with the
regulations, standards and requirements contained herein. It is
recommended that the subdivider discuss with the Village's
authorized representatives the requirements as to general layout of
streets, lots, buffer areas, and reservations and similar matters
and, with the Engineer of the Village, street improvements,
drainage, sewerage, water and like matters, as well as the
availability of existing services. In the case of land within 500 feet
of Village boundaries and other facilities described in § 239-n of the
General Municipal Law, the subdivider should also consult with the
Suffolk County Planning Commission.
§ 175-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-8
175:181
§ 175-9. Preliminary plat procedure.
(2) The subdivider should also consult with parties potentially
interested with him or her or with the ultimate users of the
development with a view to reaching, at this initial stage, firm
conclusions regarding the market demand, the suitability of the
location of the proposed subdivision, the most advantageous
subdivision plan and the arrangement of streets, lots and other
features of the proposed development which shall be provided to
the Board.
A. Application and fee. If the subdivider after complying with § 175-8 shall
request the consideration by the Board of a preliminary plat, 12 copies
of the application, the preliminary plat, a full environmental assessment
form (EAF) for all Type I actions and a short-form EAF for others, and a
coastal consistency assessment form (CAF) which shall in all respects
comply with this chapter, shall be presented to the Village Clerk at least
45 days prior to the meeting of the Board at which it is requested to be
considered. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee and
deposits, payable to the Village of Lloyd Harbor, as established by the
Board of Trustees, together with stamped envelopes addressed to each
of the owners of property within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision.
Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and payment of the fee, and
deposits, the application shall be deemed to be officially submitted on
the date it is certified, in writing, as being complete and correct by the
Village Attorney, together with the subdivision plat, construction plans
and all other items required by this chapter. The Village Clerk shall
thereafter deliver the preliminary plat to the Board. [Amended
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. Study of preliminary plat. The subdivider or his/her representative shall
attend the Board meeting and any public hearing it may call when the
preliminary plat is considered. The Board will study the practicability of
the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the requirements of
Article IV. If, in the opinion of the Board, the size character, effect on
neighboring property or other aspects of the proposed subdivision
warrant, the Board may hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
C. Staking of proposed streets and field trip. To facilitate study of the
preliminary plat in the field, the Board may require the subdivider to
provide an aerial photograph of the premises and to stake certain roads
at intervals of fifty (50) feet along their center lines. Each stake shall be
marked for ready identification on the preliminary plat and shall show
the approximate height of proposed cut and fill at that point. The Board
may schedule a field trip to the site of the proposed subdivision, which
the subdivider should attend.
D. Action on preliminary plat.
§ 175-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-9
175:182
§ 175-10. Final plat procedure. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
(1) After the submission of a fully completed application and
preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall comply with the
requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review Act40 and
thereafter take action within the time prescribed by Article 7 of the
Village Law to conditionally approve, with or without modifications,
or disapprove such preliminary plat; and the ground of any
modification required or the ground for disapproval shall be stated
upon the records of the Planning Board. The time period within
which the Planning Board must act shall be extended by any time
that is needed by the Board to comply with all applicable provisions
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) and Village
environmental regulations. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
(2) Following review of the preliminary plat and other material
submitted in accordance with this chapter and discussion with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
improvements to be made by him/her, the Board, after complete
compliance with all applicable provisions of SEQRA and Village
environmental regulations, may conditionally approve the
preliminary plat and authorize the preparation of the subdivision
plat in accordance with the preliminary plat as submitted or
modified by the Board.
(3) If the preliminary plat is entirely unsatisfactory, the Board shall
either authorize the preparation of the subdivision plat in
accordance with the preliminary plat, with suggested modifications
by the Board, or reject the preliminary plat entirely, giving the
reasons therefor.
E. Notation of action. The action of the Board shall be noted on two (2)
copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any changes
or conditions required, or in a written communication or decision of the
Board, a copy of which shall be provided to the subdivider.
F. Effect of authorization. Authorization shall be deemed a tentative
approval of the design submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to
the subdivider in the preparation of the subdivision plat.
A. Final plat requirements. The subdivision plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat, as tentatively approved by the
Board, and to the requirements of § 175-47.
B. Number of copies and time for submitting application. Twelve copies of
the application for final approval, the subdivision plat, construction
plans and all other items required by this chapter shall be prepared as
40.Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 175-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-10
175:183
specified in § 175-47 and shall be submitted to the Board within six
months after the date of authorization of preparation of the subdivision
plat; otherwise, such authorization shall expire unless an extension of
time is applied for and granted, in writing, by the Board.
C. Application and submission date. A complete application for final
approval of the subdivision plat shall be submitted by the owner or by
his or her duly authorized agent, in writing, to the Board at least 30
days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The
application shall be deemed to be officially submitted on the date it is
certified, in writing, as being complete and correct by the Village
Attorney, together with the subdivision plat, construction plans and all
other items required by this chapter.
D. Endorsement of Suffolk County Department of Health and public
districts. Proposed water supply and sewerage service facilities in the
subdivision shall be approved by the Suffolk County Department of
Health and by any water, water supply, drainage, improvement or sewer
district having jurisdiction. Endorsement of approval shall be obtained
by the subdivider and submitted to the Board prior to the approval of
the subdivision plat.
E. Approval by other planning authorities. Pursuant to § 239-n of the
General Municipal Law and Section 1333 of the County Government
Law of Suffolk County, each subdivision plat shall be referred to the
Suffolk County Planning Commission if the plat of real property lies
within one mile of a nuclear power plant or airport or within a distance
of 500 feet from the boundary of the Village; the boundary of any
existing or proposed county, state or federal park or other recreational
area; the right-of-way of any existing or proposed county or state
parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway; the existing or
proposed right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by
Suffolk County or for which the county has established channel lines;
the existing or proposed boundary of any other county, state or
federally owned land; or the Long Island Sound and any bay in Suffolk
County or estuary or any of the foregoing bodies of water. If the County
Planning Agency disapproves or recommends modification of such a
proposed subdivision plat, the Planning Board shall not act contrary to
such disapproval or recommendation of modification, except by a vote
of a majority plus one of all the members thereof and after the adoption
of a resolution fully setting forth the reasons for such contrary action.
F. Public hearing. Upon receipt of the application and all required
accompanying material, the Board shall advertise and hold a public
hearing on the proposed subdivision. The Board shall submit notice to
the official Village newspaper, which shall be published at least 15 days
prior to the hearing, and the applicant shall mail notices to property
owners within 1,000 feet of the premises at least 15 days before the
hearing, and the applicant shall simultaneously file a copy of the
subdivision plat and construction plans with the Village Clerk for public
review prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall give
§ 175-10 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-10
175:184
§ 175-11. Signing of plat; filing.
opportunity to any interested person to examine or comment upon the
subdivision plat and construction plans.
G. Action on subdivision plat. After the public hearing, the Board will
consider the matter and, within the time period permitted by the Village
Law, provided that there first has been compliance with all SEQRA
requirements, will approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the
subdivision application by resolution which will set forth in detail any
conditions to which approval is subject or reasons for disapproval. Such
conditions shall include preservation of buffer areas. If the subdivision
plat is approved, the subdivider shall be required to file a formal
declaration, executed by the applicant as owner of the land shown on
the plat, covenanting on behalf of such owner and the successors in title
and assigns of such owner with the Incorporated Village of Lloyd
Harbor that the respective owners of all the lots abutting on each
private street shown on the plat (which plat shall be identified in the
declaration by name, map number and filing date) shall be jointly and
severally responsible to the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor for
the maintenance of the surface and drainage facilities of such private
street; and all owners of all lots shown on such plat who have or will
have rights to enter upon and make use of any reserved or common land
area, such as, without limitation, beaches, landing areas or other jointly
used facilities, located in said plat shall be jointly and severally
responsible to the Village of Lloyd Harbor for the maintenance of each
such reserved or common land area and to keep such area in clean, safe
and orderly condition, free from rubbish and debris; and that the
Village shall be authorized to enforce each such responsibility above
provided by appropriate action in the courts to obtain an injunction or
for reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the Village for such
maintenance when the owners have failed, after notice by certified
mail, to perform such duty. Such declaration shall be in a form approved
by the Attorneys for the Village and recorded, at the applicant's sole
cost and expense, in the Suffolk County Clerk's office forthwith after the
filing of the plat; and a certified copy thereof shall be filed with the
Village Clerk as a condition precedent to the issuance of any building
permit relating to land on the plat.
H. Revision of subdivision plat. The subdivider will be given a copy of the
Board's resolution and, in the event that modifications are required,
shall revise the subdivision plat and construction plans to conform
thereto.
A. Signing of subdivision plat.
(1) After completion of the final subdivision plat for recording and of
construction plans in accordance with the Board's resolution, the
original tracing and two (2) prints of each shall be submitted to the
Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson for final review within the
§ 175-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-11
175:185
§ 175-12. Partitioning procedure.
The procedure for approval of a partitioning and/or the development
thereof, including compliance with SEQRA, shall be the same as that for
a subdivision. In cases where the Board finds, after study of the sketch
plan, that the proposed lots would each front on a street duly placed on the
Official Map, which street is improved to the satisfaction of the Board; meet
the lot size requirements of Chapter 205, Zoning, and the objectives of this
chapter; and would not be directly related to a drainageway, as later defined
time specified in said resolution. Approval of the subdivision plat
shall be endorsed thereon as follows:
(a) When a bond is filed. Approval of the plat shall be endorsed
thereon after the bond has been approved and filed and all of
the conditions of the Board's resolution pertaining to the plat
have been satisfied.
(b) When no bond is filed. Approval of the plat shall be endorsed
thereon after all conditions of the Board's resolution have been
satisfied and all required improvements completed to the
satisfaction of the Board.
(2) Number of copies to be signed. Approval of the Board will be noted
on the plat by the Chairperson of the Board or, in the absence of the
Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson, signing and dating the
tracing cloth original of the subdivision plat, which will be returned
to the subdivider and one (1) print of the plat, which will be
retained by the Board.
B. Filing plat with County Clerk. In accordance with the Village Law, the
approved subdivision plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the
Suffolk County Clerk within ninety (90) days of the date of signing of the
plat by the Planning Board representative. The approval of any plat not
so filed shall expire ninety (90) days from the date of signing by the
Board representative.
C. Submission of copies of filed maps. The subdivider shall submit ten (10)
copies of the subdivision plat containing the endorsement of the Suffolk
County Clerk to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of
filing.
D. Plat void if revised after signature. No changes erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made on any subdivision plat after approval has
been granted by the Board and endorsed, in writing, on the plat. In the
event that any subdivision plat, when recorded contains any such
changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall
institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of the
County Clerk. Any erasures made on a plat prior to its signing shall be
initialed by the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Board at the
time of signing.
§ 175-11 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-12
175:186
in this section, the Board may waive the requirements for submission and
approval of a preliminary plat and authorize the subdividing owner to
prepare a subdivision plat for approval of the Board and for recording upon
fulfillment of the requirements of the applicable sections of this chapter
and the conditions stipulated in such waiver and authorization, if any. The
"drainageway" referred to above is defined to mean the lands required
for the installation of storm sewers, drainage ditches or drainage systems,
including land required along a stream or watercourse for protecting the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public
against flood and/or to conserve the water supply.
§ 175-13. Development procedure.
The procedure for approval of the development, as defined in § 175-6, of a
plat entirely or partially undeveloped and which has been filed in the office
of the Clerk of Suffolk County prior to the appointment of the Board and the
grant to such Board of authority to approve plats shall be the same as that
for a subdivision, pursuant to § 7-728 of the Village Law.
§ 175-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-13
175:187

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 175-14. General standards.
A. Considerations. In considering applications for subdivision of land and/
or development, the Board shall be guided by the standards set forth
herein. Said standards shall be deemed to be minimum requirements
for the convenience, health, safety and welfare of the Village.
B. Character of land. Land to be subdivided and/or developed shall be of
such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without
danger to health or peril from fire, flood, erosion or other menace. Land
subject to such hazards shall not be subdivided nor developed for
residential purposes nor for such other uses as may increase danger to
health, life or property or aggravate a flood hazard, but such land may
be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such danger nor produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
C. Conformance to Master Plan and Official Map. Subdivisions and/or
developments shall conform to the Official Map and shall be properly
related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan. The plat shall
include all streets shown on said plan and Map, which are within the
site, and such other streets as the Board may require.
D. Frontage on improved street. The area proposed to be subdivided and/
or developed shall have frontage on and direct access to a street duly
placed on the Official Map, and if such street is private, it shall be
improved to the satisfaction of the Board or there shall be a bond held
by the Village covering such improvement.
E. Preservation of natural cover. Land to be subdivided and/or developed
shall be laid out and improved in reasonable conformity with existing
topography in order to minimize grading and cut and fill; to retain,
insofar as possible, the natural contours; to limit stormwater runoff;
and to conserve the natural cover and soil. No topsoil, sand or gravel
shall be removed from any lots shown on any subdivision plat, except
for the purpose of improving such lots and for the laying out of streets
shown thereon. Topsoil so removed shall be restored to a depth of six
(6) inches and properly seeded and fertilized on the areas of such lots
not occupied by buildings or structures. No excess topsoil so removed
shall be disposed of outside of the boundaries of the Village, except
upon the approval of the Planning Board.
F. Preservation of existing natural features. Existing natural features that
enhance the attractiveness of the site and which would add value to
residential or other development or to the Village as a whole, such as
trees, buffer areas, watercourses, ponds and similar irreplaceable
assets, shall be preserved, insofar as possible, by harmonious design of
the subdivision. The Board may make reasonable modifications in
standards for plats of streets to accomplish such purposes as well as the
§ 175-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-14
175:189
§ 175-15. Streets.
objectives noted in Subsection E. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
A. General. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the Master Plan and Official Map and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
existing topography and natural features and to public convenience and
safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land
to be served by such streets.
B. Relation to topography. Street layouts and grades shall be related
appropriately to the existing topography, and streets shall be arranged
to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at or above the
grades of the streets. Steep grades shall be avoided as well as
combinations of steep grades and curves.
C. Streets not shown on Master Plan or Official Map. Where proposed
streets are not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, such streets
shall be of sufficient width, suitably located and adequately constructed
to accommodate the prospective traffic and to facilitate drainage and to
afford access for fire-fighting, snow removal and road maintenance
equipment. Such streets shall be coordinated so as to compose a
convenient system and to cause no undue hardship to adjoining
properties.
D. Arrangements. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the
continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when
such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic,
effective fire protection or efficient provision of utilities and also where
such continuation is in accordance with the Master Plan. If the adjacent
property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street
temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A
temporary circular turnaround shall be provided on all temporary deadend
streets, with the notation on the plat that land outside the normal
street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is
continued.
E. Intersections.
(1) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twentyfive
(125) feet shall not be permitted, except with the approval of
the Board.
(2) Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to ninety degrees
(90º) as possible. Toward this end, an oblique street should be
curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at
right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Where
three (3) or more streets intersect, a turning circle or other special
treatment may be required by the Board. Wherever two (2) streets
§ 175-14 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-15
175:190
intersect at an angle smaller than seventy-five degrees (75º), the
right-of-way returns and the relation of the gutter grades shall be
given special treatment, as determined by the Board, and islands
to channelize traffic may be required.
(3) Intersections of major streets by other streets shall be at least eight
hundred (800) feet apart, if possible. Cross (four-cornered) street
intersections shall be avoided, insofar as possible, except as shown
on the Master Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A
distance at least equal to the minimum required lot depth, plus
twenty-five (25) feet, shall be maintained between center lines of
offset intersecting streets. Grades shall be limited to no more than
two percent (2%) within fifty (50) feet of an intersection.
F. Treatment along major arterial streets. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed major arterial street, the Board may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep
lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
G. Provision for future resubdivision. Where a tract is subdivided into lots
substantially larger than the minimum size required by Chapter 205,
Zoning, the Board may require that streets and lots be laid out so as to
permit future resubdivision in accordance with the requirements
contained in this chapter.
H. Dead-end streets.
(1) Where a street does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision
and its continuation is not required by the Board for access to
adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to
such boundary than one hundred (100) feet or the minimum lot
depth prescribed by Chapter 205, Zoning, whichever is greater.
However, the Board shall require the reservation of a twenty-footwide
easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic or utilities.
(2) For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited to a
reasonable length and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet and a street property line diameter
of at least one hundred (100) feet.
I. Design standards for streets. Streets shall meet the design standards
set forth below. In cases where street classification is not shown on the
Master Plan or Official Map, the Board shall determine the type of each
street. The standards do not cover major streets which would be built
by the state or county.
§ 175-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-15
175:191
(1) Widths. Generally for streets not shown on the Master Plan, the
right-of-way width shall be not less than:
(a) Local street: fifty (50) feet.
(b) Secondary street: sixty (60) feet.
(c) Major street: eighty (80) feet.
(2) Grades.
(a) Grades of all streets shall be the reasonable minimum and,
unless warranted by extenuating circumstances, shall be:
[1] Local and marginal streets: not less than one percent (1%)
or more than eight percent (8%).
[2] Secondary and major streets: not less than one percent
(1%) or more than five percent (5%).
(b) Gradients shall be used to facilitate surface drainage to proper
natural or artificial outlets.
(3) Changes in grade. All changes in street grades shall be connected
by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition
and proper sight distance, as approved by the Board.
(4) Tangents. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall
be introduced between reverse curves on all streets, except where
a greater length is required by the Board.
(5) Curves. When the alignment of the street changes more than ten
degrees (10º), the tangents shall be connected by a curve with a
radius of not less than two hundred (200) feet unless a greater
radius is required by the Board to ensure a proper sight distance.
J. Reserve strips. In general, reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited, except where their control is placed in the Village
under conditions approved by the Board.
K. Property lines at intersections. Property lines at intersections shall be
established in such a manner as to place within the street right-of-way
the triangular area which is formed by the street lines extended and a
straight line adjoining points on said street lines thirty (30) feet distant
from their point of intersection.
L. Street names. All streets shall be named, and such names shall be
approved by the Board. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound
and in spelling from other street names in the Village or adjoining
municipalities so as not to cause confusion. A street which is a
continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name. In general,
street names shall conform to the following classifications:
(1) Road: a major or secondary street.
§ 175-15 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-15
175:192
§ 175-16. Easements.
§ 175-17. Lots.
(2) Drive, Lane, Way or Path: a local residential street, except as
follows:
(a) Court or Place: a permanent dead-end street.
(b) Circle: a street that returns to its starting point or a street both
ends of which intersect another street at different locations.
A. Utilities. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least
twenty (20) feet wide.
B. Drainageway. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
channel or drainageway as defined herein, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. The Board
may require parallel streets or parkways in connection with such
drainageway.
A. General. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, buffer areas
and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. Dimensions and corner lots. Lot area and dimensions shall conform to
the requirements of Chapter 205, Zoning, and Health Department
regulations. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit compliance with the front yard setback from both streets. Where
lots are more than double the minimum area required by Chapter 205,
Zoning, the Board may require that such lots shall be of such
dimensions and arrangement as will allow further subdivision and the
opening of future streets where necessary to serve potential lots all in
compliance with Chapter 205, Zoning and this chapter.
C. Arrangement and access. The lot arrangement shall be such that there
will be no foreseeable difficulty, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in obtaining building permits to build on all lots, in
compliance with applicable regulations, and in providing, by means of a
street approved by the Board and upon which each lot fonts, safe
driveway access to buildings on such lots from an improved street duly
placed on the Official Map.
D. Access across a watercourse. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions
shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of a design
approved by the Engineer.
§ 175-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-17
175:193
E. Lot lines and setbacks. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right
angles to straight streets and radial to curved street lines. Lot lines
shall coincide with municipal boundary lines rather than cross them.
Where extra width has been dedicated for widening an existing street,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and lot dimensions and
setbacks shall be measured from such line. The Board may, whenever it
deems such lines desirable or necessary, require the showing on the
plat of specific setback lines which may vary from lot to lot, provided
that the front setback shall be not less than the zoning requirement nor
more than twenty percent (20%) greater than the zoning setback.
§ 175-17 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-17
175:194
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
§ 175-18. Certain improvements required.
Pursuant to § 7-730 of the Village Law, before the approval by the Board
of a plat or the development of a plat entirely or partially undeveloped,
the Board, in its discretion, shall require the subdivider to complete the
installation or, alternatively, to furnish a performance bond to insure the
completion of all necessary improvements stipulated in said law and
required by the Board. All required improvements shall be made by the
subdivider at his expense without reimbursement by the Village. The
subdivider shall give to the Village a written agreement, in form satisfactory
to the Village Attorney, permitting entrance by the appropriate Village
officials and employees to the land included within the subdivision for
the purposes of inspection and for the purposes of installing the required
improvements in the event of the failure or default of the subdivider to make
or complete such improvements as required by the Board resolution.
§ 175-19. Construction plans.
§ 175-20. Standards and specifications.
All required improvements shall be installed in accordance with approved
construction plans and shall conform to the Village construction standards
and specifications and shall be approved by the Engineer as to design and
A. Approval required before construction. The subdivider shall have
prepared, at his expense, construction plans, as described in § 175-46,
for all required improvements. No improvements, development or
construction work of any kind shall be commenced until after said plans
have been approved by the Village in accordance with this chapter and
by the appropriate county or state or local agencies having jurisdiction
pursuant to law, such approvals have been endorsed on said plans or
drawings and the subdivider has paid to the Village an amount equal to
the estimated Village engineering fees for inspecting and testing the
construction and work.
B. Modifications. If, at any time before or during the construction of the
required improvements, the Engineer finds or it is demonstrated to his
or her satisfaction that unforeseen conditions make it necessary to
modify the location or design of such required improvements or to
provide additional improvements, the Engineer may require or
authorize such modifications upon written request of the subdivider,
provided that such modifications are within the spirit and intent of the
Board's approval and do not extend to the waiver or substantial
alteration of the function of any improvement required by the Board.
The Engineer shall issue any authorization under this section, in
writing, and shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the Board for
its records.
§ 175-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-20
175:195
specifications. A booklet containing the Village construction standards and
specifications is available at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 175-21. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the
Engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may
be approved by the Engineer. Monuments shall be set three (3) inches above
ground surface.
§ 175-22. Grading.
All streets shall be graded within right-of-way lines in accordance with
approved construction plans. The grading of lots shall be done only in
accordance with approved construction plans. In all grading work, the
subdivider shall be required to proceed in such manner as will minimize any
disturbance to and preserve undamaged, insofar as possible, existing trees,
natural cover and soil.
§ 175-23. Street paving.
All streets shall be paved in accordance with the Village construction
standards and specifications heretofore referred to in § 175-20.
§ 175-24. Underground utilities.
Electric, telephone, cable television and other utilities shall be placed
underground and within the street or right-of-way. Where possible, they
shall be located between the paved roadway and the property line to
simplify locating and repair. Underground service connections to the
property line of each lot, where the Board considers such appropriate, shall
be installed, at the subdivider's expense, before the street is paved.
§ 175-25. Public utilities.
Where utilities required by the Board are to be installed by a public utility
company, the Board may accept assurance from said company, in writing,
that such installation will be furnished by the company within a specified
period of time and in accordance with the approved construction plans.
§ 175-26. Drainage improvements. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 4-2002]
A. Drainage review. The Village Engineer shall review each proposed
subdivision and determine the scope of drainage improvements to be
installed at the site.
B. Spring and surface water. The subdivider may be required by the Board
to carry away any spring- or surface water that may exist either
previous to or as a result of the subdivision or development. Such
§ 175-20 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-26
175:196
§ 175-27. Culverts and bridges.
All required culverts and bridges, if any, shall be constructed in accordance
with approved construction plans and shall conform to the standards and
specifications of the Village or the county or state agency having
jurisdiction.
§ 175-28. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
Where deemed necessary and required by the Board, the subdivider shall
install curbs, gutters and sidewalks or walkways in accordance with Village
standards and specifications.
§ 175-29. Street trees. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
The Board shall require the planting of new street trees in a subdivision
which lacks or is deemed deficient in trees. Such trees shall be of a size and
type as recommended by the Village Arborists with the concurrence of the
Conservation Board.
drainage facilities shall be located in street rights-of-way, where
feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements with the plats.
C. Drainage and upstream development. A drainageway, culvert or other
drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside
or outside the subdivision or development. The Engineer shall
determine the design and necessary size of the facility based on the
runoff anticipated from a ten-year storm under conditions of maximum
potential watershed development permitted under existing zoning
therein.
D. Drainage downstream. The Engineer shall also determine the effect of
each proposed subdivision or development on existing downstream
drainage facilities outside the subdivision or development. Where it is
anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility
during a ten-year storm, the Engineer shall notify the Board of such
potential. In such case, the Board may disapprove such subdivision or
development until provision, satisfactory to the Engineer and the
Village Trustees, has been made for the improvement of said potential
condition.
E. Suffolk County requirements. The subdivider will be required to install
such facilities for the subdivision and to comply with such conditions as
may be required by the Suffolk County Planning Commission that are
not superseded by Village action.
§ 175-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-30
175:197
§ 175-30. Street signs.
Street signs of a type approved by the Board shall be provided by the
subdivider and placed at all intersections in locations, within street lines,
approved by the Engineer.
§ 175-31. Streetlights and fire alarm devices.
Where required by the Board, streetlighting fixtures of a design approved
by the Board or other municipal agency having jurisdiction shall be placed
in a manner and location approved by the Board. The Board may require the
installation of fire alarm signal devices.
§ 175-32. Water supply and sanitary sewers.
Where required by the Board, the subdivider shall install water mains and
fire hydrants and/or sanitary sewers of a type and in a manner prescribed
by the regulations of the agency having jurisdiction. In cases where sanitary
sewerage is not available to a subdivision or development, the subdivider
shall install individual sewage disposal systems in accordance with
regulations of the Suffolk County Department of Health.
§ 175-33. Waiver of required improvements.
The Board may waive, pursuant to § 7-730 of the Village Law, for such
period as it may determine, the provision of any or all such improvements
as, in its judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat, are not
requisite in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare. In
the case of any waiver granted, the Board shall enter upon its records the
reason or reasons why the particular improvement is not necessary, and it
shall attach appropriate conditions or require such guarantees as may be
deemed necessary to protect the public interest and achieve the objectives
of this chapter.
§ 175-34. Estimated cost.
The subdivider shall submit his or her engineer's estimate of the full cost of
all required improvements to be installed by the subdivider, and the Board
may request the Engineer to check the cost estimates for accuracy.
§ 175-35. Guaranties of performance.
With respect to required improvements, the subdivider shall follow the
procedure set forth in either Subsection A or B below as shall be prescribed
by the Board.
A. Completion of improvements. The subdivider shall complete all
required improvements to the satisfaction of the Board before the
Board signs the plat and before any building permits will be issued. The
subdivider shall file with the Village a bond in an amount determined by
the Board to be adequate to assure the preservation of existing
§ 175-30 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-35
175:198
topographic and natural assets, pursuant to § 175-22, as well as the
satisfactory condition of the subdivision improvements for a period of
one (1) year following their completion. Such bond shall be satisfactory
to the Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution
and to the Village Board as to surety. Such bond shall be released only
by the Board of Trustees when all requirements have been satisfactorily
met.
B. Performance bond. If the subdivider is required to post a performance
bond to insure the completion of required improvements, he/she shall
file with the Village Clerk a performance payment and maintenance
bonds to cover the cost of required improvements in an amount set by
the Board and to insure proper maintenance of the improvements for
one (1) year after they are completed. Such bond shall comply with the
requirements of § 7-730 of the Village Law and shall be satisfactory to
the Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution and
to the Board as to the surety. A period of one (1) year or such other
period as the Board may deem appropriate, not to exceed three (3)
years, within which required improvements must be completed, shall be
set forth in the bond. The bond surety may be in cash, a letter of credit
having a term not less than one (1) year or such longer period, as
permitted by the Board, or partly in cash and partly guaranteed by a
surety company acceptable to the Board; but in the latter case, not less
than twenty-five percent (25%) shall be in cash. The cash surety shall
become immediately available to the Village on the date when
improvements are required to be completed for application toward the
completion of such required improvements as have not been completed
on said date. The bond shall provide that an amount in cash, deemed
adequate by the Board, shall be retained for a period of one (1) year
from the date of completion of the required improvements. All required
improvements shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer
and the Board within the time stipulated in the Board's resolution. The
bond shall be released only by the Board of Trustees when all required
improvements have been completed to its satisfaction.
C. Subdivider's responsibility. If the Engineer or other authorized
inspector finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with approved construction
plans and the Village standards and specifications, the subdivider shall
be responsible for the completion of such improvements to the
satisfaction of the Board. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered
by a performance bond, the subdivider and the bonding company shall
be severally and jointly liable for completing said improvements to the
satisfaction of the Board.
D. Failure to complete improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not
completed within the period specified by the Board in its resolution
approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In
cases where a performance bond has been posted and required
§ 175-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-35
175:199
§ 175-36. Inspection of improvements.
improvements have not been completed within the term of such bond,
the Village Trustees may thereupon declare said performance bond to
be in default.
A. General requirements. The Board shall provide for the inspection of
required improvements during construction to ensure their satisfactory
completion. The subdivider shall pay to the Village an inspection fee in
accordance with a fee schedule fixed by the Board41 and at such time as
may be stated in its resolution. The subdivision plat shall not be signed
by the Board until such fee has been paid.
B. Timing of inspection. In order to facilitate inspection of required
improvements during construction, the subdivider shall notify the
Engineer:
(1) At least three (3) days before he/she proceeds with each of the
following stages of construction:
(a) Grading of streets and/or lots.
(b) Backfilling of underground utilities and/or drainage facilities.
(c) Paving or surface treatment.
(2) Within three (3) days after completion of all improvements.
C. Copy of contract specifications. Prior to the start of construction of any
required improvements, the subdivider shall furnish to the Engineer a
copy of the specifications included in any contract entered into by the
subdivider for such construction.
D. Supervision of construction. The construction of all required
improvements shall be supervised by a registered professional engineer
employed by the subdivider. After completion of construction said
engineer shall certify to the Board that all required improvements have
been constructed as required and approved by the Board or as such
requirements have been modified under § 175-19B.
E. Reports. The Engineer shall make reports to the Board after each
inspection. If the Engineer or his/her authorized inspector finds, upon
inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the approved construction plans and/or
the Village standards and specifications, the Engineer shall inform the
subdivider and the Board, in writing.
F. Responsibility for completion. The subdivider is solely responsible for
completion of required improvements in accordance with the approved
plans. See § 175-35C. In the event that the Engineer or his/her
41.Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 175-35 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-36
175:200
authorized representative is unable to carry out inspection of required
improvements during construction, the subdivider and the bonding
company, if any, shall not in any way be relieved of their responsibilities
for satisfactory completion of required improvements.
G. Certificates of completion. The Board shall not give final approval of
required improvements nor recommend to the Board of Trustees the
release of a bond until the Engineer has submitted a report stating that
all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until
the subdivider's engineer or surveyor has furnished to the Engineer a
certified set of record drawings, in the same detail required for the
construction plan described in § 175-46, showing all improvements as
constructed, and a statement certifying that all improvements conform
to such record drawings and the standards and specifications of the
agency having jurisdiction.
§ 175-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-36
175:201

ARTICLE VI
Reservations and Dedications
§ 175-37. General requirements.
Pursuant to § 7-730 of the Village Law, before the approval of a plat or
plan of development by the Board, such plat or plan shall show, in proper
cases and when required by the Board, a park or parks suitably located for
playground or other recreation purposes. Reservation and/or dedication of
land for street purposes, drainageways and easements also may be required
by the Board and by county or state agencies having jurisdiction. Any land
offered for dedication or reserved by the owner for a particular purpose and
all easements shall be shown and appropriately marked on the plat or plan
of development.
§ 175-38. Recreation and public use.
A. Features shown on Master Plan. Where a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use is shown on the Master Plan in a location
which is entirely or partially within a subdivision or development, the
Board shall require the dedication or reservation of such area within
the subdivision.
B. Recreation area not shown on Master Plan. In cases where the Master
Plan does not show a recreation area within a proposed subdivision and
the Board deems that recreation space would be desirable and
appropriate, the Board may require the dedication or reservation of
designated sites for park, playground or other recreation purposes.
Such sites shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, location and
general character for the particular purposes envisioned by the Board.
In no case shall the Board require that more than ten percent (10%) of
the gross area of the subdivision be dedicated or reserved for such
purposes. In calculating such percentage, the Board may give due
credit for open areas reserved, by covenants in all deeds, for the
common use of all property owners in the proposed subdivision.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-200242]
C. Recreation sites. Land offered for dedication or reservation for
recreation purposes shall be of a character, shape and location suitable
for such purposes. In the case of a playfield or playground, the land
shall be relatively level and dry, and no dimension of the site shall be
less than two hundred (200) feet. Generally, a recreation site shall have
a frontage of at least two hundred (200) feet on one (1) or more streets.
D. Waiver on land for recreation. In cases where the Board finds that, due
to the size, topography or location of the subdivision or for other
reasons, a requirement that land be dedicated or reserved for
42.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the repeal of former Subsection C,
Minimum size of recreation area, and the renumbering of former Subsections D through F
as C through E, respectively.
§ 175-37 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-38
175:203
§ 175-39. Streets.
§ 175-40. Other open land uses.
recreation would be unreasonable or undesirable, the Board may waive
such requirement subject to the condition that the subdivider shall, in
lieu of such dedication or reservation, pay to the Village, in cash, an
amount equal to an amount required by the Board of Trustees for each
proposed lot in the subdivision. Such moneys shall be deposited in a
special Village Recreation Site and Improvement Fund.
E. Public use not shown on Master Plan. The Board may require that land
in a subdivision be temporarily reserved for a public school or other
essential community facility, although not shown on the Master Plan,
when the Board deems it desirable and appropriate. In such cases, if
the agency having jurisdiction does not acquire such land within two (2)
years after the date of the signing of the plat by the Board, the
subdivider, upon written notice to the Board, shall, thirty (30) days after
such notice, be relieved of the responsibility of further reservation of
said land for said public purpose.
A. General requirements. All streets shown upon the plat may be offered
for dedication or reserved for such purposes. When a street is not
offered for dedication, the reservation shall ensure to abutting owners a
perpetual unobstructed right of access.
B. Widening or realignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow street or when the Master Plan indicates the
realignment and/or widening of a street that would require use of some
of the land in a subdivision or development, the Board may require the
subdivider to offer to dedicate or reserve areas for such widening and/
or realignment.
A. Storage basins and easements. Where land is required by the Village for
storage basins and easements, such land shall be offered for dedication
to the Village.
B. Easements. Easements for drainageways, utilities or pedestrian and/or
emergency access and for planting strips shall be provided by the
subdivider in the location and at the width required by the Board.
Generally, easements for drainage and utilities shall be unobstructed
and perpetual; easements for planting strips shall be perpetual.
C. Preservation of natural features. The subdivider shall reserve and may
offer for dedication for open recreational or conservation purposes
existing natural features when the Board finds that features, such as
large trees, wooded areas, watercourses, ponds, historic sites, vistas or
other irreplaceable assets, enhance the attractiveness of the site and
will add value to residential or other development, or to the Village as a
whole. Whatever of such natural features, in the opinion of the Planning
Board with the advice of the Conservation Board, should be offered for
§ 175-38 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-40
175:204
§ 175-41. Future status.
§ 175-42. Self-imposed restrictions.
If the subdivider intends to place restrictions on any of the land contained
in a subdivision, such restrictions shall be clearly indicated on the plat. The
subdivider shall submit to the Board for its approval a copy of any additional
restrictions as may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale,
together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect title to the land proposed to be subdivided.
dedication to public uses shall be offered for dedication to the Village or
other appropriate authority, except when, after approval of the Board
pursuant to § 175-41A, such features are deeded to a property owner's
association membership running with all of the land in the subdivision
and preserving such features. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
D. Reservation of additional land. None of the sections of this Article VI
shall be constructed as preventing a subdivider or developer from
reserving other land for open recreational purposes, in addition to the
requirements of this Article.
A. Responsibility for reservations. In any case where title to streets or
other reservations is not offered for dedication to the Village, the
ownership shall be clearly established in a manner satisfactory to the
Board in order to ensure the continued maintenance and responsibility
for such reservation, including the creation of a homeowners'
association.
B. Offers of cession. Pursuant to § 7-732 of the Village Law with respect to
streets and parks, the subdividing owner may add, as a part of the plat,
a notation, if he/she so desires, to the effect that no offer of dedication
of such streets or parks or any of them is made to the public. Formal
offer of cession to the Village of all streets and parks not so marked with
such notation on the plat shall be filed by the owner with the Board
prior to approval of the plat by the Board.
C. Acceptance by the Village. Acceptance of any offer of streets, parks,
recreation or other land shall rest with the Village Board of Trustees. In
the event that the subdivider elects not to file the subdivision plat in the
office of the County Clerk within the ninety-day period required by law,
then such formal offer of cession shall be deemed to be void. The
approval by the Board of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or
imply acceptance by the Village of any street, park or other open space
shown on said plat. The Board may require said plat to be endorsed
with appropriate notes to this effect.
§ 175-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-42
175:205

ARTICLE VII
Specifications for Maps and Plans
§ 175-43. Compliance required.
The maps and drawings required with an application to the Board for
approval of a subdivision plat or plan of development shall be prepared by
the subdivider in accordance with this chapter and shall be submitted to the
Board, together with a written application on forms supplied by the Board.
§ 175-44. Sketch plan.
§ 175-45. Preliminary plat and topographic map.
A. The sketch plan may be drawn in pencil and shall be at a convenient
scale, not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and
shall show:
(1) A boundary survey of the property; municipal boundaries, if any,
within three hundred (300) feet of the property.
(2) Contour lines at intervals of no more than ten (10) feet [may be
obtained from field survey or county topographic maps at contour
intervals of five (5) feet].
(3) A sketch of: [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
(a) The proposed layout of lots and streets.
(b) The existing streets and natural features.
(c) The existing buildings and structures.
(d) Location of all individual trees exceeding eight inches in
caliper.
(e) Buffer areas based upon minimum required setback areas.
(f) Such other features as the subdivider may deem pertinent or
the Board may require.
B. If the sketch plan covers only a part of the subdividing owner's entire
holding, a sketch map of the entire tract (may be shown on the Village
Tax Map or on a print of a county topographic map), at a scale of not
less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, shall show the
platted area with its proposed streets and the probable future streets,
lots and drainage systems in the entire tract.
A. Preliminary plat.
(1) The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a convenient scale, not less
than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and shall show or
be accompanied by the following information:
§ 175-43 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-45
175:207
(a) The name or identifying title of the subdivision, graphic scale,
North point and date.
(b) The name and address of the record owner of the property and
of his/her authorized agent, if any, and the name of the land
planner responsible for the layout and of the engineer
responsible for the property survey.
(c) The property lines of the land to be subdivided and existing
permanent buildings thereon; the names of all subdivisions
immediately adjacent, if any; the names of all record owners of
all adjacent lands.
(d) The zoning districts, including exact boundary lines if more
than one (1) district; the location of any special district and/or
municipal boundaries within three hundred (300) feet of the
property.
(e) A topographic map, as described in Subsection B, and a
tentative grading plan.
(f) The locations and widths of all proposed streets and of all
existing streets (noting whether public or private) in and
within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed subdivision.
(g) The proposed lot lines with approximate lot dimensions and
areas.
(h) The location and size of all proposed and of any existing water
mains; drainage systems, including culverts, drains and
sewers; other underground utilities and sanitary sewers, if any.
The direction of flow shall be shown for drains and sewers.
(i) The existing and proposed easements, if any, with designation
of the purposes therefor.
(j) Any land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved in
the deeds for the use of property owners in the subdivision, as
well as any land which the owner may propose to reserve, with
designation of the purpose therefor.
(k) Preliminary cross sections and center-line profiles for each
proposed street and preliminary designs for all improvements,
including any bridges or culverts that may be required.
(l) Plans for water supply and sewage disposal.
(m) The preliminary plan for surface drainage of the subdivision.
(n) The results of test hole borings and percolation or other tests
when required by the Board.
(o) Buffer areas based upon minimum required setback areas.
[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
§ 175-45 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-45
175:208
§ 175-46. Construction plans.
(2) Where the preliminary plat covers only a part of the owner's entire
holding, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the
submitted part shall be furnished, and the street system of the
submitted part will be considered by the Board in the light of
adjustments and connections with future streets in the
unsubmitted part.
B. Topographic map.
(1) The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Board, with his/her
application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, a map
showing the topography for the area covered by the proposed
subdivision and such surrounding area as the Engineer may
designate as necessary to determine drainage requirements. The
map shall show the following:
(a) Contour interval. On the topographic map, the contour interval
shall be not more than five feet for land with a natural slope of
10% or less, and not greater than two feet for more steeply
sloping land. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
(b) Watercourses and drainage. The topographic map shall show
existing watercourses, drainageways, streams and ponds.
(c) Natural features. The natural features, if any, mentioned in
§§ 175-14F and 175-40C, including single trees with a diameter
of eight (8) inches or more, shall be shown on the topographic
map.
(d) Streets. The location of existing and proposed streets and the
boundary line of property proposed to be subdivided shall be
shown on the topographic map.
(2) Preparation of map.
(a) All maps or plats shall be prepared by a professional engineer
or land surveyor, duly licensed by the State of New York. The
name, address and signature of such engineer or surveyor
shall appear upon said map, as well the identifying title of the
subdivision, date, North point and graphic scale.
(b) In appropriate cases and when approved by the Engineer as
being sufficient for the particular situation, the Board may
accept a reproduction, enlarged to the required scale, of the
county topographic map in lieu of the above requirements. A
map so prepared shall be properly identified, as required
above, and shall bear an appropriate description of the method
of reproduction. The Board may designate such of the above
information as it will require the subdivider to show upon the
reproduced map.
§ 175-45 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-46
175:209
§ 175-47. Subdivision plat.
A. General. Construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements and submitted to the Board with application for approval
of the subdivision plat. All engineering drawings and designs shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer whose name, address and
signature shall appear upon such plans and drawings. When feasible,
the scale of construction plans shall be the same as that of the plat, and
plan sheets shall not exceed thirty-six by forty-eight (36 x 48) inches.
B. Information shown. The construction plans shall show:
(1) Typical cross-sections and profiles of all proposed streets showing
existing and proposed grades as approved by the Engineer. The
cross-sections shall show pavements and, where required, gutters,
curbs and sidewalks.
(2) Profiles along the center lines of streets showing existing and
proposed elevations. Where a proposed street intersects an
existing street, the elevation along the center line of the existing
street, within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection, shall be
shown. All elevations shall be referred to Suffolk County datum.
(3) A grading plan showing present and proposed contours at intervals
as per § 175-45B(1)(a) referenced to Suffolk County datum,
together with natural features required to be preserved, if any. The
Board may require, where steep slopes exist, that present
elevations along all proposed streets shall be shown every one
hundred (100) feet at five (5) points on a line at right angles to the
center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the
center line of the street, at each property line and at points twentyfive
(25) feet inside each property line.
(4) Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of
street pavements, including manholes and catchbasins; the
location of street trees, streetlighting standards and street signs;
the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, stormwater drains and fire hydrants; the exact
location and size of all water mains, gas lines or other underground
utilities or structures; and detailed descriptions of all other
required improvements.
(5) The location, size, elevation and other appropriate descriptions of
any existing facilities and utilities at the point of connection to
proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision.
(6) All specifications and references required by the Village's
construction standards and specifications.
A. General. The subdivision plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or
Mylar or equivalent material on a sheet or sheets which shall not
exceed thirty-six by forty-eight (36 x 48) inches, at a convenient scale
§ 175-46 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-47
175:210
which shall be not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet,
and oriented with the North point at the top of the map. When more
than one (1) sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall
be prepared at convenient scale to show the entire subdivision with lot
and block numbers clearly legible. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
B. Information to be shown on the plat. The subdivision plat shall show the
following:
(1) The subdivision name, graphic scale, North point and date.
(2) The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
proposed to be subdivided; the name and address of the record
owner or owners of the land to be subdivided; and the name and
address of the subdivider if other than the owner.
(3) The location and name of streets surrounding or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision; the lines of adjacent properties and the
names of the owners of record or the names of existing adjoining
developments.
(4) The location, name and width of all existing and proposed streets.
(5) The lines, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing lots; the
proposed block, lot and section numbers as assigned by the
Assessors' office.
(6) The location, width and purpose of all proposed or existing
easements.
(7) The lines, dimensions and areas of all property intended to be
dedicated for public use or reserved in the deeds of property
owners in the subdivision, as well as any land which the owner may
propose to reserve, with designation of the purposes thereof.
(8) The location and identification of existing watercourses, bodies of
water and natural features (described in §§ 175-14F and 175-40C)
and, subject to the discretion of the Board, contours at such
intervals as it may require.
(9) Sufficient data acceptable to the Engineer to determine readily the
location, bearing and length of each boundary line, street line and
lot line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. The lengths of
all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, lengths of curves and
central angles of all curves tangent distances and tangent bearings
for each street and each lot shall be given. All dimensions shall be
shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
(10) Permanent reference monuments.
(11) The name, address and signature of the licensed professional
engineer or surveyor making the plat.
§ 175-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-47
175:211
(12) Buffer areas based upon minimum required setback areas, along
with a note stating that said buffer areas are subject to change
based upon proposed gross floor area. [Added 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 4-2002]
C. Notations on the plat. The following notations shall be shown on the
subdivision plat:
(1) An endorsement of approval by the Suffolk County Department of
Health.
(2) Endorsements of approval by other planning agencies, if any,
having jurisdiction.
(3) The Town Receiver of Taxes as to payment of taxes.
(4) The Treasurer of the Village as to payment of taxes.
(5) The following statements:
(a) Streets and highways.
[1] "No offer of dedication of the streets or highways or roads
or any of them, as they appear on this plat, is made to the
Village of Lloyd Harbor nor is said Village in any way
responsible for their maintenance."
[2] "The owners of all lots abutting on each private road
shown on the plat shall be jointly and severally responsible
to the Village for the maintenance of the surface and
drainage facilities of such private road."
[3] "Each such street or highway or road shall be deemed a
private road open to public motor vehicle traffic for the
purpose of enforcing the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and the traffic ordinance43 and other
ordinances and local laws of said Village."
Owner
Signed
(b) "All lots in this development comply fully with the zoning
requirements of ___________ Zoning District."
Signed
License No.
43.Editor's Note: See Chapter 190, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 175-47 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-47
175:212
(c) "I/We hereby certify that this plat is made from an actual
survey completed by me/us ___________ and concrete
monuments have been set as shown."
Signed
License No.
(d) "This is to certify that this subdivision plat has been approved
by the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor Planning Board on
___________ , effective date of approval is ___________ ."
Signed
(e) "The owners of all lots shown on the plat who have or will have
rights to enter upon and make use of any reserved or common
land area, such as, without limitation, beaches, landing areas
or other jointly used facilities, located in said plat shall be
jointly and severally responsible to the Village of Lloyd Harbor
for the maintenance of each such reserved or common land
area and to keep such in clean, safe and orderly condition, free
from rubbish and debris."
D. No building permit shall be issued for any construction on any lot as
shown on the plat until the proposed construction has received all site
plan approvals required by the Village.
E. Accompanying material. When submitted to the Chairperson with
application for approval, the subdivision plat shall be accompanied by
the following documents in a form approved by the Attorneys for the
Village:
(1) A certificate of title showing the ownership of the land to be vested
in the subdivider or other applicant for plat approval and the
identity of all mortgages and encumbrance holders.
(2) A certificate of the licensed engineer or surveyor making such plat
survey to the effect that the plat is correct and that the error of
closure does not exceed such amount as is required by the
Engineer.
(3) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or owners
of the property, to the effect that the subdivision shown on the plat
is made with his/her or their free consent and in accordance with
his/her or their desires.
(4) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the maintenance
of undedicated open space, which shall bear the certificate of
approval of the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
§ 175-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-47
175:213
(5) A copy of such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale,
together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed
which may affect the title to the land being subdivided. Such
restrictions shall be satisfactory to the Board and shall provide, in
the case of any lot intended for residential use, against further
division thereof by the grantee without approval by the Board.
(6) Such other items or certificates of approval by proper public
authorities as may have been required by the Board.
(7) An approved stormwater management pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of Chapter 171,
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control, shall
be required for preliminary and final subdivision plat approval. The
SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and
standards of Chapter 171, Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control. The approved subdivision plat shall be
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 171, Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control. [Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 175-47 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-47
175:214
ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Applications
§ 175-48. Dredging applications.
All dredging applications shall include the original and ten (10) copies of:
§ 175-49. Special use permits.
All special use permit applications under Article IX of Chapter 205, Zoning,
shall include an original and ten (10) copies of:
A. The application form specified by the Board having jurisdiction.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. A topographic survey of the subject property with all existing features
depicted.
C. A site plan which should include:
(1) The existing topography of the parcel.
(2) Any proposed change in the topography of the parcel.
(3) Any other proposed features which are inherent as part of the
dredging operation.
(4) A cross section showing the extent of the difference between
existing levels and proposed levels.
(5) Additional structures, if any.
D. A fully completed environmental assessment form (EAF) pursuant to
the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).44
E. Completed coastal assessment form (CAF). [Amended 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 4-200245]
F. Filing fees.
G. A disclosure affidavit.
A. The application form specified by the Board having jurisdiction.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. A complete description of the proposed use.
C. A plot plan showing land contours.
D. A plan indicating all intended changes in the topography and vegetation
that would be incurred in implementing the proposed use, including
44.Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
45.Editor's Note: This local law provided for the renumbering of former Subsections E and F
as F and G, respectively.
§ 175-48 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-49
175:215
§ 175-50. Wetlands and floodplain construction permit.
All applications to obtain a wetlands or floodplain construction permit shall
include an original and ten (10) copies of:
specifications of all excavating, grading, filling, dredging, draining,
damming and removal of growth and final landscaping plans and
provisions for parking of vehicles.
E. A fully completed environmental assessment form (EAF) pursuant to
the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).46
F. A fully completed coastal assessment form (CAF). [Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 4-200247]
G. Filing fees.
H. A disclosure affidavit.
A. The application form specified by the Board having jurisdiction.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. A topographic survey of the property showing any existing contours
with vertical intervals of no more than two (2) feet; the location and
extent of any wetlands and floodplains as set forth in § 205-8 of Chapter
205, Zoning; the location of any existing buildings, structures,
driveways and utilities of the site; any existing easements and rights-ofway;
the present use of land and structures; the specific type, size and
location of trees with a diameter of twelve (12) or more inches at a
height three (3) feet above ground level; and any other existing features
or characteristics of the site which may be of environmental, historical,
archaeological or other significance.
C. A plan for the proposed site development indicating building and
driveway locations, parking areas, landscaping, grading and drainage,
utilities and other planned site uses and improvements.
D. A fully completed environmental assessment form (EAF).
E. A fully completed coastal assessment form (CAF). [Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 4-200248]
F. A disclosure affidavit.
G. Filing fees.
46.Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
47.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections F
and G as G and H, respectively.
48.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections E
and F as F and G, respectively.
§ 175-49 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-51
175:216
§ 175-51. Slope land construction permit.
All applications to obtain a slope land construction permit shall include an
original and ten (10) copies of:
§ 175-52. Coastal erosion hazard area applications.
All applications to conduct regulated activity in a designated coastal erosion
hazard area shall include an original and ten (10) copies of:
A. The application form specified by the Board having jurisdiction.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. A topographic survey of the property showing any existing contours
with vertical intervals of no more than two (2) feet; the location and
extent of any slope lands as set forth in § 205-7 of Chapter 205, Zoning;
the location of any existing buildings, structures, driveways and utilities
of the site; any existing easements and rights-of-way; the present use of
land and structures; the specific type, size and location of trees with a
diameter of twelve (12) or more inches at a height three (3) feet above
ground level; and any other existing features or characteristics of the
site which may be of environmental, historical, archaeological or other
significance.
C. A plan for the proposed site development indicating building and
driveway locations, parking areas, landscaping, grading and drainage,
utilities and other planned site uses and improvements.
D. A fully completed environmental assessment form (EAF).
E. A fully completed coastal assessment form (CAF). [Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 4-200249]
F. A disclosure affidavit.
G. Filing fees.
A. The application form specified by the Board having jurisdiction.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
B. A topographic survey showing existing contours with vertical intervals
of no more than two (2) feet down to a scale of no smaller than one (1)
inch equals one hundred (100) feet, showing all of the features and data
required by § 205-91 of Chapter 205, Zoning.
C. A plan for the proposed project drawn in accordance with accepted
engineering standards.
D. A fully completed environmental assessment form (EAF).
49.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections E
and F as F and G, respectively.
§ 175-51 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-52
175:217
§ 175-53. Procedure for approval.
E. A fully completed coastal assessment form (CAF). [Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 4-200250]
F. Filing fees.
G. A disclosure affidavit.
H. An application for site plan approval.
A. Hearing. A public hearing shall be held on all applications if required by
the law or regulation giving the Planning Board jurisdiction over the
application. Notice of hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Village and mailed to the owners of property within
one hundred (100) feet of the premises which is the subject of the
application at least five (5) days before the hearing.
B. Action on application. After a public meeting or hearing, the Board shall
approve, modify and approve or disapprove the application by
resolution which will set forth in detail any conditions to which the
approval is subject or reasons for disapproval.
50.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections E
through G as F through H, respectively.
§ 175-52 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-53
175:218
ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-54. Regulations deemed to be minimum necessary.
This chapter shall be deemed the minimum requirements for the future
growth and development of the Village which will provide adequate
facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience,
safety, health and welfare of its population.
§ 175-55. Variances.
§ 175-56. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
Any person who violates or fails to perform any duty imposed by any
provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, of this Code, and, in addition thereto, each
such violation shall constitute and is hereby declared to be a violation
pursuant to the Penal Law. Each week that a violation under any provision
of this chapter continues after the violator is provided written notice of the
violation from the Village or enforcement officer, such violation for each
such separate week shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, the
Board of Trustees may enforce obedience to any provisions of this chapter
by injunction or any other civil remedy.
§ 175-57. Enforcement.
The Village Engineer, Village Highway Superintendent, Village Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or peace officer is hereby authorized
to enforce and issue appearance tickets relating to enforcement of this
chapter.
A. Special circumstances; hardship. Where the Board finds that, because
of special circumstance of particular plat, substantial hardships, not of
the owner's or subdivider's making, may result from strict compliance
with this chapter, it may vary or waive any of the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that such variation or waiver shall comply with Chapter 205,
Zoning, and will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Master Plan, the Official Map or this chapter.
B. Conditions. In granting any variance or waiver, the Board shall set forth
such findings in its resolution of approval and such conditions as will
substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements so
varied or modified.
§ 175-54 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 175-57
175:219
Chapter 180
TAXATION
§ 175-57 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 175-57
180:220
ARTICLE I
Tax Enforcement
[Adopted 8-15-1994 as L.L. No. 1-199451]
§ 180-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by
a chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A, the Village of Lloyd Harbor hereby acts by local law, not subject to
referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue
to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law,
as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 180-2. Filing of copies.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this local
law shall be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and
Assessment.
51.Editor's Note: Section 3 of this local law provided as follows: "This local law shall take
effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of 1994 takes effect as proposed in
legislative bill number S. 8560-A, except that if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to
adoption of this local law, this local law shall take effect immediately." Legislative bill
number S. 8560-A was adopted 8-26-1994 as L.1994, c.532.
§ 180-1 TAXATION § 180-2
180:221
Chapter 183
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tree removal and trimming businesses — See
Ch. 184.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 183-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees hereby finds that the indiscriminate and excessive
cutting of trees and shrubs, or specimen trees, results in increased
municipal costs for the control of drainage and erosion and impairs the
natural scenic and aesthetic qualities of the environment which the village
is obligated to protect. Trees and shrubs, in addition to preserving the
bucolic and rural atmosphere of the village, preserve the ecology by
reducing noise, providing shade, preserving and fostering air quality and
stabilize the soil and control water pollution by preventing soil erosion and
flooding, while providing a natural habitat for wildlife.
§ 183-2. Definitions. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-199852]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESTROY — Includes, but without limitation: poisoning; ringing the tree;
excessive peeling of bark; damaging, compacting or overburdening the
roots; using herbicides, or fire, or cutting in such manner as to bring about
the ultimate death of such tree.
PERSON — Includes any individual, their successor, assigns or agent, and
any business entity, including partnerships, corporations or other business
forms.
SUBSTANTIALLY ALTER — Any cutting or pruning in excess of the normal
and customary cutting and pruning necessary to preserve the health of the
plant material or maintain its ornamental quality.
TREE — A living woody perennial plant being either deciduous or
evergreen.
§ 183-3. Regulated activities. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
A. No person shall remove, cut down, destroy or substantially alter any
deciduous tree in the Village which exceeds 40 inches in circumference,
or any evergreen tree which exceeds 24 inches in circumference
52.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the amendment and/or renumbering of
former §§ 183-2 through 183-7 as §§ 183-3, 183-4, 183-5, 183-6, 183-7 and 183-9,
respectively.
§ 180-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 183-3
183:222
§ 183-4. Issuance of permits. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
§ 183-5. Plan required. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
measured at any point between the ground level and a height of 4
feet, nor remove, cut down, destroy or substantially alter any tree,
regardless of size, in the village which is located on a steep slope, very
steep slope or bluff as defined in Chapter 205, Zoning, or any tree or
shrub within a freshwater wetland, or any tree or shrub in a villageowned
park or nature preserve, or within any public right-of-way, or
any rare or endangered species of trees or shrubs as listed by any
governmental agency of New York State or the United States, or any
large or outstanding specimen of smaller species, or any historic tree,
or tree on New York State's "Big Tree List," or any tree within a critical
environmental area of the village, without first filing an application
with the Village Clerk and thereafter procuring a permit from the
Conservation Advisory Council as appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Board of Trustees. No fee shall be charged for such an
application or permit.
B. No person shall remove, cut down, destroy or substantially alter more
than 12 trees, 20 inches in circumference or greater, on any single
property within the village during any twelve-month period without first
filing an application with and procuring a permit from the Conservation
Advisory Council.
A. Applications for a permit shall be on forms supplied by the Village and
signed by the property owner and the person or business entity to
perform the work.
B. The Conservation Advisory Council shall issue a permit provided for in
§ 183-3 when it finds that the requested action is necessary for public
safety; to prevent the spread of disease; cutting or pruning to preserve
a preferred species or fruit tree; to avoid congested overgrowth; for the
removal of dead or dying trees; as a consequence of planned
construction; or for the establishment or maintenance of a vista. A copy
of the approved or disapproved permit shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.
C. The Conservation Advisory Council may adopt rules and regulations for
efficiently discharging its responsibility under the chapter and may
create subcommittees or designate individual members to act on its
behalf.
A. If any tree included in § 183-3, Regulated activities, is proposed to be
removed, cut or substantially altered, the applicant shall submit a plot
plan depicting the property, and a tree removal or alteration plan for
the entire property, together with the required permit application. The
removal or alteration plan shall be in conformity with the rules and
regulations adopted by the Conservation Advisory Council.
§ 183-3 TREES § 183-5
183:223
§ 183-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 183-7. Enforcement; presumptions. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998]
B. Construction. If any trees are to be removed, cut or substantially
altered as a consequence of any construction, whether an addition,
expansion or new structure, the Building Inspector shall require a tree
removal or alteration plan showing the location of the trees to be
removed. The plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board
simultaneously with the building permit application for review pursuant
to Article VIII of Chapter 205, Zoning. The Planning Board shall seek
the advice of the Conservation Advisory Council when substantial
cutting, removal or alteration is requested. No cutting, removal or
alteration in connection with construction shall be permitted until the
plan is approved by both the Planning Board and the Conservation
Advisory Council. The existing indigenous and naturalized tree canopy
shall remain in its natural state on all lots and parcels of land to the
maximum extent possible in conformity with the goals and purposes of
this chapter.
C. Vistas. If any trees are to be removed or substantially altered either to
establish or maintain a vista, the Conservation Advisory Council shall
require a tree removal or alteration plan showing all trees to be
removed on the entire lot. The Conservation Advisory Council shall
review the plan for consistency with the goals and purposes of this
chapter, and shall issue a permit for such cutting only upon a finding
that the establishment or maintenance of the vista is consistent with the
goals and purposes enumerated in § 183-1.
A. Each tree or shrub removed, cut down, destroyed or substantially
altered in violation of this chapter shall be a separate violation.
B. The Building Inspector shall stop all work and construction activity on
any premises where a violation of this chapter has occurred and is
prohibited from issuing any certification of occupancy or additional
permits for construction at the property or permitting work to resume,
unless and until the provisions of this subsection have been satisfied.
C. In addition to the penalties enumerated in Article XVI of Chapter 205,
Zoning, any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be required to replace, in kind, each and every tree removed, cut
down or destroyed in violation of this chapter. If a tree was so large and
mature that it cannot be replaced, the court, upon the recommendation
of the Tree Warden, may require the planting of multiple trees.
A. The Village Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or members
of the village police are hereby vested with the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 183-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 183-7
183:224
§ 183-8. Appeal process. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Conservation Advisory Council
or the Planning Board with respect to this Chapter shall have the right to
appeal the decision to the Village Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days
of the date the decision is filed with the Village Clerk. Such appeal shall be
in accordance with the appeal procedure adopted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 183-9. Exceptions.
No permit shall be required for the normal tree trimming and cutting by a
utility company to maintain utility lines or cables, or by a person to remove
an imminent peril to life or property.
Chapter 184
TREE REMOVAL AND TRIMMING BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 183. Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 184-1. Statement of policy and objectives.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ARBORIST — Any person or business which operates, conducts or
supervises a business which removes, prunes, cuts or trims trees as part or
all of its services.
B. It is a rebuttable presumption, for the purpose of enforcing this chapter,
that the owner or occupant on whose land any tree has been removed,
cut down, destroyed or substantially altered without the necessary
permit is the person responsible for performing or permitting the act
complained of.
A. In the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of its
residents, the Board of Trustees has deemed it necessary to regulate
and license businesses performing tree removal, cutting or tree
trimming services in the village.
B. The objective of this chapter is to establish licensing procedures and
promulgate regulations and standards applicable to the removal,
cutting or trimming of trees in the village as shall be deemed necessary
by the Board of Trustees to carry out the provisions of Chapter 183 for
the benefit of the public good.
§ 183-7 TREE REMOVAL AND TRIMMING § 184-2
184:225
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village
of Lloyd Harbor.
VEHICLE — A vehicle designed, built or used for the purpose of removal,
cutting or trimming of trees.
§ 184-3. Regulation of arborists.
§ 184-4. Licensing procedure.
§ 184-5. Duration and renewal of license; fees.
A. All arborists doing business in the village shall be licensed by the
Village of Lloyd Harbor. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
arborist to operate, engage in, conduct or supervise such services on
any property in the village without having a current, valid license issued
pursuant to this chapter, together with such other municipal permits as
may be required by law.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any arborist to fail to abide by
the Village Code or any rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Trustees in furtherance of this chapter.
A. Application required. Every arborist intending to do business within the
village shall file a written, verified application with the Village Clerk on
the forms provided.
B. Application form. The application shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) If the applicant conducts business under a trade name, it shall be
noted on the application.
(3) The name, address and telephone number, both day and night, of
the applicant or the person in charge of the business.
A. An application filed and approved in accordance with this chapter shall
be deemed a license.
B. Period. Every license issued shall be effective the first day of January, or
such subsequent day of issuance, and shall expire on the 31st day of
December next succeeding, unless suspended or revoked by the village.
C. Renewal. A license may be renewed upon filing a renewal application
with the Village Clerk together with payment of the appropriate
renewal fee; provided, however, that the applicant is in full compliance
with all rules, regulations and provisions of this chapter.
D. Fees. The Village Clerk shall charge and collect the following fees:
(1) Initial license: $50.
(2) Annual renewal of license: $50.
§ 184-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 184-6
184:226
§ 184-6. Issuance of license.
A license shall be issued by the Village Clerk within 10 days after
submission of a completed application by marking the application
"approved" together with the date of such approval and the signature of the
Village Clerk. A license shall not be issued to an applicant by the Village
Clerk unless the applicant has complied with all terms and conditions of this
chapter and all rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Trustees.
§ 184-7. Denial or revocation of license.
§ 184-8. Insurance.
§ 184-9. Duty to keep records.
Every licensee shall keep complete and accurate books of account with
respect to the operation of his/her business within the jurisdictional
boundary of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor. All such records shall
be retained by the licensee for at least three years.
A. The Village Clerk may deny or revoke a license for the following
grounds:
(1) False statement or willful and knowing misrepresentation made in
a license application.
(2) Violations of any provision of Chapter 183 or 184 of the Code of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor, or rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(3) Failure to properly dispose of cut tree material.
(4) Upon cessation of the business for which a license was previously
issued.
B. Upon revocation or the expiration of a license, any license issued
hereunder shall be surrendered to the Village Clerk.
A. Before a license may be issued or renewed by the Village Clerk, each
applicant shall file with the Village Clerk certificates of insurance
coverage demonstrating that the following insurance coverage is in full
force and effect during the term of the license:
(1) Worker's compensation insurance.
(2) Disability benefits insurance.
(3) Public liability insurance.
(4) Property damage insurance.
B. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, require minimum liability
limits.
§ 184-6 TREE REMOVAL AND TRIMMING § 184-10
184:227
§ 184-10. Licensee identification.
Each licensed vehicle shall have the name and address of the licensee and
village license number in letters not less than four inches in height, either
painted or otherwise securely affixed to the vehicle.
§ 184-11. Surrender of license.
Upon the sale, dissolution, suspension or discontinuance, whether voluntary
or involuntary, of the business of a licensee, it shall be the duty of the
licensee to notify the Village Clerk and surrender the license to the Clerk.
§ 184-12. Appeals.
The holder of any license which has been revoked, and any applicant who
shall have been denied a license under this chapter, may petition the Board
of Trustees for review of the determination as follows:
§ 184-13. Hearings.
A. The petition for review shall be in writing, signed and acknowledged by
the applicant or licensee, and shall state the ground or grounds on
which the petitioner claims that the determination was improper or
illegal.
B. The petition shall be filed with the Village Clerk within 20 days after
notification of denial or revocation has been mailed to him/her by
certified mail.
C. Upon filing of the written petition, a hearing shall be held, pursuant to
the provisions of § 184-13.
A. A hearing shall be held on the date, place and hour designated by the
Mayor.
B. The Mayor shall designate two or more members of the Village Board of
Trustees to conduct said hearing as a Review Board.
C. The Village Clerk shall give notice, stating the name and address of the
petitioner, the subject matter of the hearing and the date, place and
hour designated, by mailing a copy to the petitioner at the address
shown upon the most recent application at least 10 days prior to said
hearing.
D. At the hearing, the Review Board shall consider the petition, the Village
Clerk's reasons for denial or revocation of the license and, in its
discretion, any new or additional evidence in support of, or in
opposition to, the petition or Clerk's actions.
E. The Review Board, after public hearing, shall have the authority to
affirm, reverse or modify the actions of the Village Clerk, including the
authority to impose reasonable conditions for the issuance of any
permit.
§ 184-10 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 184-13
184:228
§ 184-14. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees may promulgate rules, regulations and standards
to ensure the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the enforcement,
interpretation and implementation of this Chapter.
§ 184-15. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any arborist to remove, cut, trim or alter any tree
in the village without obtaining a license as required by Chapter 183 of the
Code. In addition to any other penalty permitted by law, any such violations
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 for each occurrence.
For the purposes of this chapter, each tree removed, cut, trimmed or altered
shall be a separate occurrence.
§ 184-16. Disclaimer of obligation and liability.
Notwithstanding the payment of any license fee or the issuance of any
license by the village, the village, including its agents and employees, shall
be under no obligation whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or
maintenance of such business or of its service to village residents, nor does
the village assume any liability whatsoever for the actions of any licensed
business.
Chapter 186
TRESPASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 62.
Disorderly conduct and criminal
mischief — See Ch. 98.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 150.
§ 186-1. Entrance to property without permission.
No person shall enter any building, premises, lot, piece of land, private road
or driveway within the boundaries of the village without authority from the
owner thereof.
§ 186-2. Unattended vehicles on private property.
No person shall leave unattended any vehicle upon any premises, lot, piece
of land, private road or driveway within the boundaries of the village
without authority from the owner thereof.
F. Within 14 days after the hearing, the Review Board shall submit its
determination to the applicant and the full Board of Trustees.
§ 184-13 TRESPASSING § 186-3
186:229
§ 186-3. Request to leave private property.
No person who, with the authority from the owner, has entered upon any
premises, lot, piece of land or building within the boundaries of the village
shall remain there after being personally notified to leave by the owner
thereof, his agent or other authorized person.
§ 186-4. Display of stickers or guest passes.
No person shall permit a motor vehicle to enter upon the property of
any private club or private property owners' association which issues
identification stickers or guest passes for motor vehicles without having
such sticker or pass properly displayed on such motor vehicle.
§ 186-5. Enforcement.
Any police officer is hereby authorized to affix a parking summons to
any unattended vehicle involved in a violation of §§ 186-2 and 186-4 for
the purpose of obtaining jurisdiction over the owner or operator thereof
requiring said owner's or operator's appearance in the Village Court.
Chapter 190
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 47.
Bicycles — See Ch. 67.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 197.
§ 186-3 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 186-5
186:230
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Definitions.
§ 190-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Village Highway Department shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make
effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn
or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York,
subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 190-3. Pavement markings; passing lane.
§ 190-4. Overtaking and passing school bus on private roads.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. Pavement markings in accordance with the standards and
specifications established by the New York State Department of
Transportation shall be applied on all highways maintained by and
within the corporate limits of the Village and on such additional
highways or portions of highways, including private roads open to
public motor vehicle traffic, as the Board of Trustees may from time to
time by regulation determine.
B. A passing lane shall be created on that portion of West Neck Road
(Lloyd Harbor Road) known as “the causeway” in keeping with the
standards and specifications established by the New York State
Department of Transportation. [Added 9-15-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
A. The driver of a vehicle upon any private road open to public motor
vehicle traffic in the Village, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus marked and equipped as provided in
Subdivision 20 of § 375 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
§ 190-1 TRESPASSING § 190-4
186:231
§ 190-5. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
New York which has stopped on the road for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching
such school bus when there is in operation on said school bus a visual
signal as specified in Subdivision 20 of § 375 of said law, and said driver
shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled
by the driver or a police officer to proceed.
B. The driver of such school bus, when discharging pupils who must cross
any such private road, shall instruct such pupils to cross in front of the
bus, and the driver thereof shall keep such school bus halted with red
signal lights flashing until such pupils have reached the opposite side of
the road.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VI of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 190-4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 190-5
186:232
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 190-6. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 190-21), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 190-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic for all streets within the Village
limits shall be 35 miles per hour, except that along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 190-22), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, the rate of speed shall be established as indicated.
§ 190-8. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 190-23), attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the
areas described in said schedule, during school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 190-9. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 190-24), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through
streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each street intersecting
the through street.
§ 190-10. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V (§ 190-25), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 190-11. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VI (§ 190-26), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 190-12. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 190-27), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials and the performance of necessary service operations requiring
the use of municipal or public utility vehicles on such streets. Any street or
road over which heavy trucking is prohibited, as provided in § 190-27, shall
be signposted as such.
§ 190-6 TRESPASSING § 190-12
186:233

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 190-13. Application of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 190-14. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule VIII (§ 190-28), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 190-15. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IX (§ 190-29), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 190-16. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule X (§ 190-30), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 190-13 TRESPASSING § 190-16
186:235

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 190-17. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 190-18. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this Article, the Police
Department may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place
at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle
may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of
the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting
such removal and storage, such storage charges not to exceed the amount
prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 190-19. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem the same. Said Police Department
shall also, without delay, report to the Village Clerk the removal and
disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this Article.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Police
Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Police Department.
§ 190-17 TRESPASSING § 190-19
186:237

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 190-20. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 190-20 TRESPASSING § 190-20
186:239

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 190-21. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-6, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 190-22. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-7, the speed limits for all streets
within the Village limits shall be 35 miles per hour, except that along the
following described streets or parts thereof, speed limits as indicated are
hereby established:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All private roads
open to public motor
vehicle traffic
25 Entire length
School Lane 15 300 feet in either direction from the
school building line
West Neck Road
[Amended
10-15-2007 by L.L.
No. 3-2007]
35 Causeway between the entrance to
Lloyd Neck Bath Club and the
entrance to the former Fort Hill
Lodge
§ 190-23. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-8, no person shall drive a vehicle
in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below,
during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
§ 190-24. Schedule IV: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-9, the following described streets
or parts thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic control
devices shall be installed on each street intersecting the through street:
§ 190-21 TRESPASSING § 190-24
186:241
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction
of Travel
Traffic
Control Device
Jennings Road Burrwood Court South Stop
Jennings Road Dock Hollow Road West Stop
Jennings Road Middle Hollow
Road
West Stop
Jennings Road Snake Hill Road South Yield
Jennings Road Snake Hill Road
(left fork)
North Yield
Jennings Road Snake Hill Road
(right fork)
East Stop
Lloyd Harbor Road Fiddlers Green
Drive
South Stop
Lloyd Harbor Road Forrest Drive South Stop
Lloyd Harbor Road Lloyd Lane South Stop
Lloyd Harbor Road Mux Lane South Stop
Lloyd Harbor Road Soundview Drive South Stop
Lloyd Lane Burrma Drive South Stop
Lloyd Lane Lloyd Cove Court South Stop
Lloyd Lane Lloyd Point Drive South Stop
Lloyd Lane Mallard Drive East Stop
Lloyd Lane Marsh Lane West Stop
Lloyd Lane Seaforth Lane East Stop
Lloyd Lane Tulip Drive South Stop
Lloyd Lane Watch Way East Stop
Lloyd Lane Woodfield Court West Stop
Middle Hollow
Road
Crane Road North Stop
Middle Hollow
Road
East Gate Road South Stop
Middle Hollow
Road
Walden Court North Stop
Middle Hollow
Road
West Gate Road North Stop
Mill Road Beech Hill Road South Stop
Mill Road Wayside Lane North Stop
Mill Road West Neck Road East Yield
School Lane Private road West Stop
§ 190-24 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 190-24
186:242
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction
of Travel
Traffic
Control Device
School Lane Plover Lane South Stop
Shore Road Snake Hill Road North Yield
Shore Road Snake Hill Road South Stop
Shore Road Snake Hill Road West Stop
Snake Hill Road Jennings Road West Yield
Snake Hill Road Shore Road West Stop
Snake Hill Road White Hill Road South Stop
Southdown Road Abbington Drive West Stop
Southdown Road Beech Hill Road East Stop
Southdown Road Bouton Road West (2 exits) Stop
Southdown Road Christopher Way East Stop
Southdown Road Heather Lane East Stop
Southdown Road Lloyd Haven Drive East Stop
Southdown Road Mill Road East Stop
Southdown Road Millwood Lane West Stop
Southdown Road Oak Hill Road South Stop
Southdown Road Pippin Lane West Stop
Southdown Road Quail Hill Road South Stop
Southdown Road Van Wyck Lane West Stop
Target Rock Road Hawk Drive West Stop
West Neck Road Banbury Lane East Stop
West Neck Road Beach Road East Stop
West Neck Road Beardsley Lane East Stop
West Neck Road Camel Hollow
Road
East Stop
West Neck Road Crane Road East Stop
West Neck Road Grouse Lane West Stop
West Neck Road Harbor Hill Drive West Stop
West Neck Road Janes Lane East Stop
West Neck Road Knutson Court East Stop
West Neck Road Middle Hollow East Stop
West Neck Road Mill Road West Stop
West Neck Road Pheasant Circle East Stop
West Neck Road Pond Drive West Stop
West Neck Road School Lane West Stop
§ 190-24 TRESPASSING § 190-24
186:243
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction
of Travel
Traffic
Control Device
West Neck Road Seven Springs
Court
West Stop
West Neck Road Westview Drive East Stop
West Neck Road Wilton Court East Stop
§ 190-25. Schedule V: Stop Intersections. [Amended 11-15-2004 by
L.L. No. 3-2004; 12-13-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004; 6-19-2006 by L.L.
No. 3-2006]
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-10, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Jennings Meadow
Road
South Jennings Road
Jennings Road Both Jennings Meadow Road and White Hill
Road
Lloyd Harbor Road Both Forrest Drive
School Lane Both Crosswalk adjacent to school building
(when stop sign is displayed)
Southdown Road Both Mill Road
Southdown Road West Southdown Road Spur
White Hill Road North Jennings Road
§ 190-26. Schedule VI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 190-27. Schedule VII: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-12, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts
thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials and the performance
of necessary service operations requiring the use of municipal or public
§ 190-24 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 190-27
186:244
utility vehicles on such streets. Any street or road over which heavy
trucking is prohibited, as provided herein, shall be signposted as such.
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Snake Hill Road 5 Entire length
§ 190-28. Schedule VIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-14, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
All Both Corporate limits of Village
§ 190-29. Schedule IX: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-15, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
West Neck Road Both Between Fort Hill Gate Lodge and the
southerly entrance driveway of the Seminary
of the Immaculate Conception
§ 190-30. Schedule X: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-16, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
All Both Corporate limits of Village
§ 190-27 TRESPASSING § 190-30
186:245
Chapter 197
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED OPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct and criminal
mischief — See Ch. 98.
Trespassing — See Ch. 186.
Removal and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
194.
§ 197-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Automobile, truck, motorcycle, motorbike, minibike,
trail bike, go-cart, snowmobile, golf cart and any other combination of
materials which, assembled, can transport a person and which are propelled
by any power other than muscular power, except electrically or
mechanically driven invalid chairs being operated or driven by an invalid,
fire and police vehicles and self-propelled tractors and caterpillar- or
crawler-type equipment while being operated on a contract site.
PRIVATE ROAD and PUBLIC ROAD — Any paved or unpaved lane, road or
right-of-way which appears on the Official Map of the Village or has been
duly approved by the Planning Board.
UNLICENSED MINOR — Any person, under the age of eighteen (18), who
is not duly licensed to operate a motor vehicle in the State of New York.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which is not
registered in accordance with the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York for operation on public highways.
§ 197-2. Operation restricted.
No person shall operate an unregistered motor vehicle and no unlicensed
minor shall operate a registered motor vehicle on any public road in the
village or, without written permission, on the property of another person or
on any private road unless with the written consent of the owner or owners
thereof.
§ 197-3. Operation of vehicles by unlicensed minors.
If an unregistered or registered motor vehicle is operated by an unlicensed
minor in violation of § 197-2 of this chapter, any police officer shall, upon the
written complaint of any resident of the village or upon said police officer's
witnessing such violation, impound the particular motor vehicle involved in
such violation and store the same with the Police Department.
§ 190-30 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 197-4
197:246
§ 197-4. Redemption of impounded vehicles; fines and fees.53
When a motor vehicle is impounded pursuant to this chapter, the owner
may redeem the same from the Police Department upon the payment of a
fine and storage fee as established by Board of Trustees resolution. The
fine and storage fee shall become the property of the village thirty (30)
days after the payment of the same unless, before such time, the owner of
said vehicle makes an application to the Village Court requesting a hearing
concerning said violation. If, after said hearing, the Village Court decides
that said vehicle was used in violation of this chapter, the fine and storage
fee shall become village property. If the Village Court finds that said motor
vehicle was not used in violation of this chapter, said fine and storage fee
shall be returned to the owner of said motor vehicle.
§ 197-5. Unredeemed vehicles.54
If an unregistered impounded motor vehicle is not redeemed within sixty
(60) days from the time it is impounded, the Police Department shall mail
a notice to the owner thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested,
advising said owner that the village, after thirty (30) days from the date
of said notice, shall sell said motor vehicle at public auction and retain
that portion of the proceeds therefrom needed for the payment of the
aforementioned fine and storage fee. Any surplus moneys remaining after
the payment of said fine and storage fee shall be returned to the former
owner of said motor vehicle.
Chapter 205
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 8,
Art. V, and Ch. 106.
Application and hearing fees — See Ch. 8, Art.
VII.
Plats — See Ch. 8, Art. VIII.
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 8, Art. X.
Waterfront consistency review — See Ch. 8,
Art. XII.
Site and Building Permit Review Board — See
Ch. 8, Art. XIII.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 116.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 120.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 171.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Trees — See Ch. 183.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 197-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 197-5
197:247

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 205-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor."
§ 205-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-1
197:249

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 205-2. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY USE — A building or use
subordinate to the main building or use on a lot and used for purposes
customarily and clearly incidental to those of the main use or building, such
as a private garage; private swimming pool and appurtenant bathhouse;
private toolhouse; private children's playhouse; private tennis court and
appurtenant tennis house; recreation court; terrace, deck or patio; private
riding ring; private paddock, corral or other roofless, fenced enclosure for
animals; private stable; private barn; private kennel; any roofed enclosure
for animals; a noncommercial greenhouse; a freestanding dish-type
communications antenna having a diameter, width, length or height of over
three feet; a building used by an employee of the owner; a guesthouse;
aboveground LPG or oil tank; or a generator. A guesthouse shall be used
solely by the owner or occupant of the premises for the accommodation
of his/her guests or members of his/her family for a period not to exceed
six months in any calendar year, for which no rental or other charge
shall be made or received. In the case of a guesthouse or a building
used by an employee, such accessory building, together with the principal
building, shall be located on a lot of at least three acres in area.[Amended
2-20-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979; 6-17-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985;
5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
ALTER — To change or rearrange the structural parts or the exit facilities of
a building or structure, including extension on a side, or increase in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.[Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 3-2002]
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
BASEMENT — A space, partly underground, where the finished first-floor
elevation is five feet or more above the mean level of the finished grade
upon completion of construction.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
BLUFF — A bank or cliff with a height at least 10 feet above mean high
water and a precipitous or rounded face exceeding a one-to-one slope and
adjoining a beach or a body of water. The seaward limit of a "bluff" is the
landward limit of its contiguous beach. Where no beach is present, the
seaward limit is mean low water. The landward limit is 25 feet landward of
the "bluff's" receding edge.[Added 1-20-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
BUFFER AREA — A vegetated area comprising the outer 40% of the
required setback area for side and rear yards.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
§ 205-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-2
197:251
BUILDING — A principal building, accessory building or structure,
including all appurtenances to and parts thereof.[Added 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
BUILDING AREA — The computed area of the horizontal cross section
of a building or buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters or
chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, steps, driveways and
walkways.[Added 6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989; amended 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 3-2002]
BUILDING HEIGHT — For pitched roofs, the vertical distance measured
from the mean level of the finished grade on which the building stands to
a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided
that chimneys shall not be included in the building height. To be considered
a pitched roof for the purposes of this definition, said roof shall have a slope
of at least four on 12. For any other type of roof structure, the building
height shall be measured to the uppermost portion of the roof surface.
Elements such as cupolas, turrets and widow's walks shall be permitted to
exceed the highest point of any roof, as deemed appropriate by the Site
and Building Permit Review Board, and cover no more than 10% of the roof
area measured along its widest horizontal planes.[Amended 11-21-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994; 5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
BUILDING LINE — The line established by this chapter beyond which a
building shall not extend (e.g., setbacks, etc.).[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
DEBRIS BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other
suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel or silt or other
material.[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
DECK — A structure consisting of one or more planes constructed of wood,
metal or other materials, and located on or above the surface of the earth
on or including a support system of footings or foundations, piers, pilasters,
columns, posts, joists, stringers and beams or any of them and including any
railings or open enclosure thereof and including any stairs, ramps or other
devices connecting one level with another, with the ground and with any
adjoining structure.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any domesticated sheep, cattle, fallow deer, red
deer, sika deer, whitetail deer which is raised under license from the
Department of Environmental Conservation, llama, goat, swine, fowl, duck,
goose, swan, turkey, confined domestic hare or rabbit or pheasant or other
bird which is raised in confinement under license from the state Department
of Environmental Conservation before release from captivity. Any other
animal not specifically included in this definition is excluded from the
definition.[Added 12-21-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
EXISTING BUILDING SITE — That portion of a lot consisting of at least
20,000 contiguous square feet upon which the principal building is located,
but excludes setbacks, freshwater wetlands, tidal wetlands, floodplains,
steep slopes, very steep slopes and bluffs unless variances or approvals
§ 205-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-2
197:252
as required by the Village or any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction of the property were previously obtained.[Added 10-21-2002
by L.L. No. 3-2002]
FLOODPLAIN — Lands within Floodplain District I.[Added 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Gross floor area divided by gross lot area.[Added
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Lands which are seasonally or permanently
submerged or which contain water-saturated soils and are commonly known
as "marshes," "swamps," "bogs" and "flats," which host aquatic and
semiaquatic vegetation, whether or not shown on any freshwater wetlands
map as defined in Subdivision 1(a), (b), (c) and (d) of § 24-0107 of Article 24
of the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York.[Amended
4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
FRONT LOT LINE — The street line of a lot which is not a corner lot or, if
such lot extends through a block, the street line from which the principal
building sets back the lesser distance. In the case of a corner lot, the "front
lot line" is the front street line as designated in an application for a permit
to erect or alter a building on such lot or, if not so designated, the street line
from which the principal building sets back the greatest distance or, if its
setback is equidistant from two or more street lines, the street line which is
nearest to the main entrance of the principal building.
FRONT YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
between the front line of the building and the front lot line of the lot
measured on the shortest distance between the front wall and the front lot
line.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of
a building or buildings, measured from the exterior of the framed walls
of such building or buildings, without exclusion of any interior spaces,
and also including half stories, basements, attached garages, and detached
garages located within 25 feet of the principal structure; except that for half
stories, horizontal areas where the vertical distance between the floor or
floor beams and the ceiling or roof structure next above is less than 7 1/
2 feet, and open porches (unenclosed in all respects) shall not be included
in the computation of gross floor area.[Added 6-28-1989 by L.L. No.
4-1989; amended 5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
HABITABLE AREA — Space in which people normally live, sleep, eat or
cook, including bathrooms, but excluding storage rooms, garages, hallways,
laundries, closets, cellars, and unfinished attic space.[Amended
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
IMPROVED SURFACES — All buildings, as defined herein, as well as all
areas on the ground or elevated above the ground which are comprised of
materials such as asphalt, concrete, masonry, wood, gravel or partially open
paving stone, and including elements such as swimming pools, courtyards,
§ 205-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-2
197:253
volleyball courts, tennis courts and other sports courts, decks, patios,
terraces and driveways.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
LOT — A parcel or plot of land occupied or designed to be occupied by
one principal building and its accessory buildings, if any, including such
yards or open spaces as are arranged or designed to be used in connection
with such buildings, the area of such lot to be measured to the street line
only.[Amended 5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
LOT AREA, NET — The area, measured to the street line only, after
deducting from the area of the lot the area for those portions of such lot
which consist of water, freshwater wetlands, tidal wetlands, floodplains and
reductions for slope lands as follows; provided, however, that overlapping
regulated areas shall, for the purpose of calculating these deductions, be
deemed a single regulated area.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.[Added 6-28-1989
by L.L. No. 4-1989]
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured at the
principal building line and measured at right angles to the lot depth.[Added
6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE OF LAND — A
building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this
chapter or any amendment thereto, but not now in conformity with one
or more requirements of this chapter or subsequent amendments.[Added
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot lawfully existing in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto,
which lot does not now conform to the regulations of this chapter for the
district in which it is situated. However, if such lot is, or comes to be, in
the same ownership as an adjoining lot, and either lot does not contain a
principal building, the two lots shall merge and become one lot for building
purposes.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
PATIO — Terrace.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-200255]
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES — A facility for the provision of
personal wireless services as defined in Title 47 of the United States Code,
including any building, antenna or other structure which is part of the
facility.[Added 12-21-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
For bluffs and very steep slopes, the reduction factor shall be 0.75, i.e.,
1.0 acre of very steep slope shall equal 0.25 acre of calculable land
area.
A.
For steep slopes, the reduction factor shall be 0.50, i.e., 1.0 acre of
steep slope shall equal 0.5 acre of calculable land area.
B.
55.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed the former definition of "pool."
§ 205-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-2
197:254
POTENTIAL BUILDING SITE — That portion of a lot consisting of at least
20,000 contiguous square feet upon which construction of the principal
building is intended, but which area excludes setbacks, freshwater
wetlands, tidal wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, very steep slopes and
bluffs.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building designed to be used as the main
dwelling or building on a lot, including all attached garages, and detached
garages located within 25 feet of the main dwelling or building.[Amended
5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building used for the housing of one or more motor
vehicles or conveyances owned and used by the owner or occupant of the
lot on which it is erected for a purpose accessory to the use of the lot.
PRIVATE STABLE — A building used for the housing of one or more horses
owned and used by the owner or occupant of the lot on which it is erected
for a purpose accessory to the use of the lot, such horses not to be let for
commercial livery.
REAR YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot measured
on the shortest distance between the rear wall and the rear line.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996]
SEDIMENT POOL — The reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of
submerged sediment during the life of the structure.[Added 9-16-1996 by
L.L. No. 6-1996]
SETBACK — A setback of a building or of a story thereof from a particular
lot line is the horizontal distance from such lot line to the part of the
building or of the story, respectively, which is nearest to such lot line, and
includes, but is not limited to, air-conditioning units, generators or LPG
tanks, chimneys, stoops, steps, bay windows, cellar entry foundation walls
(but excluding, at grade, cellar window/light wells less than 40 square
feet in area, out-to-out dimension). Roof projections (eaves) may extend a
maximum of 18 inches into a required setback.[Amended 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
SIDE YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
through from the street or from the front yard to the rear yard or to the rear
line of the lot measured on the shortest distance between the side wall and
the side line. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a
side line.
SIGN — Includes the word "billboard" and shall mean any advertising
structure, sign, picture, word or device for the advertisement thereon or
thereby of any commodity, service or thing or for the furtherance of any
political purpose.
§ 205-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-2
197:255
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for not more than one family. A "family"
means one or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living
and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household
servants. A number of persons, but not exceeding two, living and cooking
together as a single housekeeping unit, though not related by blood,
adoption or marriage, shall be deemed to constitute a "family."[Amended
6-17-1974]
STEEP SLOPE — An area of land with a gradient of or greater than 15%,
but less than 25%, over a horizontal length of at least 25 feet and extending
for a horizontal width of at least 25 feet.[Added 1-20-1986 by L.L. No.
1-1986]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the surface of the floor and the top
of the ceiling beams next above it. A basement shall be counted as a
story.[Added 6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989; amended 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
STORY, HALF — An uppermost story with at least two opposite exterior
sides meeting a sloping roof not more than two feet above the surface of the
floor of such story.[Added 6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
STREET — A way which is an existing state, county or Village highway
or a private road which appears on the Official Map of the Village or
upon a subdivision plat approved by the Village Planning Board and which,
in all cases, affords the legal and principal means of access to abutting
property.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977]
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials constructed or erected, the
use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something
having location on the ground.
TERRACE — An uncovered flat platform of earth with a surface material.
A terrace which has a roof and which is attached to a building shall be
considered a porch.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
TIDAL WETLANDS [Added 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988] — Coastal
lands located in bays, sounds and deltas which are controlled by the ebbs
of tide, including areas where soil is saturated with saline water and water
level uses up to six feet during the growing season. Vegetation known to
these areas includes:
A. Cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora).
B. Salt meadow grass (Spartina patens).
C. Spike grass (Distichlis spicata).
D. Seaside lavender (Limonium carolinianum).
E. Black grass (Juncus Gerardi).
§ 205-2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-2
197:256
TRAILER — A vehicle which is or can be mounted on wheels, moveable
either by its own power or by being drawn by another vehicle and equipped
to be used for living or sleeping quarters or so as to permit cooking.
The term trailer shall include such vehicles if mounted on temporary or
permanent foundations.[Added 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
VERY STEEP SLOPE — An area of land with a gradient of or greater
than 25% over a horizontal length of at least 25 feet and extending for a
horizontal width of at least 25 feet.[Added 1-20-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
VILLAGE — The Village of Lloyd Harbor.
VILLAGE LAW — The Village Law of the State of New York, as amended
from time to time.
WATER POOL or POOL — Any receptacle for water or an artificial pool of
water having a depth at any point of more than two feet and a plane surface
of greater than 100 square feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or
partial immersion therein of human beings together with all appurtenances,
including, but not limited to pool filter, diving board, pool house, patios,
terraces and other similar features used in connection with the
pool.[Amended 5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ 205-3. Word usage.
F. Rush (Scirpus species).
A. Words used in the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
and the word "building" includes the words "structure," "pools,"
"docks," "piers" and "jetties." The word "building" shall be construed as
though followed by the words "or part thereof and its appurtenant
structures," and the word "street" includes "highway," "road" and
"lane." [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
B. The word "shall" in this chapter is always mandatory.
§ 205-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-3
197:257

ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 205-4. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 4-20-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Lloyd Harbor is hereby
divided into 10 districts designated as follows:
Residence A-1 District
Residence A-2 District
Public Beach District
Floodplain District I
Floodplain District II
Coastal Overlay District-1 (COD-1)
Coastal Overlay District-2 (COD-2)
Conservation Recreation District
Parkland Overlay District
Estuarine District
§ 205-5. District boundaries.
A. The Residence A-1 District shall comprise all properties within the
boundaries of the Village as shown on the map attached to and made
part of this chapter, which map is entitled "Official Zoning District Map
of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, in the Town of Huntington,
County of Suffolk, State of New York, as amended February 1992 and
last amended August 17, 2009";56 and all notations, references and
other things on said map shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the
matters and things shown on said map were all fully described herein,
except that there shall be excluded from such Residence A-1 District
the property particularly described in Subsection C of this section and
all areas and properties in the Floodplain Districts defined in Article VII
of this chapter. [Amended 4-20-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 1-19-2010
by L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. The Residence A-2 District shall comprise all properties within the
boundaries of the Village as shown on the map attached to and made
part of this chapter, which map is entitled "Official Zoning District Map
of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, in the Town of Huntington,
County of Suffolk, State of New York, as amended August 17, 2009";57
and all notations, references and other things on said map shall be as
much a part of this chapter as if the matters and things shown on said
56.Editor's Note: Said map is included in a pocket at the end of the Code.
57.Editor's Note: Said map is included in a pocket at the end of the Code.
§ 205-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-5
197:259
map were all fully described herein, except that there shall be excluded
from such Residence A-2 District the property particularly described
in Subsection C of this section and all areas and properties in the
Floodplain Districts defined in Article VII of this chapter. [Added
1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-201058]
C. The Floodplain Districts shall comprise the areas and properties
described and defined in Article VII of this chapter. The Coastal Overlay
Districts shall comprise the areas and properties described and defined
in Article XVII of this chapter. [Amended 4-20-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992]
D. Conservation Recreation District shall comprise the areas and
properties described and defined in Article XVIII of this chapter.
[Amended 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; 9-16-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996; 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
E. Parkland Overlay District shall comprise the areas and properties
described and defined in Article XIX of this chapter. [Amended
9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
F. Estuarine District shall comprise the areas and properties described
and defined in Article XX of this chapter. [Added 9-16-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996; amended 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
G. Any question concerning the exact boundary of a district established
pursuant to this chapter shall be determined by the Board of Trustees.
[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
58.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through G as Subsections C through H, respectively.
§ 205-5 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-5
197:260
ARTICLE IV
Lot and Building Requirements
§ 205-6. Residence A-1 District. [Amended 4-19-1971; 2-20-1979 by
L.L. No. 1-1979; 7-7-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; 8-17-1981 by L.L. No.
1-1981; 6-17-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988;
6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989; 4-20-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992;
5-15-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
A. Lot requirements. Subject to the exceptions specified in § 205-64 of this
chapter, no building shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged in
the Residence A-1 District, except on a lot for which each principal
building, together with its accessory buildings, complies with the
following:
(1) If the lot is vacant, contains a net lot area of at least two acres, but
shall not be required to be more than five gross acres, and contains
a potential building site; or
(2) If the lot is improved, contains a net lot area of at least two acres,
but shall not be required to be more than five gross acres, and
contains an existing building site; or
(3) If the lot contains neither a potential nor existing building site of
20,000 square feet, and contains at least five gross acres.
(4) The building area for the principal building shall not exceed 7 1/2%
of the area of the gross lot area, and the aggregate building area
(including the principal and every accessory building) shall not
exceed 15% of the gross lot area, except that, in the case of a
guesthouse or a building used as a dwelling by an employee, such
accessory building, together with the principal building, shall be
located on a lot of at least three acres of gross lot area, and the
aggregate building area (including the principal and every
accessory building) shall not exceed 15% of the gross lot area.
(5) Further, no single accessory building, except for an accessory
building without a roof or enclosing walls, shall have a gross floor
area which exceeds 1,000 square feet, or a height which exceeds 1
1/2 stories, and shall have no habitable area within the half stories
of the structure.
(6) A perimeter not in excess of 800 linear feet for each one acre of
area; and the width of such lot shall at no point be less than 20 feet.
(7) A front lot line frontage of at least 175 feet, except that where such
frontage coincides with the circumference of a turnaround at the
extremity of a dead-end road, such front lot line frontage shall be at
least 90 feet.
(8) A lot width of at least 200 feet and a lot depth of at least 200 feet.
§ 205-6 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-6
197:261
B. Gross floor area and setbacks. Subject to the exceptions specified in
§ 205-64 of this chapter, and subject to review in accordance with
§ 205-34 of this chapter, no building shall hereafter be erected, altered
or enlarged in the Residence A-1 District unless:
(1) If it is a principal building where the gross floor area does not
exceed 6,000 square feet, it shall then be set back at least 60 feet
from the front lot line and at least 40 feet from every other
boundary line of the lot. However, if it is a principal building where
the gross floor area exceeds 6,000 square feet, it shall then be set
back at least an additional 3% of 60 feet from every street line and
at least an additional 3% of 40 feet from every other boundary line
of the lot for every 1% which such gross floor area exceeds 6,000
square feet. In addition, if the lot on which such building is located
has a bluff which is adjacent to tidal water and which has an
elevation of over 10 feet above mean high water, then such building
shall be set back from the top edge of the bluff at least a distance
equal to twice the elevation of the bluff above mean sea level;
provided, however, that the Building Inspector may permit a
setback of less than twice the elevation if the face of the bluff is
covered with well-established, dense vegetation and the toe of the
bluff is protected from wave erosion by an artificial or natural
barrier, and further provided that no building shall be located any
closer than 50 feet to the top edge of the bluff.
(2) If it is a principal building, its maximum gross floor area shall be
calculated as follows: Maximum gross floor area = 6,000 square
feet + [(gross lot area - 87,120 square feet) x 0.0229569].
Notwithstanding the gross lot area of an existing legal lot, no
principal building shall be required to be less than 6,000 square
feet by the application of this section. For the purposes of this
Subsection B(2), the first 800 square feet of that part of the
principal building that is a garage shall not be counted in the
computation of maximum gross floor area.
(3) If it is an accessory building, it shall be set back at least 100 feet
from every street line and at least 40 feet from every other
boundary line of the lot, except that:
(a) A garage may be set back at the same distance as the principal
building from the street line, but not less than 60 feet.
[Amended 11-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
[1] Each lot less than three acres and improved with a
principal structure may have a maximum of one attached
garage and one accessory garage.
[2] Each lot having at least three acres or up to four acres and
improved with a principal structure may have an attached
garage and a maximum of two separate accessory garages.
§ 205-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-6
197:262
[3] Each lot containing 4 acres or more and improved with a
principal structure may have an attached garage and a
maximum of three separate accessory garage structures.
(b) A riding ring, paddock, corral or other roofless, fenced
enclosure for animals may be set back no less than 20 feet from
every street line and from any other boundary line.
(c) A swimming pool and its appurtenant structures shall be set
back at least 100 feet from every street line and 50 feet from
every other boundary line.
(d) A tennis court and its appurtenant structures shall be set back
not less than 100 feet from every street line and not less than
50 feet from any other boundary line. No outdoor tennis court
shall be illuminated by artificial lighting.
(e) If the lot on which such building is located has a bluff which is
adjacent to tidal water and which has an elevation of over 10
feet above mean high water, then such building shall be set
back from the top edge of the bluff a distance equal to twice
the elevation of the bluff above mean sea level; provided,
however, that the Building Inspector may permit a setback of
less than twice the elevation if the face of the bluff is covered
with well-established, dense vegetation and the toe of the bluff
is protected from wave erosion by an artificial or natural
barrier and further provided that no building shall be located
any closer than 50 feet from the top edge of the bluff.
(f) LPG tanks, oil tanks, generators or air-conditioning units
located within five feet of the building they serve may extend
into the required setbacks if the building such structure serves
is located at or greater than the setbacks required by the
§ 205-6.
(4) If it is a dish-type communications antenna, the Building Inspector
shall require that such antenna be concealed from neighboring
properties by an enclosure in harmony with the architectural and
aesthetic design of the structure on which it is located or to which
it is attached or, if it is a freestanding antenna, that it be concealed
with appropriate screen planting so as not to be visible from
neighboring properties.
C. Roofs. No principal building having a pitched roof shall have a building
height exceeding 35 feet or be more than 2 1/2 stories. No principal
building having any other type of roof structure shall exceed 25 feet and
two stories in building height. No accessory building having a pitched
roof shall exceed 25 feet or 1 1/2 stories in building height. No
accessory building having any other type of roof structure shall exceed
12 feet and one story in building height.
D. Habitable area.
§ 205-6 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-6
197:263
(1) Every principal residence building hereafter erected, moved into
the Village limits or altered shall have a habitable area of not less
than the following:
(a) One story: 1,250 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 1,500 square feet.
(c) Two stories: 1,800 square feet.
(2) In no case shall the habitable area of the first floor of one-and-onehalf-
or two-story houses be less than 1,000 square feet.
(3) No room, except bathrooms and closets, shall be less than 80
square feet in area.
E. Drainage. Subject to the exceptions specified in § 205-64 of this
chapter, and subject to review in accordance with § 205-34 of this
chapter, no building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration
or enlargement of a building or structure unless the application for the
same is accompanied by a drainage plan showing the installation of onsite
drainage facilities as determined necessary by the Building
Inspector or Village Engineer to properly drain the new impervious
surfaces relating to the new construction (including but not limited to
roofs, terraces, patios and driveways, athletic courts and the like). The
drainage plan shall be approved by the Building Inspector or the Village
Engineer so as to handle a minimum of a two-inch rainfall in 24 hours,
subject to additional capacity being required due to individual site
conditions. All drainage facilities shall be installed in accordance with
the approved plan before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
new structure.
F. Buffer areas. In order to protect the privacy of adjoining property
owners and the bucolic nature of the Village, existing buffer areas
exceeding three feet in height shall be preserved on all lots with the
following exceptions:
(1) Existing vegetation may be removed if replaced with alternative
plantings as approved by the Site and Building Permit Review
Board.
(2) Existing vegetation may be removed to provide for a driveway to
the premises if determined to be appropriate by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board in consideration of the construction
site, lot shape and topography, and adjacent lots and their
structures.
(3) Nothing in this section shall require an owner of an existing
improved lot to plant or maintain buffer areas where none now
exist.
(4) The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any other
planting, buffering or screening which may be required by the
§ 205-6 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-6
197:264
§ 205-6.1. Residence A-2 District. [Added 1-19-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
Board of Trustees, Planning Board, Zoning Board or Site and
Building Permit Review Board as a condition of approval for any
application before such Board.
G. A sports or recreation court and its appurtenant structures shall be set
back not less than 100 feet from every street line and not less than 50
feet from any other boundary line. A sports or recreation court may not
be illuminated by artificial lighting and shall be screen planted in
accordance with § 205-34B. [Added 9-20-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
A. Lot requirements. Subject to the exceptions specified in § 205-64 of this
chapter, no building shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged in
the Residence A-2 District, except on a lot for which each principal
building, together with its accessory buildings, complies with the
following:
(1) If the lot is vacant, contains a net lot area of at least four acres, but
shall not be required to be more than seven gross acres, and
contains a potential building site; or
(2) If the lot is improved, contains a net lot area of at least four acres,
but shall not be required to be more than seven gross acres, and
contains an existing building site; or
(3) If the lot contains neither a potential nor existing building site of
20,000 square feet, and contains at least seven gross acres.
(4) The building area for the principal building shall not exceed 5% of
the area of the gross lot area, and the aggregate building area
(including the principal and every accessory building) shall not
exceed 10% of the gross lot area, except that, in the case of a
guesthouse or a building used as a dwelling by an employee, such
accessory building, together with the principal building, shall be
located on a lot of at least five acres of gross lot area, and the
aggregate building area (including the principal and every
accessory building) shall not exceed 10% of the gross lot area.
(5) Further, no single accessory building, except for an accessory
building without a roof or enclosing walls, shall have a gross floor
area which exceeds 1,000 square feet, or a height which exceeds
1 1/2 stories, and shall have no habitable area within the half
stories of the structure.
(6) A perimeter not in excess of 800 linear feet for each one acre of
area; and the width of such lot shall at no point be less than 40 feet.
(7) A front lot line frontage of at least 265 feet, except that where such
frontage coincides with the circumference of a turnaround at the
§ 205-6 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-6.1
197:265
extremity of a dead-end road, such front lot line frontage shall be
at least 135 feet.
(8) A lot width of at least 300 feet and a lot depth of at least 300 feet.
B. Gross floor area and setbacks. Subject to the exceptions specified in
§ 205-64 of this chapter, and subject to review in accordance with
§ 205-34 of this chapter, no building shall hereafter be erected, altered
or enlarged in the Residence A-2 District unless:
(1) If it is a principal building where the gross floor area does not
exceed 8,000 square feet, it shall then be set back at least 120 feet
from the front lot line and at least 80 feet from every other
boundary line of the lot. However, if it is a principal building where
the gross floor area exceeds 8,000 square feet, it shall then be set
back at least an additional 3% of 120 feet from every street line and
at least an additional 3% of 80 feet from every other boundary line
of the lot for every 1% which such gross floor area exceeds 8,000
square feet. In addition, if the lot on which such building is located
has a bluff which is adjacent to tidal water and which has an
elevation of over 10 feet above mean high water, then such building
shall be set back from the top edge of the bluff at least a distance
equal to twice the elevation of the bluff above mean sea level;
provided, however, that the Building Inspector may permit a
setback of less than twice the elevation if the face of the bluff is
covered with well-established, dense vegetation and the toe of the
bluff is protected from wave erosion by an artificial or natural
barrier, and further provided that no building shall be located any
closer than 50 feet to the top edge of the bluff.
(2) If it is a principal building, its maximum gross floor area shall be
calculated as follows: Maximum gross floor area = 8,000 square
feet + [(gross lot area - 87,120 square feet) x 0.0229569].
Notwithstanding the gross lot area of an existing legal lot, no
principal building shall be required to be less than 8,000 square
feet by the application of this section. For the purposes of this
Subsection B(2), the first 800 square feet of that part of the
principal building that is a garage shall not be counted in the
computation of maximum gross floor area.
(3) If it is an accessory building, it shall be set back at least 160 feet
from every street line and at least 80 feet from every other
boundary line of the lot, except that:
(a) A garage may be set back at the same distance as the principal
building from the street line, but not less than 120 feet.
[Amended 11-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
[1] Each lot containing four acres or more and improved with
a principal structure may have an attached garage and a
maximum of three separate accessory garages.
§ 205-6.1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-6.1
197:266
(b) A riding ring, paddock, corral or other roofless, fenced
enclosure for animals may be set back no less than 40 feet from
every street line and from any other boundary line.
(c) A swimming pool and its appurtenant structures shall be set
back at least 160 feet from every street line and 80 feet from
every other boundary line.
(d) A tennis court and its appurtenant structures shall be set back
not less than 160 feet from every street line and not less than
80 feet from any other boundary line. No outdoor tennis court
shall be illuminated by artificial lighting.
(e) If the lot on which such building is located has a bluff which is
adjacent to tidal water and which has an elevation of over 10
feet above mean high water, then such building shall be set
back from the top edge of the bluff a distance equal to twice
the elevation of the bluff above mean sea level; provided,
however, that the Building Inspector may permit a setback of
less than twice the elevation if the face of the bluff is covered
with well-established, dense vegetation and the toe of the bluff
is protected from wave erosion by an artificial or natural
barrier and further provided that no building shall be located
any closer than 50 feet from the top edge of the bluff.
(f) LPG tanks, oil tanks, generators or air-conditioning units
located within five feet of the building they serve may extend
into the required setbacks if the building such structure serves
is located at or greater than the setbacks required by
§ 205-6.1.
(4) If it is a dish-type communications antenna, the Building Inspector
shall require that such antenna be concealed from neighboring
properties by an enclosure in harmony with the architectural and
aesthetic design of the structure on which it is located or to which
it is attached or, if it is a freestanding antenna, that it be concealed
with appropriate screen planting so as not to be visible from
neighboring properties.
C. Roofs. No principal building having a pitched roof shall have a building
height exceeding 35 feet or be more than 2 1/2 stories. No principal
building having any other type of roof structure shall exceed 25 feet and
two stories in building height. No accessory building having a pitched
roof shall exceed 25 feet or 1 1/2 stories in building height. No
accessory building having any other type of roof structure shall exceed
12 feet and one story in building height.
D. Habitable area.
(1) Every principal residence building hereafter erected, moved into
the Village limits or altered shall have a habitable area of not less
than the following:
§ 205-6.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-6.1
197:267
(a) One story: 1,250 square feet.
(b) One-and-one-half stories: 1,500 square feet.
(c) Two stories: 1,800 square feet.
(2) In no case shall the habitable area of the first floor of one-and-onehalf-
or two-story houses be less than 1,000 square feet.
(3) No room, except bathrooms and closets, shall be less than 80
square feet in area.
E. Drainage. Subject to the exceptions specified in § 205-64 of this
chapter, and subject to review in accordance with § 205-34 of this
chapter, no building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration
or enlargement of a building or structure unless the application for the
same is accompanied by a drainage plan showing the installation of onsite
drainage facilities as determined necessary by the Building
Inspector or Village Engineer to properly drain the new impervious
surfaces relating to the new construction (including but not limited to
roofs, terraces, patios and driveways, athletic courts and the like). The
drainage plan shall be approved by the Building Inspector or the Village
Engineer so as to handle a minimum of a two-inch rainfall in 24 hours,
subject to additional capacity being required due to individual site
conditions. All drainage facilities shall be installed in accordance with
the approved plan before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
new structure.
F. Buffer areas. In order to protect the privacy of adjoining property
owners and the bucolic nature of the Village, existing buffer areas
exceeding three feet in height shall be preserved on all lots with the
following exceptions:
(1) Existing vegetation may be removed if replaced with alternative
plantings as approved by the Site and Building Permit Review
Board.
(2) Existing vegetation may be removed to provide for a driveway to
the premises if determined to be appropriate by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board in consideration of the construction
site, lot shape and topography, and adjacent lots and their
structures.
(3) Nothing in this section shall require an owner of an existing
improved lot to plant or maintain buffer areas where none now
exist.
(4) The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any other
planting, buffering or screening which may be required by the
Board of Trustees, Planning Board, Zoning Board or Site and
Building Permit Review Board as a condition of approval for any
application before such Board.
§ 205-6.1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-6.1
197:268
§ 205-7. Slope lands. [Added 1-20-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
G. A sports or recreation court and its appurtenant structures shall be set
back not less than 160 feet from every street line and not less than 80
feet from any other boundary line. A sports or recreation court may not
be illuminated by artificial lighting and shall be screen-planted in
accordance with § 205-34B.
A. Purpose. The Board of Trustees hereby finds that the maintenance and
protection of slope lands in the Village, as recommended in the Village
Master Plan, is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of both
present and future residents of the Village and is specifically necessary
to prevent soil erosion, sedimentation, the loss of protective vegetation
and resultant flooding and drainage hazards as well as to provide safe
building sites with proper access thereto for pedestrian, vehicular and
emergency traffic and to preserve wildlife habitat and to protect
important scenic resources, all in furtherance of state and county
development policies and objectives as well as the Village Master Plan.
B. Slope lands. For the purpose of this section, slope lands shall consist of
all bluffs, very steep slopes and steep slopes.
C. Construction within slope lands. No building development or the
construction of other site improvements nor the excavation, filling or
grading, or removal or substantial alteration of any tree or shrub, shall
be permitted within a slope land unless a slope land use permit (slope
land permit) for the activity shall have been issued by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board. [Amended 7-19-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-200259]
(1) Prior to taking such action, the Site and Building Permit Review
Board shall determine that:
(a) For very steep slopes, the proposed location for the use,
improvement or development is the only suitable location on
the site. However, for steep slopes, the Site and Building
Permit Review Board need only determine that the proposed
location for the use, improvement or development is an
appropriate location on the lot in the consideration of the lot's
shape, topography or other features, and in relation to the
neighborhood;
(b) The activity proposed is the minimum activity necessary to
make reasonable use of said land;
(c) All feasible construction standards and precautions are or will
be taken to assure that the resulting environmental hazard will
be minimized;
59.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection C, Minimum lot area
requirements, and renumbered former Subsection D as C.
§ 205-6.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-7
197:269
(d) Such proposed action is otherwise in full compliance with all
applicable requirements of the Village, town, county, state and
federal agencies; and
(e) The purpose and intent of this section are satisfied to the
maximum feasible degree as determined by said Site and
Building Permit Review Board.
(2) Application. In order to provide the Site and Building Permit
Review Board with adequate time to review the application, an
application for such slope land permit shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk in eight copies, not less than 45 days prior to the
meeting at which it is to be officially received by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board, and shall include the following:
(a) A topographical survey of the property showing existing
contours with vertical intervals of no more than two feet; the
location and extent of any slope lands as set forth in Subsection
B; the location of any existing buildings, structures, driveways
and utilities of the site; existing easements and rights-of-way;
the present use of land and structures; the specific type, size
and location of trees with a diameter of 12 or more inches at a
height four feet above ground level; and any other existing
features or characteristics of the site which may be of
environmental, historical, archaeological or other significance.
(b) A plan for the proposed site development, indicating building
and driveway locations, parking areas, landscaping, grading,
drainage, utilities and other planned site uses and
improvements.
(c) Specific design measures proposed to mitigate the potential
impact of the proposed site development upon the
environmentally sensitive features of the property both during
and after construction.
(d) An application fee in an amount as established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
(3) Procedure.
(a) Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the Site and
Building Permit Review Board may refer it for review and
report to the Village Engineer and other such experts as may
be determined necessary or appropriate by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board to assist it in its review of the
proposed application, which cost shall be borne by the
applicant. A copy of the application shall also be referred to
appropriate town, county and state agencies whose approval
may be required or whose recommendations may be sought.
§ 205-7 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-7
197:270
§ 205-8. Wetlands and floodplains. [Added 4-18-1988 by L.L. No.
2-1988]
(b) Within 60 days of the date of the Site and Building Permit
Review Board meeting at which the properly completed
application is officially received and the Site and Building
Permit Review Board's proceeding are completed, the Site and
Building Permit Review Board shall act either to approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove the slope land permit
application.
(4) Determination.
(a) Prior to making a determination to approve, either with or
without modifications, any such application, the Site and
Building Permit Review Board shall first find that the proposed
site development has been designed in such a way as to
minimize any potential adverse environmental impacts to the
maximum degree reasonably feasible, either through redesign,
reduction in the size of the proposed project, the
implementation of special environmental protection measures,
permanent restrictions on the use and development of the
property which may be established by deed restrictions or a
combination of the above. In so finding, the Site and Building
Permit Review Board shall further determine that the slope
lands shall not be significantly impaired, that the proposed site
design will provide safe building locations with proper access
thereto, that important scenic and visual resources will be
protected to the maximum extent feasible and that there will
be no significant adverse impact upon any rare or endangered
species of flora or fauna. The Site and Building Permit Review
Board shall attach such conditions to its approval as it may
determine necessary to assure compliance with these
standards and requirements.
(b) In the event that the applicant fails to establish that the
proposed use and development of the site and the conditions
which the applicant proposes in relation thereto comply with
these essential environmental standards, the Site and Building
Permit Review Board shall disapprove said application and the
Building Inspector shall deny the issuance of any permits in
relation thereto.
(5) In addition to the above, the requirements of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act60 shall also be applicable.
A. Purpose. The Board of Trustees hereby finds that the maintenance and
protection of wetlands and the prevention of new building development
within and the filling of floodplains are essential to the public health,
60.Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 205-7 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-8
197:271
safety and welfare of both present and future residents of the Village
and are specifically necessary for the purpose of preserving wildlife
habitat, protecting important scenic resources, protecting the safety
of life and property, preserving vegetative cover and for such other
purposes as set forth in Article VII hereof and in the laws of the State of
New York and the Village related to coastal zone management and the
protection of both freshwater and tidal wetlands.
B. Wetlands and floodplains. For the purpose of this chapter, "wetlands"
shall include both freshwater and tidal wetlands, and "floodplains" shall
mean any land within the Village which is less than 12 feet above mean
sea level, specifically including all lands within Floodplain District I.
C. Minimum lot area requirements. The following minimum lot
requirements shall apply to properties which consist in whole or in part
of wetlands and/or floodplains. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
(1) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new
principal building on any existing lot within the Village unless said
lot contains at least two acres of land area in the Residence A-1
District or at least four acres in the Residence A-2 District,
exclusive of wetlands and floodplains, and meets all other
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
(2) Where the requirements of Subsection C(1) above cannot be met
and where there is no present principal use or structure located on
a legally created lot, a special permit may be issued by the Planning
Board for the construction of a principal building and
establishment of a permitted use on such lot, provided that the
following standards and conditions are met:
(a) There shall be available a potential building site with vehicular
access from a street directly to such area.
(b) A minimum distance for said building site of not less than 100
feet shall be provided from any wetlands.
(c) All other required zoning setbacks shall be complied with.
(3) Where there is an existing principal building located on a legally
created lot, which lot contains or is immediately adjacent to a
freshwater or tidal wetland or floodplain, no building permit shall
be issued for the enlargement of such building or for the
construction of an accessory building on such lot if it is to be
located within a floodplain or within 100 feet of a wetland unless a
special permit therefor shall have been issued by the Planning
Board. In reviewing an application for such special permit, the
Planning Board shall be guided by the following standards and
conditions:
§ 205-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-8
197:272
(a) Building construction shall not be permitted within the actual
limits of any wetland.
(b) Wherever possible, the proposed building construction shall be
relocated out of any floodplain or redesigned so as to provide a
minimum setback of not less than 100 feet from any wetland.
(c) All other required zoning setbacks shall be complied with.
(d) Where the Planning Board determines that due to the
configuration of the lot and/or the nature and location of
existing building development on it, there is no reasonable
alternative to the construction of the proposed building
addition or accessory building other than within 100 feet of a
wetland and where the Planning Board determines that such
construction would not have a significant adverse impact on
such wetland, the Board may permit such construction
conditioned upon the implementation of appropriate mitigating
measures designed to minimize whatever adverse impact may
occur as a result of the proposed construction. These
mitigating measures may include, without limitation, the
reduction in the size of the proposed construction, the
relocation of the proposed construction, the redesign of the
proposed construction and/or the design or redesign of such
site improvements as may be determined necessary or
appropriate by the Planning Board.
(e) Where the Planning Board determines that a safety hazard or
adverse impact cannot be satisfactorily mitigated or when the
applicant does not agree to the mitigating requirements, as
determined by the Planning Board, said Board shall deny the
issuance of the special permit. The reasons for such action
shall be clearly and fully stated on the record in writing.
(4) The application requirements, procedures and required
determinations with respect to the issuance of such a special
permit by the Planning Board shall be the same as set forth in
§ 205-7C with respect to slope lands, except that the required
determinations shall be made with respect to wetlands and
floodplains rather than slope lands.
(5) Where a lot two acres or larger in the Residence A-1 District or four
acres or larger in the Residence A-2 District does not meet the
standards, as set forth above, and is not eligible for a special
permit, as described above, or where a special permit application is
disapproved by the Planning Board, the owner of such lot shall be
permitted, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees, to transfer,
by sale or otherwise, to the owner of a larger parcel of land located
elsewhere in the Village the development right to create one singlefamily
dwelling lot in addition to the maximum number which the
Planning Board determines could otherwise be accommodated as a
§ 205-8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-8
197:273
result of the subdivision of such larger parcel in conformance with
all applicable regulations and requirements. In such subdivision,
the additional permitted building lot will be accommodated by
allowing a reduction of the otherwise applicable minimum net land
area requirements; provided, however, that the minimum gross
land area requirement shall remain at two acres per lot in the
Residence A-1 District and four acres per lot in the Residence A-2
District. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Board of Trustees
approves such a transfer and the Planning Board determines, for
purposes of proper subdivision design or for other appropriate
reason, that it is either not practical or not possible for each lot
in such subdivision to contain a minimum gross area of two acres
in the Residence A-1 District and four acres lot in the Residence
A-2 District, the Planning Board may be specifically authorized
by the Board of Trustees to approve one lot with a gross area
of less than two but not less than one acre in the Residence A-1
District and less than four but not less than two acres in the
Residence A-2 District, and to modify the otherwise applicable lot
dimensional requirements within such subdivision as said Planning
Board may determine appropriate in accordance with the purposes
and pursuant to the authority of § 7-738 of the Village Law.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(6) As a part of any application to the Board of Trustees for permission
to transfer the right to create one additional single-family dwelling
lot pursuant to Subsection C(5) above, the applicant shall be
required to prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees a plan for
the proposed future ownership and use of the lot from which the
development right will be transferred. Such plan, provided that it is
otherwise consistent with the environmental protection purposes
and requirements of all other applicable laws and regulations, may
allow the use of the lot for waterfront access, passive recreation,
environmental education and protection and other such similar
purposes and including the subdivision of such lot into parcels of
less than two acres in the Residence A-1 District or less than four
acres in the Residence A-2 District, but not less than 20,000 square
feet each for such purpose. If the Board of Trustees approves the
application, it shall require the filing of appropriate covenants and
restrictions as are determined necessary to permanently limit the
use of the land in accordance with such proposed plan, including
any modification thereof as may be agreed upon by the Board and
the applicant. [Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 205-8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-8
197:274
ARTICLE V
Residence A-1 and A-2 District Uses
§ 205-9. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-19-1971; 4-9-1980 by L.L. No.
1-1980; 12-21-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992; 6-21-2010 by L.L. No.
3-2010; 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
Except as provided in Article IX of this chapter, no building, structure or
premises in the Residence A-1 and A-2 Districts shall be used or maintained
for any purpose other than the purposes authorized in this Article V. No
building or structure shall thereafter be erected, enlarged or altered if, as
so erected or as a result of such enlargement or alteration, such building or
structure or any part thereof is arranged, designed or intended to be used
for any except the purposes set forth below. Such uses shall not include any
uses customarily carried on as a business or any advertising sign, except as
hereinafter permitted in Article XI of this chapter. This provision shall not
be deemed to permit any driveway or walk giving access to premises used
for business purposes or used for purposes not permitted in Residence A-1
and A-2 Districts. Permitted uses are as follows:
A. A single-family detached principal dwelling.
B. Private and noncommercial uses or buildings customarily incidental or
accessory to the uses herein specifically permitted in said district and
located on the same lot, as follows:
(1) Farming which is confined to the raising or production of crops.
(2) The keeping of bees, and birds kept within the residential building
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises.
(3) The keeping of dogs, cats or other small animals ordinarily kept as
pets which sleep and eat within the residential building occupied
by the owner or occupant of the premises.
(4) The private stabling of horses and the breeding of dogs or cats,
subject to the following additional standards and conditions:
(a) The animals shall be kept securely penned within an enclosure
so as to prevent them from straying off the premises. Newly
erected or relocated enclosures shall be subject to the setback
requirement of Article IV and permit review pursuant to Article
VIII.
(b) All grain, feed or other food stock for the animals, if not kept
within a building, shall be kept in rodent-proof containers
located at least 100 feet from any boundary line of the
property.
(c) All manure shall be stored or treated in a manner so as not to
attract or harbor vermin, flies or other pests nor create any
obnoxious or offensive odors detectable on adjacent property.
§ 205-9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-9
197:275
(d) All stormwater runoff and other surface water or drainage
shall be contained on the premises.
(e) No horse may be kept or maintained on any premises in the
Village unless it shall have been previously registered with the
Village.
(f) No animal shall be kept in a manner which is proscribed by
§ 205-10 of this article.
(g) The combined number of horses and domestic animals as
defined in this chapter shall not exceed two animals per acre.
(h) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XII of the chapter, if,
on any lot in the Village at the time of the enactment of this
subsection, there are any horses or dogs or cats for the
purpose of breeding which are not kept in the manner
prescribed by this subsection, the resident occupant or owner
of the premises on which the animals are kept shall, within six
months of the date of the enactment of this subsection, bring
the keeping of such animals into compliance with this chapter.
(5) The keeping of domestic animals, as specifically defined and
enumerated in this chapter, subject to the owner of the premises
first obtaining a special use permit pursuant to the standards and
conditions of Article IX and upon the following additional standards
and conditions: [Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(a) No such use shall be permitted on lots having less than two
acres of land in the Residence A-1 District and four acres of
land in the Residence A-2 District.
(b) The animals shall be kept securely penned within an enclosure
so as to prevent them from straying off the owner's premises.
Newly erected or relocated enclosures shall be subject to the
setback requirements of Article IV or any greater setback as
may be determined necessary by the Planning Board after it
review pursuant to Article IX of this chapter.
(c) The combined number of domestic animals permitted on each
lot shall not exceed one animal for each full acre of lot area. If,
on any lot, there shall be kept domestic animals and horses,
then, for the purpose of computing the permitted number of
animals pursuant to this Subsection B(5)(c), the horses shall be
considered domestic animals.
(d) The permitted number of facilities or structures for the shelter
of the animals shall be limited to the minimum number of
facilities or structures necessary to accomplish that purpose.
§ 205-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-9
197:276
(e) No domestic animal may be kept or maintained on any
premises in the Village unless it shall have been previously
registered with the Village.
(f) All grain, feed or other food stocks for the animals, if not kept
within a building, shall be kept in rodent-proof containers
located at least 100 feet from every boundary line of the
property in the Residence A-1 District and at least 160 feet
from every boundary line of the property in the A-2 District.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(g) All manure shall be stored or treated in such a manner so as
not to attract or harbor vermin, flies or other pests nor create
any obnoxious or offensive odors detectable on surrounding
properties.
(h) All stormwater runoff and other surface water or drainage
shall be contained on the premises.
(i) Any violation of the above standards or conditions or other
conditions which may be imposed by the Board of Trustees as a
condition for the issuance of a special use permit may result, in
addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, in
revocation of the permit by the Board upon a showing that the
holder of the permit has been notified of the violation and has
refused or neglected to correct the violation.
(j) No animals shall be kept in a manner which is proscribed by
§ 205-10 of this article.
(k) If, on any lot in the Village at the time of the enactment of this
subsection, there are kept any number of other domestic
animals, except horses, which exceed the number permitted by
Subsection B(5)(c), the resident occupant or owner of the
premises on which the animals are kept shall, within six
months of the date of the enactment of this subsection, reduce
the number of other domestic animals on the premises so as to
be in compliance with Subsection B(5)(c). If any person is
aggrieved by this requirement, said person may apply to the
Board of Zoning Appeals for additional time to reduce the
number of other domestic animals at the premises, which
appeal may be granted only upon a showing, by competent
evidence, that to reduce the number of such animals would
create an unnecessary hardship or that the subject animals do
not constitute a present detriment to the health, safety or
general welfare of the surrounding community in terms of
visual impacts, noise, odors or other nuisance.
(6) Nursery and horticulture, including noncommercial greenhouses,
provided that no organic fertilizer shall be stored within 100 feet of
any boundary line of a lot in the Residence A-1 District and within
§ 205-9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-9
197:277
160 feet of any boundary line of a lot in the Residence A-2 District
unless kept in airtight storage; provided, however, that with
respect to the uses above enumerated under this Subsection B(6),
there shall be no display of produce, stock or merchandise visible
from any street nor any sale thereof unless the articles sold have
been grown on the premises; and provided, further, that all
buildings or structures shall be set back at least 75 feet from each
boundary line of the lot and at least 100 feet from each street
line in the Residence A-1 District and at least 120 feet from each
boundary line of the lot and at least 160 feet from each street line
in the Residence A-2 District. [Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
(7) The cultivation and harvesting of shellfish in the waters within the
boundaries of the Village, but there shall be no selling of shellfish
within such boundaries.
(8) The carrying on of a customary home occupation, such as
dressmaking, millinery or similar handicrafts, by a person residing
in the dwelling unit in which such home occupation shall be carried
on, provided that:
(a) No change in the exterior appearance of such dwelling unit
shall be made as a result of such occupation.
(b) There shall be no display of goods or advertising visible from
any street.
(c) No more than one assistant, whether paid or not, shall be
employed.
(d) No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used, except
ordinary household equipment.
(e) The space so used shall not occupy more than 1/4 of the total
floor area of the dwelling unit.
(f) Such home occupation shall not be carried on in any accessory
building.
(9) Real estate activities of an owner or of his duly authorized agent,
only in connection with such owner's property within the Village.
(10) The office or studio of a physician, surgeon, dentist, osteopath,
chiropractor, psychologist, architect, painter, sculptor, teacher,
musician, lawyer or engineer residing in the dwelling unit in which
such office or studio shall be located, provided that:
(a) There shall be no display or advertising on the premises in
connection with such use, except for a professional nameplate
not over one square foot in area.
§ 205-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-9
197:278
(b) Such nameplate shall comply with the provisions of Article XI
of this chapter.
(c) Such studio or office shall not occupy more than the equivalent
of 1/3 of the area of one floor of such dwelling unit.
(d) Such use shall be merely incidental to the use of such dwelling
unit primarily for residential purposes.
(e) Any such musician's studio shall be equipped and used in such
a manner that sounds therefrom shall not be unduly annoying
to other persons on nearby premises or public places.
(f) No assistants, whether paid or not, may participate in such
use, except that one assistant may be employed if the nature of
the profession is such as to require an assistant.
(g) No use shall be made of more than one building in connection
with such professional use.
(h) Such professional use shall not be deemed to include the right
to engage in wholesale or retail trade as such terms are
ordinarily understood.61
C. Pumping, storage, sale and distribution of water, including water
towers, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the
Board of Trustees after written application thereto and issuance of a
permit.
D. Private docks, seawalls, retaining walls and jetties in Coastal Overlay
District-1 (COD-1) and Coastal Overlay District-2 (COD-2) after
approval by the Site and Building Permit Review Board and the
issuance of a building permit from the Building Inspector. No dock,
seawall, retaining wall or jetty shall utilize artificial illumination
directed seaward. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
E. Playgrounds or parks operated by the State of New York or by the Board
of Education of the school district in which the Village is located.
F. Playgrounds or parks and accessory buildings operated by a person,
firm or nonprofit corporation, other than the state or said school
district, only when authorized by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with Article IX and provided that:
(1) Such use shall be part of or incidental to a permitted educational
institution or that such use shall serve the needs of the inhabitants
of the Village.
(2) Such use shall not be for profit.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(11), regarding heliports, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010.
§ 205-9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-9
197:279
(3) At least 20% in number of the governing board of any such
organization shall be comprised of persons residing in and owning
at least two acres of real property located in the Village.
G. Incorporated churches, only when authorized by the Board of Trustees
in accordance with the provisions of Article IX of this chapter and
provided that the membership of any such church shall be at least
partially composed of Village inhabitants and that the buildings and
property of such church shall be used only for purposes of worship and
other church purposes.
H. Educational institutions, only when authorized by the Board of Trustees
in accordance with the provisions of Article IX of this chapter and
provided that the buildings and property of such institution shall be
used only for bona fide educational purposes recognized by the Board of
Regents of the State of New York.
I. Incorporated clubs, only when authorized by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of this chapter and
provided that:
(1) Twenty-five per centum or more of the voting membership and 51%
of the governing body of any such club shall be composed of
resident property owners of this Village.
(2) The total membership of such club shall not exceed 250 persons.
J. Personal wireless facilities, only when authorized by the Board of
Trustees in accordance with the provision of Article IX of this chapter
and provided that:
(1) Neither the radio frequency environment nor energy associated
with the applicant's proposed installation shall violate the safety
criteria adopted from time to time by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(2) The facility and location shall be in harmony with the Village's
Master Plan and Local Water Revitalization Plan, in compliance
with the Village's zoning requirements and in character with the
neighborhood in which it is located.
(3) The subject installation shall cause no interference with television
and radio reception or other electronic devices in the Village.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate a need for the facility in the
Village.
(5) No less intrusive technology is available.
(6) A maintenance and demolition bond of sufficient amount is
deliverable to the Village to insure the proper maintenance of the
structure and its removal when the facility is no longer used or has
become obsolete.
§ 205-9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-9
197:280
§ 205-10. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-21-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992; 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(7) Any approval obtained must be reviewed by the Village at intervals
of five years.
A. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this Article V, no
building or premises shall be used for any purpose which:
(1) Is obnoxious or offensive to the surrounding community by reason
of causing or emitting unreasonable levels of odor, smoke, vapor,
gas, dust, garbage, refuse matter, glare of lights, radiation, noise or
vibrations, interference with radio or television reception or other
physical or electronic disturbance beyond the premises on which
such use is conducted.
(2) Is dangerous or harmful to the health, peace, comfort or safety of
the community.
(3) Tends to disturb or annoy the residents of the Village.
(4) Involves any radiation or explosive menace or any serious fire
hazard.
B. The rental, leasing or subletting, and the advertisement thereof by any
means, of any dwelling or any portion thereof in the Village for a term of
less than 60 days is prohibited. Any homeowner renting, leasing or
subletting a dwelling in accordance with this subsection must notify
both the Village Clerk and the Village Police Department in writing of
the full name, address and contact telephone number of the owner(s),
any property manager and the individual(s) renting, leasing, or
subletting the dwelling at least five days in advance of said activity. The
Board of Trustees may grant a waiver of this subsection for good cause
shown.
§ 205-9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-10
197:281

ARTICLE VI
Public Beach District
§ 205-11. Permitted uses.
No building or premises in the Public Beach District shall be used or
maintained for any except the purposes enumerated below and for no other,
and no building shall hereafter be erected, enlarged or altered if, as so
erected or as a result of such enlargement or alteration, such building
or any part thereof is arranged, designed or intended to be used for any
purpose, except a bathing beach owned, operated and maintained by the
Town of Huntington for the benefit of the inhabitants of said town and the
inhabitants of the Village when authorized as a special exception by the
Board of Zoning Appeals of the Village as set forth and provided for in
the following sections of this article. If, at any time, the property included
in said Public Beach District should cease to be used for the purposes
described in this § 205-11, the provisions of Article VII of this chapter shall
become applicable to such property.
§ 205-12. West Neck Beach.
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Village shall have the power, to the
extent hereinafter set forth, after public notice and hearing and after
giving consideration to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the Village and of the property owners and residents thereof and
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to be imposed by it, to
determine and vary the application of the regulations herein
established in harmony with the purposes enumerated in the Village
Law and the general intent of this article, as follows: permit for a stated
term of years in said Public Beach District the construction, operation
and maintenance of a bathing beach by the Town of Huntington, which
shall, if permitted, be designated "West Neck Beach," for the benefit of
the inhabitants of said town and of the Village.
B. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section or any
other provisions of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals, in acting
upon any application for such permit, shall observe and comply with the
following minimum mandatory provisions and requirements
[Subsection B(1) to (17) inclusive] which, among such other conditions
and safeguards as may be imposed by said Board, shall be set forth and
contained in any such permit granted and issued by said Board.
(1) The use of such property as a beach shall be limited to bona fide
residents of the Town of Huntington and the Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
(2) An adequate entrance to such property shall be constructed by the
town, which shall be properly policed by it and shall provide for
turnarounds to eliminate any traffic congestion.
§ 205-11 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-12
197:283
(3) A parking area shall be constructed and limited to 360 cars, of
which 25% shall be reserved in a special area for the exclusive use
of residents of the Village.
(4) No public transportation buses to and from such property shall be
permitted.
(5) A control booth person and such assistants as shall be necessary
shall be in attendance at all times to check permits, to police
parking and to disperse unprivileged motor vehicles.
(6) Each motor vehicle shall be properly identified with an appropriate
windshield sticker. All applicants for such permit stickers shall
register at the Town Hall or any other suitable public place, with
full identification, and shall pay an annual fee per car prescribed by
the town.
(7) The beach and parking area shall be open from Memorial Day
weekend through Labor Day weekend each year from 10:00 a.m. to
1/2 hour after sunset. Any use of the beach at other times shall be
subject to the approval of the Joint Park Commission, hereinafter
provided for.
(8) A cyclone fence or equivalent with suitable gates and locks shall be
installed along the boundary lines of such property down to the
mean low-water mark.
(9) No intoxicating liquors shall be sold or dispensed on the property,
and no concessionaires of any kind shall be permitted thereon.
(10) There shall be no rental, use or landing of any boats, except those
required by lifeguards. No fishing shall be permitted nor shall any
docks be installed.
(11)No floodlights or search lights nor loudspeakers or similar
structures shall be erected or used on such property in any manner
that will cause hazard, annoyance or discomfort in any manner to
the public generally or to the occupants of neighboring properties.
(12) Any and all accessory uses shall be of the same character and
nature as the use to which the same are accessory.
(13) A Joint Park Commission shall be created, consisting of five
members. Three of such members, one of whom shall be
Chairperson, shall be appointed by the Mayor of Lloyd Harbor from
residents of said Village and two by the Supervisor of the Town of
Huntington from residents of said town. Each member shall serve
for a term of five years, and once the Commission is established,
provision shall be made for rotating membership. Any vacancy in
the membership shall be filled by such Mayor or Supervisor, as the
case may be. A majority of the whole number of the members of
such Commission shall, at any meeting duly held by them,
§ 205-12 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-12
197:284
§ 205-13. Site plans and building plans required.
No such permit shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals for such
uses, nor shall any such uses on such property be permitted or carried on
until detailed site plans and building plans of such area and all buildings
thereon showing dimensions, design, materials, elevation, location and
areas of all buildings and structures, drainage, garbage and refuse removal,
sewage and sanitary facilities, parking areas, roads, entrances, walks,
landscaping, planting, screening, fences, entrance gates, booths and stands
and such other relevant information as may be required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have been submitted to and approved by it.
constitute a quorum; and not less than a majority of the whole
number of such membership may perform and exercise any power,
authority or duty herein provided for. The words "whole number"
shall mean the total such Commission would have were there no
vacancies in office.
(14) The Joint Park Commission shall supervise the operation and
maintenance of the beach and shall report promptly any violations
of the terms, conditions or restrictions contained in said permit to
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lloyd Harbor and the Town
Board of the Town of Huntington, and the Commission shall make
recommendations, from time to time, for the improvement of the
operation of the beach.
(15) The Town of Huntington shall, upon recommendation of the Joint
Park Commission, hire and discharge all personnel, including
lifeguards, matrons, etc., and if, in the opinion of the Joint Park
Commission, a caretaker shall be required, the Town of Huntington
shall employ the same on an annual basis.
(16) In the event that the Joint Park Commission determines that a
violation of any such terms, conditions or restrictions exists and
that such violation is one for which the Town of Huntington is
responsible and over which it has control, it shall immediately
notify the Town Board, in writing, of such violation; and the Town
Board shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of such notice to
cure the same. Should the Town Board fail to cure such violation
within the time specified, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, by a
decision, in writing, after public notice and notice to said Town
Board and a hearing, revoke, annul and terminate such permit; and
such decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to
court review as provided in § 7-712 of the Village Law.62
(17) The Town of Huntington shall make appropriation in its annual
budget to cover all costs and expenses which may be anticipated in
connection with the maintenance and operation of said beach in
each year.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 205-12 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-13
197:285

ARTICLE VII
Floodplain Districts
[Amended 1-16-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978; 3-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3-1983; 5-16-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
§ 205-14. Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the Village, Floodplain District I and Floodplain
District II, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 205-15. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by methods and provisions designed to:
§ 205-16. Methods for reducing flood losses. [Amended 4-18-1988
by L.L. No. 2-1988]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
E. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
F. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
G. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
§ 205-14 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-16
197:287
§ 205-17. Definitions.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Preventing the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Preventing filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
F. Qualifying for and maintaining participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program. [Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Building Inspector's
interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a
variance.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on the Village's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within the Village subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding
in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH,
AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to
as the base floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For purposes of
this article, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous
in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."[Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
§ 205-16 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-17
197:288
BREAKAWAY WALLS — Any types of walls, whether solid or lattice and
whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any
other suitable building material, which are not part of the structural
support of the building and which are so designed as to break away
under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the
structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any
buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters.
BUILDING — See "structure."[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."[Added 7-20-2009 by
L.L. No. 2-2009]
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V.[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area
of special flood hazard.[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
ELEVATED BUILDING[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009] —
A non-basement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor,
or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
§ 205-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-17
197:289
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.[Added
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FLOOD or FLOODING[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009] —
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map for the
Village, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."[Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"flooding.")[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT I — Consists of all land within the Village
subject to possible flooding by tidewater rising to a height of 12 feet
above mean sea level, and all land within the Village to which the
principal means of access is over any private roadway which in whole
or in part is subject to possible flooding by tidewater rising to a height
of 12 feet above mean sea level.[Amended 2-24-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT II — Consists of all land not within Floodplain
District I but shown on the Federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps
applicable to the Village.[Amended 2-24-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987;
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.[Added
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 205-17 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-17
197:290
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."[Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities.[Added 7-20-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 7-20-2009 by
L.L. No. 2-2009]
LOWEST FLOOR — A building's lowest floor (including basement) of
the lowest enclosed area of the structure.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational
vehicle."[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a New York State inventory of historic places
in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in the
Village with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 205-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-17
197:291
home lots for rent or sale, if permitted in the future.[Added 7-20-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this article.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope
to a relatively mild slope.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.[Added
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009] —
A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as authorized in this article.[Added 7-20-2009 by
L.L. No. 2-2009]
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to an existing structure,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 205-17 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-17
197:292
§ 205-18. Applicability. [Amended 2-24-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987;
1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
The provisions contained in § 205-19 shall apply to land within Floodplain
District I, including overlapping areas in Floodplain District II. All other
provisions of this article shall apply to land included within Floodplain
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.[Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. Substantial improvement includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed, but does not include:[Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this article
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this article.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
"historic structure."
(2)
§ 205-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-18
197:293
District II and to those areas included within Floodplain District I that
are placed in the Residence A-1 or A-2 Districts by action of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 205-19. Standards and procedures for Floodplain District I.
[Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988; 11-21-1988 by L.L. No
4-1988; 4-20-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
No person shall fill, dredge, disturb the natural ground cover, build, make a
substantial improvement or cause to be placed a building, house, residence,
dwelling or other structure on land lying within Floodplain District I;
provided, however, that this prohibition shall not prevent:
§ 205-20. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard;
Floodplain District II. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998;
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
A. The pitching of tents or the construction of nonresidential shelters of a
temporary nature for the purposes of camping, fishing, swimming or
hunting by the owner.
B. Site and Building Permit Review Board approval. [Amended
11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000;
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
(1) After obtaining Site and Building Permit Review Board approval:
(a) The construction, alteration or substantial repair of private
docks, boat ramps, seawalls, retaining walls and jetties or
dredging for navigation purposes in that portion of Floodplain
District I within Coastal Overlay Districts-1 and -2, subject,
however, to the provisions of Article XVI hereof regarding the
coastal erosion hazard area.
(b) The substantial repair of legal preexisting but nonconforming
private docks, boathouses, boat ramps, seawalls, retaining
walls and jetties in that portion of Floodplain District I within
Coastal Overlay Districts-1 and -2.
(2) Any application for Site and Building Permit Review Board approval
shall comply with the requirements of § 175-50 of Chapter 175,
Subdivisions of Land, and with the standards and procedures set
forth in § 205-7C, except that the required determination shall be
made by the Site and Building Permit Review Board with respect to
the wetlands and floodplains rather than slope lands. No road
traversing land lying within Floodplain District I shall be added to
the Official Map of the Village. No uses prohibited in the Residence
A-1 and A-2 Districts shall be permitted in Floodplain District I.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
C. The routine maintenance and minor repairs to legally existing buildings
or structures within Floodplain District I.
§ 205-18 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-20
197:294
§ 205-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-24-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987]
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted
or altered nor land developed without full compliance with the terms of
this article and other applicable articles and regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with the conditions) shall constitute a violation and subject the violator to
the penalties provided for in § 205-72 of this chapter.
§ 205-22. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Amended 2-24-1987
by L.L. No. 2-1987]
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where sections of this
article or this article and other local laws or ordinances conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 205-23. Interpretation; conflict with other laws. [Amended
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village, Community Number
360799, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36103C0303H,
36103C0304H, 36103C0311H, 36103C0312H, 36103C0313H,
36103C0314H, 36103C0316H, 36103C0318H, 36103C0602H,
whose effective date is September 25, 2009, and any subsequent
revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under our
community’s jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Suffolk County, New York, All Jurisdictions” dated September 25,
2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this Article. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Lloyd Harbor Village, 32 Middle Hollow Road, Huntington, New York
11743.
A. This article includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this
article are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
§ 205-20 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-23
197:295
§ 205-24. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Amended 7-20-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of
the Village, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 205-25. Development permit. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L. No.
2-1988; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
In addition to the issuance of a building permit, a development permit shall
be obtained before construction or development of permitted structures
begins within any area in a Floodplain District. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Building
Inspector and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn
to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials
and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required:
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the Building Inspector the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the Building Inspector the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zones V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 205-23 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-25
197:296
D. Certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 205-30C, Utilities.
E. Certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 205-30.2, Nonresidential structures (except
coastal high hazard areas).
F. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 205-20, when notified by the Building
Inspector, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for
this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the Building Inspector, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
including proposal for manufactured home and recreation vehicle parks
and subdivisions, if permitted in the future, that are greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
I. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in a
proposed structure with design strengths in excess of 20 pounds per
square foot.
J. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, for all new and substantial improvements to structures,
floodplain development permit applications shall be accompanied by
design plans and specifications, prepared in sufficient detail to enable
independent review of the foundation support and connection
components. Said plans and specifications shall be developed or
reviewed by a licensed professional engineer or architect, and shall be
accompanied by a statement, bearing the signature of the architect or
engineer, certifying that the design and methods of construction to be
used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with all
applicable provisions of this article.
§ 205-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-26
197:297
§ 205-26. Designation of administrator.
The Building Inspector of the Village is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this article by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 205-27. Duties and responsibilities of administrator. [Amended
4-18-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review. The Building Inspector shall conduct the following
permit application review before issuing a floodplain development
permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 205-25, Development permit, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this article.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development including
manufactured home parks to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building
site is located in an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of § 205-29, General standards for flood
hazard reduction, and, in particular, § 205-29B, Subdivision
proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The
Building Inspector may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 205-29, General standards for flood hazard reduction, and
§ 205-31.2, Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, of this
article, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the
adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Review all development permits to assure that the proposed
development will not alter sand dunes so as to create potential
flood damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level.
(6) Review all development permits to assure that the proposed
development will not adversely affect the flood-carrying capacity of
areas of special flood hazard. For the purpose of this article,
"adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the
§ 205-26 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-27
197:298
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
B. Use of other base flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (These areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM.) nor
identified a floodway, the Building Inspector shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 205-25G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this article.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the Building
Inspector may use flood information from any other authoritative
source, such as historical data, to establish flood elevations within
the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes of this article.
C. The Building Inspector shall retain and maintain and make available for
inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 205-27E(1) and (2) and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 205-27E(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 205-28, Variances;
(5) Notices required under § 205-27D, Alteration of watercourses.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Building Inspector shall:
(1) Give notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
E. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
§ 205-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-27
197:299
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new or
substantially improved structure, the permit holder shall submit to
the Building Inspector a certificate of elevation, in relation to mean
sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns). The certificate shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. An
elevation certificate must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(3) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Building
Inspector shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
F. Inspections. The Building Inspector shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance with permit conditions. The developer's engineer
or architect shall certify to the Village that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit
and/or any variance provisions.
G. Stop-work orders.
(1) The Building Inspector shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 205-21, Penalties for
offenses, of this article.
(2) The Building Inspector shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this article and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
§ 205-27 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-27
197:300
§ 205-28. Variances.
the violator to the penalties described in § 205-21, Penalties for
offenses, of this article.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 205-20, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard; Floodplain District II, it shall be unlawful to occupy or
to permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both,
or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a
certificate of compliance has been issued by the Building Inspector
stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this article.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Building Inspector
upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special
flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 205-27F, and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements
or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
I. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Building Inspector shall make
interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided
in § 205-28, Variances.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by the Village, shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this article consistent with the standards of
Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement
or administration of this article.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
may appeal such decision to the New York State Supreme Court
through an Article 78 proceeding.63
§ 205-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-28
197:301
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this article and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 205-28A(4) and the purposes
of this article, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this article. [Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
(6) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request. [Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
63.Editor's Note: See Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 205-28 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-28
197:302
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of two acres or
more in size in the Residence A-1 District and four acres or more in
size in the Residence A-2 District, contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
provided that the provisions of Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond two acres in
the Residence A-1 District and beyond four acres in the Residence
A-2 District, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases. [Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009;
1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of historic structures upon
determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an "historic structure";
and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense nor create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
Subsection A(4) or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 205-28 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-28
197:303
§ 205-29. General standards for flood hazard reduction. [Amended
11-20-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009;
1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
In Floodplain District II and those areas included within Floodplain District
I that are placed in the Residence A-1 or A-2 Districts, the following
standards are required:
(7) Variances granted pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to
vary any other provision of this chapter.
(8) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: [Added
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (3), (4) and (7) of this section
are met; and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
A. Coastal high hazard areas.
(1) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the reach of
high tide.
(2) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(3) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions, if permitted in the future.
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage;
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
§ 205-28 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-29
197:304
§ 205-30. Standards for all structures. [Amended 4-18-1988 by L.L.
No. 2-1988; 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood
elevation are available, new construction and substantial
§ 205-29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-30
197:305
§ 205-30.1. Residential structures (except coastal high hazard
areas). [Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either
free from obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system. The
enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used only for parking
vehicles, building access or storage. Use of this space for human
habitation is expressly prohibited. The construction of stairs,
stairwells and elevator shafts are subject to the design
requirements for breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in § 205-29B, Subdivision proposals,
and § 205-30, Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
§ 205-30 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-30.1
197:306
§ 205-30.2. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high hazard
areas). [Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 205-29B,
Subdivision proposals, and § 205-30 Standards for all structures.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 205-20, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard; Floodplain District II, (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood elevation must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 205-30C, Utilities.
§ 205-30.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-30.2
197:307
§ 205-31. Residential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
[Amended 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) are located within Floodplain District
II (which may include portions of Floodplain District I) as established in
§ 205-20, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard; Floodplain
District II. The following standards, in addition to the standards in
§ 205-29A, Coastal high hazard areas, § 205-29B, Subdivision proposals,
and § 205-30, Standards for all structures, apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard
shown as Zones V1-V30,VE or V on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map designated in § 205-20, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard; Floodplain District II.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the Building Inspector that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 205-30.2A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Elevation. The location of all buildings or structures shall be located
landward of the reach of mean high tide. New construction and
substantial improvements shall be elevated on pilings, columns or shear
walls such that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
supporting the lowest elevated floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal
bracing attached to the piles or columns, grade beams, pile caps and
other members designed to either withstand storm action or break
away without imparting damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to
or above two feet above base flood elevation so as not to impede the
flow of water.
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during the base
flood on all building components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that
would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves, current
drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm debris.
Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if bulkheads, walls, or
§ 205-30.2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-31
197:308
other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause wave runup
beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due
to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include
windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof,
internal forces when openings allow wind to enter the house, and
upward force on the underside of the house when it is exposed. In
the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially from
any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind-loading values used shall be those required by the building
code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water pressures acting
simultaneously on all building components. Foundations must be
designed to transfer safely to the underlying soil all loads due to
wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including uplift
due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural
support of a new building or substantial improvement of an existing
structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less
than 8:1 for individual piles. (This shall not apply to pile clusters
located below the design grade). The maximum center-to-center
spacing of wood piles shall not be more than 12 feet on center
under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to
resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with typical
structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include consideration of
decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion of soil strata
surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum
if the BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if
the BFE is greater than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in
column action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil
elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally
braced to withstand wind and water forces.
§ 205-31 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-31
197:309
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of
eight inches for round timber piles and eight inches by eight inches
for square timber piles. All wood piles must be treated in
accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and
damage from fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twentyeight-
day ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000
pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced with a minimum of
four longitudinal steel bars having a combined area of not less than
1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete area. Reinforcing for
precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4
inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for
No. 6 through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field
shall have a concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted, or augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both
directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced concrete
grade beam. These at-grade supports should be securely attached
to the piles to provide support even if scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch-by-eightinch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in
location to below the lowest supporting structural member and
above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the vertical plane
along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline. Galvanized steel
rods(minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable-type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the
beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall be
two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or four-byfour-
or-larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting shall
consist of two five-eighths-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for
two-by-eight members, or one five-eighths-inch lag bolt (each end)
for square members. Knee braces shall not extend more than three
feet below the elevation of the base flood.
E. Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete
piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads,
and be connected with a movement-resisting connection to a pile cap or
pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors, or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
§ 205-31 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-31
197:310
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure. Toe
nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All metal
connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be steel, hotdipped
galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in protected interior
locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam-to-pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall
span the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential
floodwater and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or
pilings by bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members shall
be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (of precast) shall be
securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams, or girders
are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two five-eightsinch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/16
inch by four inches by 18 inches each bolted with two one-half-inch lag
bolts per beam member shall be used. Notching of pile tops shall be the
minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam members without
unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall not be notched so that
the cross section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-by-four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist
anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders.
These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a minimum.
Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided. Such cross
bridging may be one-by-three-inch members, placed eight feet oncenter
maximum, or solid bridging of same depth as joist at same
spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide
good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure.
The plywood should not be less than three-fourths-inch total
thickness, and should be exterior grade and fastened to beams or
joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such
fastening shall be supplemented by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be
used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to studs in
exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie. Continuous fifteenthirty-
seconds-inch-or-thicker plywood sheathing overlapping the top
wall plate and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder may be used
to provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically
continuous, then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all
horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood, galvanized steel rods of 1/2
inch diameter or galvanized steel straps not less than one inch wide by
1/16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top wall plate to the
sill, beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum diameter of three inches
shall be used at each end of the 1/2 inch round rods. These anchors
§ 205-31 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-31
197:311
shall be installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more
than four feet on center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(1) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner that
the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters. Ceiling joists
and rafters shall be securely fastened at their intersections. A
metal or wood connector shall be used at alternate ceiling joist/
rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(2) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end.
Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet toward the
house interior from each gable end.
K. Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and water
uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two
feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs
and porches will be permitted if designed or reviewed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices for
sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of other
suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six inches
shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial
adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used
in the sheathing of such corner, gable end, or roof overhang.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and other
points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
M. Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and doors
shall be designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand loads due to
the design wind speed of 75 mph. Connections for these elements must
be designed to transfer safely the design loads to the supporting
structure. Panel widths of multiple panel sliding glass doors shall not
exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, with
the criterion that the safety of the overall structure at the point of
§ 205-31 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-31
197:312
§ 205-31.1. Nonresidential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
[Added 7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
In Zones V1-V30, VE and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available,
new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall have
the bottom of lowest member of the lowest floor elevated to or above two
feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of structures is not an
allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor to two feet above the base
flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
§ 205-31.2. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. [Added
7-20-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 205-29, General
standards for flood reduction, and § 205-30, Standards for all structures
apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes
and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood
hazard.
wall failure be confirmed using established procedures. Grade
beams shall be installed in both directions for all piles considered
to carry the breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for
front row piles that support breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square
foot shall not be permitted unless a registered professional
engineer or architect has developed or reviewed the structural
design and specifications for the building foundation and
breakaway wall components, and certifies that the breakaway walls
will fail under water loads less than those that would occur during
the base flood; and the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and nonstructural). Water-loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind-loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
O. Sand dunes. There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would
increase potential flood damage.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V, and VE shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
§ 205-31 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-31.2
197:313
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 205-31.2B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
C. Within Zones A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that
are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of
dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 205-20 (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked
blocks is prohibited.
§ 205-31.2 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-31.2
197:314
ARTICLE VIII
Site and Building Permit Review Board
[Added 12-15-1969; amended 4-20-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992;
7-19-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-23-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996;
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 205-32. Findings; purpose.
The Village Board of Trustees hereby finds that excessive uniformity or
dissimilarity, inappropriateness and poor quality of design and the improper
placement or inadequate screening of structures within the Village and
along its shorelines adversely affects the environment and community by
creating a visual or ecological detriment. These visual and ecological
detriments impair the beneficial use of real property in such areas, impair
the stability and value of both the improved and unimproved real property
in such areas, prevent the most appropriate development of such areas,
produce a degeneration of the property and aesthetic character of such
areas and impair the proper relationship between the taxable value of real
property in the community and the cost of municipal services provided
therefor. These detriments, singly and in combinations, result in a
deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the community. It is the purpose of this article
to prevent these and other harmful effects by instituting a review procedure
for all building permit applications to the Village prior to their review by the
Building Inspector pursuant to the state building code.
§ 205-33. Application process.
A. Every completed application for a building permit for the construction
of any building within the Village of Lloyd Harbor, or for the
reconstruction or alteration of any building, including any additions
thereto, which would affect the exterior appearance of such building,
shall be referred by the Building Inspector to the Site and Building
Permit Review Board of the Village for review. Such referral shall be
made within 21 days of the date that the completed application is
received by the Building Inspector, provided that such application
conforms in all respects to all other applicable laws and ordinances,
including but not limited to § 205-73 of this chapter. The referral shall
be made prior to the Building Inspector's review of the plans and
drawings as required by the state building code and shall be made in
conformity with this article.
B. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 171, Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control, shall be required for site plan approval. The
SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards
of Chapter 171, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control. The approved site plan shall be consistent with the provisions
of Chapter 171, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control. [Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 7-200764]
§ 205-32 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-33
197:315
§ 205-34. Site and Building Permit Review Board standards for
review.
C. In order to assist applicants in designing and locating structures in
harmony with this chapter, the Site and Building Permit Review Board
may adopt such preapplication review procedures as it deems
necessary and expedient.
A. The Site and Building Permit Review Board, in conformity with the
purposes and standards of this article, shall review and approve, with
or without conditions, or it shall disapprove any building permit
application referred to it pursuant to § 205-33. The decision of the Site
and Building Permit Review Board must be by a majority vote of its full
membership or the unanimous vote of any subcommittee it may
appoint, and its findings and decision shall be recorded in the minutes
of the Board filed with the Village Clerk. The Site and Building Permit
Review Board shall disapprove any permit where it finds that the
proposed construction, reconstruction or alteration would be so
detrimental to the surrounding properties or the community as to
provoke one or more of the harmful effects set forth in § 205-32 above,
by reason of:
(1) Excessive similarity to any other structure or structures existing or
for which a permit has been issued or to any other structure
included in the same permit application, or any structure located
on a contiguous lot, or structure located on lots on the same street
within 1,000 feet of the subject site, in respect to one or more of the
following features of exterior design and appearance: substantially
identical facade; substantially identical size and arrangement of
either doors, windows, porticos or other openings or breaks in the
facade facing the street, including reverse arrangement; or other
significant identical features, such as but not limited to material,
roofline and height or other design elements. A finding of excessive
similarity shall state not only that such similarity exists but further
that it is of such a nature as to be expected to provoke one or more
of the harmful effects set forth in § 205-32 and that the finding is
not based on personal preference as to taste or choice of
architectural style.
(2) Excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other
existing structure, or structure for which a permit has been issued,
or to any other structure included in the same permit application,
or any structure located on a contiguous lot and structure located
on lots within 1,000 feet on the same street of the proposed site, in
respect to one or more of the following features: inappropriate
relationship to the contours, shape or natural characteristics of the
site; inappropriate location of features incorporated into the
structure, including but not limited to windows or air-conditioning
64.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection B as
Subsection C.
§ 205-33 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-34
197:316
equipment, or of features ancillary to the structure, including but
not limited to patios or refuse storage areas; and other significant
design features, such as materials, quality of construction or
architectural design. Before the Site and Building Permit Review
Board makes a finding of excessive dissimilarity or
inappropriateness, it shall conclude that one or more of such
dissimilarities or inappropriateness exist and further that such
dissimilarities or inappropriateness are of such a nature as to be
expected to provoke one or more of the harmful effects set forth
in § 205-32, and further, that the finding is not based on personal
preference of Site and Building Permit Review Board members as
to taste or choice of architectural style.
(3) Inappropriate building site selection or location of improved
surfaces including driveways, or excessive site disturbance in
relation to the surrounding environmental, ecological, natural,
other features of the subject and neighboring lands, including but
not limited to topography, vistas, existing patterns of tree and
shrub growth, property lines, and accessibility or proximity to
wetlands, preserves, historic sites or areas.
B. The Site and Building Permit Review Board shall examine, review and
approve or disapprove applications for permits for swimming pools,
tennis courts and other structures as to the screening and placement of
the same. A landscaped strip 10 feet wide, planted and maintained with
the appropriate number and species of nondeciduous plants, with an
actual height of at least six feet above the natural grade when installed,
is the preferred screening method between the pool or court and the
abutting property. However, the Site and Building Permit Review Board
may approve alternate conditions if:
(1) There is existing landscaping on the lot between the pool or court
and the property line(s) equal in effectiveness, height and density
to the required evergreen screening.
(2) There is a preexisting six-foot-high opaque fence or wall on the lot
between the pool or court and the property line(s), which is totally
owned and controlled by the lot owner and which is in conformity
with applicable fence height regulations, provided that the Site and
Building Permit Review Board further finds that the increased
height of matured evergreen screening is not necessary to screen
the pool or court from the view of the abutting property.
(3) The existing topography of the lot where the pool or court is to be
located, relative to the topography of the abutting property, is such
that the pool or court will not be within the view of the abutting
property, provided that the Site and Building Permit Review Board
further finds that it is reasonable to expect that this topographical
relationship will not be adversely altered in order to facilitate
future development of either property.
§ 205-34 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-34
197:317
§ 205-35. Refusal of permit.
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector unless it first
has been approved by the Site and Building Permit Review Board.
§ 205-36. (Reserved)
§ 205-37. (Reserved)
§ 205-38. (Reserved)
§ 205-39. (Reserved)
(4) The soil conditions where the landscaping strip would be required
to be installed are such that the evergreens cannot be expected to
survive or to properly mature, provided that the Site and Building
Permit Review Board further finds that the pool or court cannot be
reasonably placed in another location with suitable soil conditions,
and further provided that a preexisting six-foot-high opaque fence
or wall which conforms to applicable fence height regulations
exists between the property line and the pool or court in place of
the landscaped strip.
(5) The property line which would otherwise be screened is along the
Long Island Sound, Cold Spring Harbor, Lloyd Harbor or
Huntington Bay, and provided that the Site and Building Permit
Review Board further finds that the landscaped strip is not
necessary to screen the pool or court.
(6) Conditions exist which are not specifically covered in Subsection
B(1) through (5) above, but which are of a similar nature, provided
that the Site and Building Permit Review Board further finds that
approval of the waiver will not be inconsistent with the spirit and
intent of this section or less protective of the view from the
abutting properties.
§ 205-34 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-39
197:318
ARTICLE IX
Special Uses
§ 205-40. Approval required; standards. [Amended 1-19-2010 by
L.L. No. 1-2010]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, special
uses, not necessarily residential in character, may be permitted in the
Residence A-1 or A-2 Districts when approved by the Board of Trustees after
finding that:
§ 205-41. Application for approval. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
Application for approval of a special use must be addressed to the Planning
Board and filed with the Village Clerk. Such application shall comply with
the provisions of § 175-49 of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, and the
following requirements:
A. The proposed special use will not be detrimental to the essential
character, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community.
B. Such proposed special use, together with the location, size and
topography of the parcel of land involved; the nature, design, size and
location of every existing and proposed building, structure, access road,
utility line and other improvement; and the provisions for landscaping,
screening neighboring property, major planting of trees and shrubs and
parking of vehicles, will be, both as a composite architectural scheme
and as a functioning establishment, consistent with the Comprehensive
Master Plan of the Village in effect at the time that the application for
such special use is filed with the Village Clerk.
A. It shall explicitly describe the intended use, including an explanation of
any terms not normally clearly understood by laymen and in such terms
as to exclude all other uses.
B. It shall contain a plot plan showing land contours and explicitly
indicating all intended changes in the topography and vegetation that
would be incurred in implementing the proposed use, including
specifications of all excavating, grading, filling, dredging, draining,
damming and removal of growth and final landscaping plans and
provisions for parking of vehicles.
C. It shall include a precise description of the nature and architectural
appearance of any new buildings and of any proposed alterations to
existing buildings. Such descriptions shall include all buildings above or
below ground or extending into the water.
D. It shall explicitly describe the financing, management and supervision
of the proposed special use, giving the names and true identities of all
owners, sponsors, corporate stockholders or corporate members (if
§ 205-40 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-41
197:319
§ 205-42. Action by Planning Board.
§ 205-43. Action by Board of Trustees.
any) and the names of the proposed managers and supervisors of the
enterprise.
E. It shall contain a schedule of events indicating the time or times at
which various construction, alteration or landscaping activities will be
undertaken and the time or times at which they will be completed.
A. Public hearings.
(1) Not more than 90 days after the Planning Board has received such
an application in a form satisfactorily complying with § 205-41, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing thereon at a time and
place to be set by it. Not less than 15 days' advance notice of such
public hearing shall be given by publication in the official Village
newspaper and by service, in person or by mail, upon the following:
(a) The applicant or applicant's attorney or other representative.
(b) The owner or owners as shown on the current Village
assessment roll of each parcel of land contiguous to the
boundaries of the subject premises, including parcels across
any abutting street embraced within the prolongations of the
boundary lines of the subject premises.
(c) The owners of all land within 100 feet (whether contiguous or
not) from the boundaries of the subject premises, including
land directly opposite the subject premises extending 100 feet
from the street frontage of such opposite land.
(2) The Planning Board may hold such further public hearings as it
may deem advisable on 15 days' notice to be given as aforesaid.
B. The Planning Board shall file a report with the Board of Trustees not
later than 60 days after its final public hearing on the application,
containing its comments and recommendations with respect thereto; a
copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant.
A. After receipt of such report from the Planning Board, the Board of
Trustees may or may not, in its discretion, call a public hearing on the
application and take appropriate action thereon; provided, however,
that if the Planning Board's report contains a recommendation that the
application be granted in whole or in part with or without conditions,
the Board of Trustees must hold a public hearing thereon. All
procedures for the calling and holding of such public hearing shall
conform to the notice requirements contained in § 205-42A of this
article. [Amended 7-2-1973]
§ 205-41 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-43
197:320
§ 205-44. Transferability of approval.
If an application for a special use shall be approved, such approval shall
not be transferable but shall inure solely and specifically to the benefit of
the applicants and others described in § 205-41D of this article, unless the
Board of Trustees shall by resolution consent to such transfer.
§ 205-45. Fees. [Added 12-18-1972; amended 11-21-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
The fee for filing each application under § 205-41 of this article shall be
as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the
applicant shall reimburse the Village for all stenographic charges for taking
down and transcribing the minutes of each formal public hearing and any
adjournment thereof.
B. The Board of Trustees, in its discretion, may require the applicant to
post a bond in a reasonable amount to secure proper performance of
the applicant's duties and conditions imposed for the granting of such
use.
C. Where an application is made for approval of a special use to be
exercised by a tax-exempt institution, the Board of Trustees, in its
discretion, may require such institution to enter into a binding written
agreement with the Village under which the Village shall receive annual
payments in such amounts as will fully compensate the Village for
rendition of municipal services to such institution.
§ 205-43 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45
197:321

ARTICLE IXA
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 205-45.1. Purpose and legislative intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the authority of the Board
of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor concerning the
placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications
facilities. The Board of Trustees recognizes that wireless
telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the safety,
public welfare, character and environment of the Village and its residents.
The Board of Trustees also recognizes that facilitating the development of
wireless service technology can be of significant benefit to residents of the
Village. In order to ensure that the placement, construction, or modification
of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the Village's land
use policies, the Board of Trustees is adopting a single, comprehensive,
wireless telecommunications facilities application and permitting process.
The intent of this article is to minimize impact of wireless
telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for
review and approval of applications, assure an integrated and
comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and
protect the safety and welfare of the Village and its residents.
§ 205-45.2. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule and applicable
authority granted expressly or otherwise by state and federal law.
§ 205-45.3. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Siting Law for the Village of Lloyd Harbor."
§ 205-45.4. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and where not otherwise rendered inconsistent
as a result of any particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this
section.
ACCESSORY FACILITY or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — An accessory
facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless
telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the
wireless telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited to, utility
or transmission equipment, storage sheds, or cabinets.
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS — Granting, denying, or revoking of a
special use permit under this article, by the Village Clerk, after notification
to the Board, where the proposed facility meets the requirements of this
article and that does not require a public hearing as defined by § 205-45.17.
§ 205-45.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.4
197:323
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals.
APPLICANT — Any person submitting an application for a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
APPLICATION — All necessary and appropriate documentation that an
applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, together with applicable fee(s).
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd
Harbor.
CO-LOCATION — The use of an existing tower or structure used as an
existing cell antenna site to support antenna(s) for the provision of wireless
services pursuant to a building permit or special use permit from the
Village. A replacement tower constructed on the same site as an existing
tower will be considered a co-location, as long as the new tower is no taller
than the old tower and that the old tower is removed in a reasonably short
time frame after the new tower is constructed.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— The inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce;
the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably
anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the
project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment
or profit, standing alone, shall not render a situation to be "commercially
impracticable" and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement
"commercially impracticable."
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all required
information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be
made with respect to an application.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM or DAS — A network of spatially
separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport
medium that is designed to provide wireless service within a geographic
area or structure.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated
and authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured
from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection
device.
INFORMATION SERVICES — The offering of a capability for generating,
acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making
available information via telecommunications, and includes electronic
publishing, but does not include any use of any such capability for the
management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the
§ 205-45.4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.4
197:324
management of a telecommunications service, and shall include mobile
broadband access or other broadband services not included in 47 U.S.C.
§ 332(c).
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The addition, removal, or change of any of
the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless
facility, such as antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping,
fencing, utility feeds, changes to the color or materials of any visually
discernable components, vehicular access, parking, and/or any upgrade or
changeout of equipment for better or more modern equipment. The term
shall additionally include the adding of a new wireless carrier or service
provider to a telecommunications tower or telecommunications site as a colocation
is a modification. A modification shall not include the replacement
of any component of a wireless facility where the component being replaced
is identical to the component being replaced or the normal repair and
maintenance of a wireless facility without any addition, removal, or changes
to the component.
NIER — Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint
stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common
interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS — Shall have the same meaning
as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE — The replacement of any component of
a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component
being replaced or any normal repair or maintenance of a wireless facility
without any additions, removal, or changes of any of the physical or visually
discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the
visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted.
SHALL — Expresses an instruction or command; a mandatory requirement.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The permission issued by the authority of the
Board, pursuant to this Article IXA, by which an applicant is allowed to
file for a building permit, to construct and use wireless telecommunications
facilities as granted or issued by any board or department of the Village.
STATE — The State of New York.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — To minimize adverse aesthetic and
visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent
to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location
of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the
least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or
commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances present.
§ 205-45.4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.4
197:325
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of audio,
video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — A structure used in the provision
of services described in the definition of "wireless telecommunications
facilities."
TEMPORARY — Temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this
article, something intended to, or that does not exist for more than 90 days.
TOWER — Any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for
receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, New York.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any wireless services using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE OR PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY OR
INFORMATION SERVICES SITE — A structure, facility or location, which
is designed or intended to be used as or to support antennas, transmitting
devices, or receiving devices. Towers of any kind shall be included in this
definition, including buildings, steeples, silos, water towers, signs, or other
similar structures which can be used as a support structure for antennas
or any functional equivalent thereof. This definition shall further include
all related facilities and equipment, such as cabling, equipment shelters,
and other structures associated with any site. The terms shall include
any structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio,
television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, personal communications services
(PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services, and any
commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC.
§ 205-45.5. Overall policy and desired goals for special use permits
for wireless telecommunications facilities.
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities protects the Village's safety, public
welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community
and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed
elsewhere in this article, the Board hereby adopts an overall policy with
respect to a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for
the express purpose of achieving the following goals:
A. Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities;
B. Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is
both fair and consistent;
§ 205-45.4 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.5
197:326
§ 205-45.6. Exceptions from a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
§ 205-45.7. Exclusions.
The following shall be exempt from this article:
C. Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or colocation
of wireless telecommunications facilities among service
providers;
D. Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height
and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner,
including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize
adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings,
and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same
area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications
facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically
intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially
impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
E. Promoting and encouraging proper permitting for all new, co-location,
or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility; and
F. Promoting and encouraging the most appropriate site, with regards to
being the least visually intrusive among those available in the Village,
for placement of a wireless telecommunications facility.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this article no person shall be
permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify, or prepare any site for
the placement or use of wireless telecommunications facilities as of the
effective date of this article without having first obtained a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit shall be
required for those noncommercial exclusions noted in § 205-45.7.
B. All legally permitted wireless telecommunications facilities,
constructed as permitted, existing on or before the effective date of this
article shall be allowed to continue as such presently exists; provided,
however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility will require the complete facility and any
new installation comply with this article.
C. Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility does not require an
application for a special use permit.
A. The Village Police Department, Highway Department, or other public
service facilities owned and operated by the local government.
B. Any facilities expressly exempt from the Village's siting, building, and
permitting authority.
§ 205-45.5 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.7
197:327
§ 205-45.8. Special use permit application and other requirements.
C. Over-the-air reception devices, including the reception antennas for
direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution
(wireless cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations
(TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit
fixed wireless signals, that are primarily used for reception.
D. Facilities exclusively for private, noncommercial radio and television
reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio, and other
similar noncommercial telecommunications.
E. Facilities used exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum
technology (i.e., Bluetooth or a hot spot), where the facility does not
require a new tower, where the service is not to be used for commercial
purposes, where there is no fee or charge for the use of the service and
where the service is intended to be useable for less than 200 feet.
F. Applications for special use permits for other than wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall be governed by the
provisions of Article IX.
A. All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the
requirements set forth in this article. The Board is the officially
designated agency or body of the Village to whom applications for a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities must be
made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make
decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking special
use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The Board may
in its discretion delegate or designate other official agencies or officials
of the Village to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make
recommendations to the Board with respect to the granting, not
granting, or revoking of special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
B. The Board delegates its authority to the Village Clerk, or their designee,
to accept, review, analyze and, after notification to the Board, make
administrative approvals with respect to the granting, denying, or
revoking special use permits for those facilities that meet requirements
of this article and that do not require a public hearing as defined by
§ 205-45.17.
C. No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed,
constructed or modified until the application is reviewed and approved
by the Board, or a designee thereof, and a special use permit has been
issued.
D. Any and all representations made by the applicant to the Village on the
record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall
§ 205-45.7 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.8
197:328
be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good
faith by the Village.
E. An application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person
preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information.
F. The applicant must provide documentation to verify the authority to
proceed as proposed on the site. Proof of such authority can be
established by the applicant's furnishing of an executed copy of a lease,
easement, right-of-way agreement, collocation attachment agreement,
or a signed letter acknowledging authorization to use said site in
conformity with the use described in the application. If the applicant
owns the site, the applicant must provide a certified copy of the last
deed of record showing the applicant as the grantee.
G. The applicant shall include a statement in writing:
(1) That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance
with all conditions of the special use permit, without exception,
unless specifically granted relief by the Board, or a designee
thereof, in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local
codes, laws, and regulations, including any and all applicable
Village, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and
(2) That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities
is legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the
applicant is authorized to do business in the state.
H. Where a certification is called for in this article, such certification shall
bear the signature and seal of a registered professional licensed in the
state.
I. In addition to all other required information as stated in this article, all
applications for the construction or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities or modification of an existing facility shall
contain the information hereinafter set forth.
(1) A descriptive statement of the objective(s) for the new facility or
modification including and expanding on a need such as coverage
and/or capacity.
(2) Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the
wireless telecommunications facility to provide service primarily
and essentially within the Village. Such documentation shall
include propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining
planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites that demonstrate a
significant gap in coverage and/or if a capacity need, including an
analysis of current and projected usage.
§ 205-45.8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.8
197:329
(3) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the
report.
(4) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and
applicant, and to include the legal name of the applicant. If the site
is a tower and the owner is different than the applicant, provide
name and address of the tower owner.
(5) The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property.
(6) The Zoning District or designation in which the property is
situated.
(7) The size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines.
(8) The location of nearest residential structure(s).
(9) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures
on the property which is the subject of the application.
(10) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping and fencing.
(11) The azimuth, size and center-line height location of all proposed
and existing antennas on the supporting structure.
(12) The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed with a
copy of the specification sheet.
(13) The make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and design
plan stating the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users.
(14) A site plan describing the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and
lighting.
(15) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment.
(16) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum
effective radiated power (ERP) in watts.
(17) Signed documentation such as the "Checklist to Determine
Whether a facility is Categorically Excluded" to verify that the
wireless telecommunication facility with the proposed installation
will be in full compliance with the current FCC RF emissions
guidelines (NIER). If not categorically excluded, a complete RF
emissions study is required to provide verification.
(18) A statement, signed by the applicant, that the proposed installation
will not cause physical or RF interference with other
telecommunications devices.
§ 205-45.8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.8
197:330
(19) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities.
(20) A copy of the geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation,
evaluation report and foundation recommendation for a proposed
or existing tower site and if existing tower or water tank site, a
copy of the installed foundation design.
J. The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a
qualified individual or organization, to determine if the proposed new
tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities is in
compliance with FAA Regulation Part 77 and if said structure requires
lighting. This requirement shall also be for any existing structure or
building where the application increases the height of the structure or
building. If this analysis determines that an FAA determination is
required, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and
any related correspondence shall be provided with the application.
K. Application for new tower.
(1) In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit
a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure
shared use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or
other structures within the Village. Copies of written requests and
responses for shared use shall be provided to the Village in the
application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason
for rejection.
(2) If deemed necessary to better inform the public, in the case of a
new telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the
public hearing on the application, conduct a "balloon test." The
applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a
minimum of a three foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the
maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates, (including a
second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date) times, and
location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant no
less than seven and no more than 14 days in advance of the first
test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the Village.
The applicant shall inform the Village, in writing, of the dates and
times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be
flown for at least four consecutive hours between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be
on a weekend; however, in the case of poor weather on the initial
date, the secondary date may be on a weekday. A report with
pictures from various locations of the balloon shall be provided
with the application.
(3) The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing the
proposed tower to accommodate future demand for at least four
additional commercial applications, for example, future colocations.
The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate
§ 205-45.8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.8
197:331
at least four additional antenna arrays equal to those of the
applicant, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as
possible without causing interference. This requirement may be
waived, provided that the applicant demonstrates, in writing, that
the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not
technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable, or creates
an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon:
(a) The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
(b) The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed;
(c) The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facilities spaces/sites; and
(d) Available space on existing and approved towers.
(4) The owner of a proposed new tower and their successors in interest
shall negotiate, in good faith, for the shared use of the proposed
tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall:
(a) Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant;
(b) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared
use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers;
(c) Allow shared use of the new tower if another
telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay
reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not
limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less
depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or
equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference; and
(d) Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be
grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
L. The applicant shall provide certification with documentation (structural
analysis) including calculations that the telecommunication facility
tower and foundation and attachments, rooftop support structure,
water tank structure, and any other supporting structure as proposed
to be utilized are designed and will be constructed to meet all Village,
county, state, and federal structural requirements for loads, including
wind and ice loads.
M. If proposal is for a co-location or modification on an existing tower, the
applicant is to provide signed documentation of the tower condition
such as an ANSI report as per Annex J, tower Maintenance and
Inspection Procedures, ANSI/TIA/EIA-222G or most recent version. The
§ 205-45.8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.8
197:332
inspection report must be performed every three years for a guyed
tower and five years for monopoles and self-supporting towers.
N. All proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a
demonstration that the facility will be sited so as to minimize visual
intrusion as much as possible, given the facts and circumstances
involved and will thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the
environment and its character and on the residences in the area of the
wireless telecommunications facility.
O. If a new tower, proposal for a new antenna attachment to an existing
structure, or modification adding to a visual impact, the applicant shall
furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include the following.
(1) If a new tower or increasing the height of an existing structure is
proposed, a computer generated "Zone of Visibility Map" at a
minimum of one mile radius from the proposed structure, with and
without foliage shall be provided to illustrate locations from which
the proposed installation may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representations of "before and after" (photo simulations)
views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the Village as
may be appropriate, including but not limited to state highways and
other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands;
historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the
public; and from any other location where the site is visible to a
large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be
provided concerning the appropriate key sites at the preapplication
meeting. Provide a map showing the locations of where
the pictures were taken and distance from the proposed structure.
(3) A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility,
including and as applicable the tower base, guy wires, fencing and
accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and
streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening.
P. The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by
drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all
related equipment and structures of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility.
Q. The wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or
associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors
and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be
affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall
include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be
required by the Village.
R. All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be
installed underground whenever possible and in compliance with all
laws, rules and regulations of the Village, including specifically, but not
§ 205-45.8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.8
197:333
limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code where appropriate.
S. An access road, turn-around space, and parking shall be provided at a
telecommunications site, to assure adequate emergency and service
access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall
be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times
minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
T. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, provided for removal of, modified, or
restored in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes adopted by the Village, state, or federal
government, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the
ANSI Code, State Fire Prevention and Building Code(s), National
Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and
recommended practices of the National Association of tower Erectors.
The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to,
construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, and land use codes. In the
event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the more
stringent shall apply.
U. A holder of a special use permit granted under this article shall obtain,
at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law,
rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and
effect, for as long as required by the Village or other governmental
entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
V. There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the preapplication
meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite
the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also
include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the
requested site.
W. An applicant shall submit to the Village the number of completed
applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting.
Written notification of the application shall be provided to the
legislative body of all adjacent municipalities as applicable and/or
requested.
X. The holder of a special use permit shall notify the Village of any
intended modification of a wireless telecommunication facility and shall
apply to the Board to modify, relocate, or rebuild a wireless
telecommunications facility.
Y. With respect to this application process, the Board will typically seek to
assume lead agency status pursuant to SEQRA. The Board shall conduct
an environmental review of the proposed project pursuant to SEQRA in
combination with its review of the application.
§ 205-45.8 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.9
197:334
§ 205-45.9. Location of wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site,
and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance
with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and seven
being the lowest priority:
(1) On existing towers or other structures on Village-owned properties,
including the right-of-way; then
(2) On existing towers or other structures on other property in the
Village; then
(3) A new tower on Village-owned properties, including the right-ofway;
then
(4) A new tower on properties in areas zoned for heavy industrial use;
then
(5) A new tower on properties in areas zoned for commercial use; then
(6) A new tower on properties in areas zoned for agricultural use; then
(7) A new tower on properties in areas zoned for residential use.
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above,
then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception
must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a
permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that
would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for
the proposed site.
C. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site
proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall
address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board why
co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements
between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a
valid basis for any claim of Commercial Impracticability or hardship.
D. Notwithstanding the above, the Board may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the Board
finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the safety and
welfare of the Village and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious
effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood.
E. The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority,
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If
appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed
written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not
selected shall be included with the application.
§ 205-45.9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.9
197:335
§ 205-45.10. Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities
and other structures.
§ 205-45.11. Height of telecommunications tower(s).
F. Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the Board may disapprove
an application for any of the following reasons:
(1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
(2) Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or
historical district;
(3) The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities
which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning
or land use designation;
(4) The placement and location of wireless telecommunications
facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the
reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees
and agents of the Village, or employees of the service provider or
other service providers; or
(5) Conflicts with the provisions of this article.
A. It shall be presumed that the Board shall prefer locating antennas,
nodes, and all other facilities on existing towers or others structures
without increasing the height, as opposed to construction of new
towers.
B. Applicants shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing
towers and other suitable structures within two miles of the proposed
location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that
some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively
why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot be used.
C. Any applicant which intends to locate on an existing tower, or similarly
suitable structure, shall provide documentary proof of the property
owner's permission for the applicant to use said property.
D. Unless good cause is shown, any such shared use shall, to the extent
practicable, consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically
required to provide service primarily and essentially within the Village.
A. Applicants shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any
tower, facility and/or antenna requested and the basis therefore.
Documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all
supporting backup data used to perform at the height requested and a
minimum of 10 feet lower than said height, to allow verification of the
need for said height. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the
context of the justification of the height needed to provide service
§ 205-45.9 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.11
197:336
§ 205-45.12. Visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities.
§ 205-45.13. Security of wireless telecommunications facilities.
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced, and otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized
access. Such security measures shall be as follows:
§ 205-45.14. Signage.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall provide adequate notification
to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation or to
control exposure to RF radiation within a given area, which is no larger
than four square feet. A sign containing the name(s) of the owner(s) and
operator(s) of the antenna(s), shelter, and cabinet, as well as emergency
phone number(s), measuring no large than four square feet, shall also be
located on the applicant's equipment shelter or cabinet and be visible from
the access point of the site. Signage on tower sites shall also contain an
FCC registration, whenever applicable. Signage shall not be lighted, unless
otherwise required by law. No other signage, including advertising, shall be
permitted, without permission of the Board.
primarily and essentially within the Village, to the extent practicable,
unless good cause is shown.
B. No tower or any attachment constructed after the effective date of this
article shall exceed the height which shall permit operation without
required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with Village, state,
and/or any federal statute, law, local law, Village Code, rule or
regulation.
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or
marked, except as otherwise required by law.
B. Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint
of an appropriate color, as may be approved by the Board, to harmonize
with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
C. If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a plan for lighting, which
is the most unobtrusive and inoffensive, while still complying with all
requirements of law.
A. All antennas, towers, and other supporting structures, including guy
anchor points and wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and
constructed, or shielded, in such a manner as to prevent the structure
from being scaled or struck; and
B. Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed
in such a manner as to allow only authorized personnel to access said
structures.
§ 205-45.11 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.15
197:337
§ 205-45.15. Lot size and setbacks.
§ 205-45.16. Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by
applicant.
A. All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless
telecommunications facility structures shall be set back from adjacent
parcels, recorded rights-of-way, and road or street lines by the greater
of the following distances:
(1) A distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 10% of the height of the
tower or structure; or
(2) The existing setback requirement of the underlying Zoning District.
B. Accessory structures shall be located so as to comply with the
applicable minimum setback requirements for the property as per the
underlying Zoning District.
A. The Board may hire any consultant(s) and/or expert necessary to assist
the Village in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site
inspections.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the Village escrow funds sufficient to
reimburse the Village for all costs of the Board's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation to any agency of the
Village in connection with the review of any application, including
where applicable, the lease negotiation, the pre-approval evaluation,
and the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The
initial deposit shall be $8,500. The placement of the $8,500 with the
Village shall precede the pre-application meeting. The Village will
maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The Board's
consultants/experts shall invoice the Village for its services related to
the application. If at any time during the process this escrow account
has a balance less than $2,500, the applicant shall immediately, upon
notification by the Village, replenish said escrow account so that it has a
balance of at least $5,000. Such additional escrow funds shall be
deposited with the Village before any further action or consideration is
taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by
the Village is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the
conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall, upon request of
the applicant, be promptly refunded to the applicant. If notified by the
Village that additional escrow is required, the applicant may request
copies of consultants' and/or experts' invoices. If the applicant finds
errors in those invoices, applicant may ask the Board to audit those
specific items for reasonableness, and may request relief there from if
not deemed reasonable by the Village. Should the application be for
multiples sites, the Village Clerk shall have the authority to accept such
§ 205-45.15 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.16
197:338
§ 205-45.17. Public hearing and notification requirements.
§ 205-45.18. Action on an application for a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities.
initial escrow sum as they shall deem reasonable for all sites in the
aggregate.
C. Notwithstanding the above, there shall be a fee cap of $17,000 as to the
total consultant fees to be charged to applicant in a case. The foregoing
does not prohibit the Board from imposing additional reasonable and
cost-based fees for costs incurred should an applicant amend or change
its application and the fee cap shall not apply as to any fees which the
Board determines to be attributable to the dilatory or otherwise bad
faith actions of applicant in providing a complete application or in
proceeding with a public hearing.
D. The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in Subsection B of this
section may vary with the scope (lease negotiations and/or review) and
complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other
information as may be needed to complete the necessary review,
analysis and inspection of any construction or modification.
A. Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, a public hearing shall be held by
the Board, notice of which shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village no less than 15 calendar days prior to the
scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the Village may
notify nearby landowners, the application shall contain the names and
address of all landowners whose property is located within 1,500 feet of
any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless
telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located.
B. There shall be no public hearing required for an application to co-locate
on an existing tower or other structure or a modification at an existing
site, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height of the tower
or structure, including attachments thereto.
C. The Board shall schedule the public hearing referred to in Subsection A
of this section once it finds the application is complete; the Village, at
any stage prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such
additional information as it deems necessary.
A. The Board, or a designee thereof, will undertake a review of an
application pursuant to this article in a timely fashion, consistent with
its responsibilities and applicable state and federal requirements, and
shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative
complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard
for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the applicant's
desire for a timely resolution.
§ 205-45.16 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.18
197:339
§ 205-45.19. Extent and parameters of special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities.
The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be as follows:
§ 205-45.20. Application fees.
The fee for a special use permit required by this chapter shall be at the level
fixed, from time to time, by resolution of the Board.
§ 205-45.21. Performance security.
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense,
be jointly required to execute and file with the Village a bond, or other
form of security acceptable to the Village as to type of security and the
form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000 for a tower
B. The Board may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory,
other committee or commission for a nonbinding recommendation.
C. After a public hearing and after formal consideration of the application,
the Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny any such
application for a special use permit requested under this article. Its
decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the
granting of the Permit shall always be upon the applicant.
D. If the Board approves the application for a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be
notified of such approval in writing within 10 calendar days of the
Board's action, and the special use permit shall be issued within 30 days
of such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and
subsequent certificates of compliance, once a special use permit has
been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the
Board, such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the
Village for the wireless telecommunications facilities permitted by the
special use permit.
E. If the Board denies the application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of
such denial in writing within 10 calendar days of the Board's action.
A. Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed
without the express prior written notification to the Board; and
B. Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice
to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of
the conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material
violation of this article after prior written notice to the holder of the
special use permit.
§ 205-45.18 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.21
197:340
facility and $25,000 for a co-location on an existing tower or other structure
and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the Village to assure
the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this article and
conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this article. The
full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary
site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to
that, which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit.
§ 205-45.22. Reservation of authority to inspect wireless
telecommunications facilities.
In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or
licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities place and construct such
facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable
technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, regulations, and
other requirements, the Village may inspect all facets of said permit
holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction,
modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited
to, towers, antennas, and buildings or other structures constructed or
located on the permitted site.
§ 205-45.23. Liability insurance.
A. A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
policies for personal injury, death, property damage, and umbrella, for
the duration of the special use permit in the amounts fixed, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board.
B. Any commercial general liability insurance policy, for a wireless
telecommunications facility on Village property, shall specifically
include the Village, its officers, boards, members of any board,
employees, attorneys, agents, and consultants as additional insureds.
C. Insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state, which maintain
a Best's rating of "A" or better.
D. Before any building permit is granted for a permitted wireless
telecommunications facility, and in no case more 15 days after the
granting of the special use permit, the holder of said special use permit
shall provide the Village with copies of all relevant policies or
certificates of insurance reflecting the required insurance amounts.
E. All such insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the Village with at least 30 days' written
notice prior to the cancellation of any of the insurance.
§ 205-45.21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.23
197:341
§ 205-45.24. Indemnification.
§ 205-45.25. Fines.
F. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates of insurance shall be
delivered to the Village at least 15 days before the expiration date of
any policies or certificates of insurances then in effect.
A. Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities proposed to
be located on Village property, pursuant to this article, shall contain a
provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require
the applicant, to the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend,
indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the Village and its
officers, Boards, employees, board members, committee members,
attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages,
costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands,
causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or
punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which
might arise out of or are caused by the placement, construction,
erection, modification, location, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
installation, replacement, removal, performance of, or restoration of
said facility; excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits,
demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable
to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the Village, or its
servants or agents. The penalties, damages, and charges referenced
herein, as recoverable by the Village, shall include reasonable
attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees.
B. Notwithstanding the requirements noted in Subsection A of this
section, no indemnification provision shall be required where the
Village acts as an applicant for a special use permit under the
provisions of this article.
A. In the event of a violation of this article or any special use permit issued
pursuant to this article, the Board may impose and collect, and the
holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall pay to the Village, fines or penalties as set forth below.
B. Any failure of a special use permit applicant or holder to comply with
provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and
shall subject same to the code enforcement provisions and procedures
provided in Chapter 205, Article XIV, of the Village Code.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this article, the holder of the special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the
payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties to avoid
compliance with this article. An attempt to do so shall subject the
holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of the
special use permit. The Village may also seek injunctive relief to
prevent the continued violation of this article, without limiting other
remedies available to the Village.
§ 205-45.23 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.26
197:342
§ 205-45.26. Default; revocation.
If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved,
re-located, modified, or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in
compliance with the provisions of this article or of the special use permit,
then the Village shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of
such violation. A Permit holder in violation may be considered in default and
subject to fines as in § 205-45.25, and if a violation is not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Village, within a reasonable period of time, the special
use permit shall be subject to revocation.
§ 205-45.27. Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. The Board may determine that the safety and welfare interests of the
Village warrant and require the removal of wireless
telecommunications facilities, under the following circumstances:
(1) Where a properly permitted wireless telecommunications facilities
has been abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless telecommunications
facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of
180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force
majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall
commence within 90 days; or
(2) Where a properly permitted wireless telecommunications facility
falls into such a state of disrepair that said structure constitutes a
safety hazard; or
(3) Where a wireless telecommunications facility has been located,
constructed, or modified without first obtaining any and all proper
authorization; or
(4) Where any such necessary authorization or Special Permit has
been duly revoked.
B. If the Board makes such a determination as noted in Subsection A of
this section, then the Village shall notify the holder of such special use
permit, within 48 hours, that said wireless telecommunications
facilities are to be removed.
(1) The Board may approve an interim temporary use agreement or
permit, to enable the sale or rehabilitation, in compliance with this
article, of any such wireless telecommunications facility.
C. The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall
dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and
all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site
to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being
limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days
of receipt of written notice from the Village. However, if the owner of
the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities are
located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless
§ 205-45.26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.27
197:343
§ 205-45.28. Relief.
Any applicant desiring relief, waiver, or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of this article may request such, provided that the relief or
exemption is contained in the submitted application for either a special use
permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit
a request for modification of applicant's existing tower and/or facility. Such
relief may be temporary, permanent, partial, or complete. The applicant
bears the burden of proving the reasonable need for any such requested
relief, waiver, or exemption. No such relief, waiver, or exemption shall
be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing
evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver, or exemption will have no
significant effect on the safety and welfare of the Village, its residents, and
other service providers. The applicant shall bear all costs of the Village in
considering the request, waiver, exemption, or other relief.
§ 205-45.29. Periodic regulatory review by the Board.
telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of
the Board.
D. If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial
progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the special use
permit holder has received notice, then the Board may order officials or
representatives of the Village to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or
special use permit holder.
E. If the Board removes, or causes to be removed, wireless
telecommunications facilities, and the owner of said wireless
telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove same from the
site to a lawful location within 10 days, then the Board may take steps
to declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and
sell them and their components.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the Board may
approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, for no more than 90 days, during which
time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the
affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by
the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the
Board, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder
of the special use permit and the Board. If such a plan is not developed,
approved, and executed within the ninety-day time period, then the
Village may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section.
A. The Board may at any time conduct a review and examination of this
entire article.
§ 205-45.27 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.29
197:344
§ 205-45.30. Adherence to State and/or Federal rules and
regulations.
§ 205-45.31. Conflict with other laws.
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this article are
at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, or ordinances, this article shall govern, unless otherwise
preempted by law.
§ 205-45.32. Singular and plural.
Words used in this article in the singular, where the context so permits, shall
be deemed to include the plural and vice versa. The definitions of words in
the singular in this article shall apply to such words when used in the plural
where the context so permits and vice versa.
B. If after such periodic review and examination of this article, the Board
determines that one or more provisions of this article should be
amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, the Board may take
whatever measures necessary, in accordance with applicable law, to
accomplish the same. Where warranted and in the best interests of the
Village, the Board may repeal this entire article.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section,
the Board may at any time and in any manner, amend, add, repeal, and/
or delete one or more provisions of this article.
A. To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities has not received relief or otherwise
exempt from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or
regulations, the holder of a special use permit granted under this article
shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations,
standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency including, but
not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in the
requirements of this section are any rules and regulations regarding
height, lighting, security, electrical, and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to,
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or
are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, the holder of such a special use permit
shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to
the applicable changed or modified rule, regulation, standard, or
provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the
applicable change or modification, or sooner, if so required by the
issuing agency.
§ 205-45.29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-45.33
197:345
§ 205-45.33. Severability.
A. If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other
portion of this article or any application thereof to any person or
circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any
reason, by a competent authority, then such word, phrase, sentence,
part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application
thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this article,
and all applications thereof, not having been declared void,
unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect.
B. Any special use permit issued under this article shall be comprehensive
and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid,
unenforceable in any material respect, or otherwise overturned by a
competent authority, the Permit shall be void in total, upon
determination by the Board.
§ 205-45.33 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-45.33
197:346
ARTICLE X
Swimming Pools
§ 205-46. Compliance required.
No outdoor water pool shall be constructed, maintained, installed, altered
or enlarged in this Village, except as specifically permitted herein.
§ 205-47. Permit required; fees.
§ 205-48. Construction materials.
Pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which
shall provide a tight tank and shall be of sufficient strength to contain the
water therein.
§ 205-49. Plans and drawings.
§ 205-50. Water disposal.
All water, either overflowing or emptying from the pool, shall be disposed of
on the owner's land; and the plans submitted shall show provisions made for
preventing such water from flowing onto the land of any adjoining property
owner or into any abutting street.
A. It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any pool or appurtenances within the
Village unless a permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the
Building Inspector.
B. The fees for such permit and for a certificate of occupancy shall be
computed on the basis prescribed for buildings or structures.
[Amended 9-21-1970; 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any pool shall be prepared by and bear the signature of
a professional engineer or architect licensed by the State of New York
and shall certify that the drainage of such pool is adequate and will not
interfere with the public water supply system, with existing sanitary
facilities, with adjoining property owners, with the public highways or
with private roads. Such plans, as so certified, shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector for examination and approval.
B. Plans and drawings shall show lot lines and shall include information
pertinent to the pool, fence construction, pool screening, water supply
system, drainage, water disposal system, filter system and all other
appurtenances as well as detailed plans and vertical elevations.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
C. Pools, appurtenances, water supply, drainage systems and fences shall
be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
§ 205-46 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-51
197:347
§ 205-51. Pools to be enclosed. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
All pools shall be completely enclosed as required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 205-52. Location.
Every pool which shall hereafter be installed or enlarged shall be so located
and constructed that:
§ 205-53. Lighting.
All lights used to illuminate the pool or pool area shall be shielded so as to
prevent their shining upon the property of any adjacent property owner.65
§ 205-54. Offenses.
The failure to comply with any provision of this article shall constitute a
violation of this chapter by the owner of the land on which the pool is
located, notwithstanding the fact that such owner may not be in actual
possession of such land. All persons actually in possession of any land
affected by the terms of this article who fail to comply with § 205-51 hereof
shall be in violation of this chapter, even though such land may be owned by
another.
A. In the Residence A-1 District such pool shall be set back at least 100
feet from every street line and at least 50 feet from every other
boundary line of the lot and in the Residence A-2 District such pool shall
be set back at least 160 feet from every street line and at least 80 feet
from every other boundary line of the lot in which it is installed.
[Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. No current carrying electrical conductors, either overhead or
underground, shall cross such pool or come in contact with the water
therein.
C. The top of such pool shall not extend more than two feet above the level
of the surrounding area.
65.Editor's Note: Original Section 10.9, Existing water pools, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 205-51 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-54
197:348
ARTICLE XI
Signs, Fences and Trailers
§ 205-55. Signs to comply with regulations.
No sign shall be hereafter erected or maintained on any building or
premises in any residence district, except as specifically permitted herein.
§ 205-56. Signs. [Amended 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010;
11-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
A. Purpose.
(1) The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor
finds that the prevalence of signs, including signs advertising real
estate for sale or let, has marred the character and appearance of
the Village, reduced property values, become a danger and
distraction to persons using public highways, and has a negative
and undesirable impact on the health, safety, and general welfare
of the Village and its residents.
(2) The Board of Trustees further finds that signs advertising real
estate are distinguishable from other commercial signs in that they
relate directly to the property of residents in the Village, thereby
having a greater reason for placement within the Village than other
types of commercial signs.
B. The Board of Trustees further finds that the advertising of a premises
for rent suggests that premises are vacant, and hence attracts persons
with criminal intent to the Village, thereby jeopardizing the health,
safety, and general welfare of residents.
C. Therefore, the Board of Trustees declares it to be the policy of the
Village of Lloyd Harbor to limit and restrict the construction,
placement, use, and maintenance of signs within the Village, as
provided in this article.
D. Prohibited and permitted signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section to the contrary, one real estate sign shall be permitted on each
premises or parcel of land within the Village that is for sale, provided
that a permit for such sign is first obtained, as provided herein. Any
such sign shall be rectangular in shape. No such sign may be larger
than one foot high and two feet wide. Any such sign may advertise only
the sale of the property upon which the sign is located. Each such sign
shall have a white background with black letter or numerals only, and
shall be limited to writing that states: "For Sale," together with the
word "Realtor," if the homeowner has contracted with a licensed real
estate broker to broker the sale of the premises or parcel, and may
include the telephone number of the party seeking to sell the residence
or the realtor. No other words, symbols, numerals, images, names,
colors, designs or borders shall be permitted. Said real estate sign shall
§ 205-55 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-56
197:349
be located within the lot boundaries of the subject property for sale,
and shall be at least 15 feet from any roadway, curb, driveway, or
property line. The top of any authorized real estate sign shall be no
higher than six feet from grade. No ancillary or additional signs may
be attached to said real estate sign, or to any post to which said real
estate sign is affixed, nor shall any balloons, bows, ribbons, or other
adornments, be attached in any way to the said real estate sign or
any post to which it is attached, nor shall the said real estate sign be
artificially illuminated in any manner.
E. Sign permit. The Village Clerk shall issue a permit for any sign
authorized by this article, upon submission of a completed application
and payment of any applicable fees.
(1) Any such permit shall effective for a period of one year from the
date of issuance.
(2) If the sign for which the application is made does not conform to
the provisions of this article, the permit application shall be denied.
(3) Each application for a sign permit shall include a survey of the
property, showing the specific location whereat the sign is sought
to be placed, and shall include a facsimile of the sign in full size.
The applicant shall also mark the proposed sign location at the
premises or parcel where the sign is to be placed by placing a flag
at such location.
(4) If a sign permit application is made by any person or entity other
than the recorded owner of the premises, the application shall
include a signed and notarized authorization from each recorded
owner.
(5) Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Village Clerk made
pursuant to this article may appeal to the Village Board of Zoning
Appeals ("Board of Appeals") by filing such appeal in writing within
15 days after the date of such determination, or within 10 days
after the erection of the sign, whichever is later. In the event such
an appeal is made by a person other than the applicant for the
permit, the filing of an appeal shall stay the effect and operation of
the permit pending determination of the appeal by the Board of
Appeals. In the event an appeal is filed by any person other than the
applicant for the permit, the Village Clerk shall give written notice
to the permit holder, including a copy of the appeal, at least five
days prior to the date on which the Board of Appeals will consider
such appeal. The Board of Appeals shall hear and determine any
such appeal within 35 days after the filing of the appeal.
(6) No sign for which a permit is issued shall be altered, modified,
moved, or changed in any manner such that the sign does not
conform to the sign for which the application was made and
approved, without an approved amendment to the permit. Such
§ 205-56 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-56
197:350
amendment may be approved upon written application, containing
the same information as required for an initial application.
(7) The fee for the sign permit shall be fixed or amended, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(8) Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall terminate and
expire on the execution of a contract of sale, the termination of a
listing agreement with the real estate broker, or upon the
expiration of the permit, whichever occurs earliest. The sign must
be removed within 24 hours after the termination or expiration of
the permit.
F. Open house signs. A limited number of temporary signs announcing a
bona fide open house which are necessary to aid in providing directions
to the property are permitted as follows: [Amended 12-17-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012]
(1) The sign shall be displayed by temporary attachment to the ground
but may not be located on any roadway surface.
(2) Surface area shall not be greater than 24 inches by 12 inches and
not protrude more than 30 inches from the ground at its highest
point.
(3) An open house sign may only be displayed during the limited hours
of the bona fide open house, and must be removed immediately
following the event.
(4) No open house sign shall be placed on private property including
roadways, without permission of the owner.
G. Regulations applicable to all signs.
(1) No sign shall be affixed in any manner to a tree, bush, or other
flora.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, no sign
shall include or consist of colors, whether in foreground,
background, or otherwise, in a florescent-type, neon-type, color or
overly bright hue.
H. Penalties for offenses. Any person who erects or maintains a sign in
violation of the provisions of this article, or who owns property on which
any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
article, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500.
I. Presumption regarding placement. Where the matter included on a sign
consists of a commercial advertisement, it shall be presumed that the
vendor of the specified product, service, or entertainment is a person or
entity who placed such sign or caused it to be placed upon the property.
§ 205-56 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-57
197:351
§ 205-57. Permits for signs; applications; fees.
§ 205-58. Construction and maintenance of signs.
All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced as to make them
safe and shall be kept in perfect structural condition and clean and wellpainted.
§ 205-59. Unsafe signs.
When it shall appear to the Building Inspector or the Code Enforcement
Officer that any sign is being maintained in an unsafe or insecure manner
or in violation of any of the other terms of this article, he/she shall so notify
the person to whom the final permit has been issued, in writing, at the
address stated on the application; and it shall be the duty of such person
to make such repairs or to comply with the necessary provisions of the
chapter within the time stated in the notice. If such repairs are not made
or if such compliance is not so effected, the Building Inspector or the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause such sign to be removed and shall charge
the expense thereof to the person so notified.
§ 205-60. Expiration of sign permits.
Any permit issued hereunder shall be deemed to expire upon any change
in ownership of the premises on which it is erected or upon any change
in ownership of the business or profession which it shall advertise. Upon
expiration and notice thereof by the Building Inspector or the Code
Enforcement Officer to the applicant, it shall be the duty of the person so
notified to remove such sign, and if not so removed, the Building Inspector
or the Code Enforcement Officer may cause such sign to be removed and
shall charge the expense thereof to the person so notified.
A. Except as provided in § 205-56A hereof, it shall be unlawful to erect,
alter, maintain, reconstruct or relocate a sign until a permit has been
issued therefor by the Building Inspector.
B. A written application therefor shall be filed with the Building Inspector
by the owner or lessee of the building or premises on which such sign is
to be erected or maintained or by the duly authorized agent of such
owner or lessee. Such application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the owner or lessee of the property on which such sign is to
be erected or maintained and shall contain an accurate description of
the location or proposed location of such sign, the name and address of
the person by whom such sign is to be erected, altered, maintained,
reconstructed or relocated and such other information as the Building
Inspector or may reasonably require to show a compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. A fee as required by a Board of Trustees resolution shall be paid to the
Village by the applicant for a permit at the time of submitting his/her
application for a permit. [Amended 11-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 205-57 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-61
197:352
§ 205-61. Fences. [Amended 11-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
§ 205-62. Motor homes and trailers. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002; 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
No automobile or trailer designed to be used for human habitation shall
be used, stored or parked in the Residence A-1 or A-2 Districts, except
that a trailer may be stored or parked inside a private garage or screened
enclosure, said enclosure to comply with the zoning setback requirements
for accessory structures.
A. No fence, wall or structure in the nature of a fence (fence-like
structure) or gates, piers, pillars or similar structures shall be hereafter
erected or maintained on any premises unless a permit has been issued
therefor. No such structure shall exceed 6 1/2 feet in height, which
measurement shall exclude unlighted finials not exceeding 18 inches
located atop such structure, such height to be measured from the
natural existing grade; provided, however, that as to said height
limitation, a backstop consisting of screening with apertures of not less
than three square inches for use in connection with a tennis court shall
be permitted, but the height of such backstop shall not exceed 12 feet.
On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other similar structure shall be
erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained
in such location as, in the opinion of the Police Department, would
cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view. All fences and fence-like
structures shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjoining
property. [Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
B. Each application for a permit for a fence-like structure shall be
accompanied by an affidavit of the owner which certifies that the owner
is familiar with the location of his property line and that the fence-like
structure will not encroach upon adjacent properties and an application
fee in an amount required by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 205-61 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-62
197:353

ARTICLE XII
Nonconformities
§ 205-63. Nonconforming buildings and uses. [Amended
10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Any building or use legally existing on the effective date of this chapter and
permitted by the Building Zone Ordinance in effect immediately prior to
that date, although not conforming to the other provisions of this chapter,
may be continued subject to compliance with § 205-64 of this chapter and
subject to the following conditions.
§ 205-64. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 6-28-1989 by L.L. No.
4-1989; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
A. No such building which is nonconforming with respect to height, area,
location on the lot, or setback from any lot line shall be enlarged or
altered in such manner as to increase any nonconformity, subject to the
provisions of § 205-64 of this chapter.
B. No such building which is nonconforming with respect to use shall be
enlarged, nor shall it be altered structurally, except as may be allowed
by law or ordinance.
C. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended, nor shall it
be changed to another nonconforming use.
D. No such nonconforming building or use, if changed to a building or use
which conforms to the provisions of this chapter, shall thereafter be
changed to a nonconforming use or building.
E. No such nonconforming use, if discontinued for six months or longer,
shall be resumed.
F. No such nonconforming use or its building, if 50% or more of the
assessed value thereof is destroyed due to any cause, shall be restored
in nonconforming form or location or for the continuance of a
nonconforming use.
G. If a nonconforming building containing a permitted use is destroyed
accidentally due to fire, explosion or any other cause, or in need of
repair, it may be restored in substantially the same form and location,
but without enlargement.
A. In the case of a lot on which there stands, on the effective date of this
chapter or any subsequent amendment, a dwelling or other principal
building which conformed to the Building Zone Ordinance in effect at
the time it was legally created and which lot shall not at any time on or
after the effective date it was legally created have been reduced in area
or in any dimension and the perimeter per unit area of which lot shall
not have been increased, then such lot and building shall be considered
a preexisting nonconforming lot and building and may continue to be
§ 205-63 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-64
197:355
§ 205-65. Reducing area or changing dimension of improved lots.
[Amended 6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
No improved lot shall be reduced in area or changed in any dimension
unless the lot so reduced conforms to all requirements of this Chapter 205.
used and maintained. However, no addition, enlargement or alteration
of the building shall be permitted unless such change complies with all
the other requirements of this Chapter 205.
B. In the case of an unimproved lot in single and separate ownership on
the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent amendment, which
lot conformed to the Building Zone Ordinance in effect at the time it
was legally created and which lot shall not at any time on or after the
effective date of its legal creation be reduced in area or in any
dimension and the perimeter per unit area of which shall not have been
increased, then such lot shall be considered a preexisting
nonconforming lot and may be improved upon. However, the proposed
structure and its location must comply with all the other requirements
of this Chapter 205.
§ 205-64 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-65
197:356
ARTICLE XIII
Board of Zoning Appeals and Planning Board
[Amended 7-22-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
§ 205-66. Appointment; membership - Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting
of a membership as provided by the Village Law or by a local law of the
Village.
§ 205-66.1. Appointment; membership - Planning Board.
The Planning Board, previously created by the Board of Trustees and
consisting of five appointed members, is hereby increased to seven
members pursuant to Village Law § 7-718, Subsection 6.
§ 205-67. Meetings and procedure - Board of Zoning Appeals.
The meetings and procedure of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
governed by the provisions of the Village Law and the local laws of the
Village. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power, from time to
time, to adopt, repeal and amend rules and regulations not inconsistent
with law or the provisions of this chapter governing its procedure and the
transaction of its business.
§ 205-68. Appellate jurisdiction - Board of Zoning Appeals.
[Amended 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall, pursuant to the Village Law of the State
of New York, as amended from time to time by state or local action, hear
and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements, decisions or
determinations made by the Building Inspector, or other officer charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, and hear and decide all matters
specifically referred to it by the Planning Board or upon which it is required
to pass under any local law or ordinance.
§ 205-69. Original jurisdiction - Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in a specific case after public notice and
hearing and subject to appropriate safeguards to be prescribed by such
Board, determine and vary the application of the provisions of this chapter
in harmony with their general purposes and intent as follows:
A. It may permit any variance specifically provided for in this chapter
subject to the provisions and conditions applicable thereto.
B. It may exercise such other powers of original jurisdiction as are
specifically provided for in other sections of this chapter or are
authorized under the Village Law or local laws of the Village.66
§ 205-66 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-69
197:357
66.Editor's Note: Former § 205-69.1, Original jurisdiction - Planning Board, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002.
§ 205-69 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-69
197:358
ARTICLE XIV
Interpretation; Enforcement; Administration
§ 205-70. Interpretation. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977]
This chapter shall be deemed to prescribe minimum requirements and is
intended to impose strict liability as defined in the Penal Law. Except for the
repeal of the Building Zone Ordinance,67 this chapter shall not be deemed
to amend, repeal or impair any requirement in any ordinance or law or in
any deed restriction or covenant or in any other undertaking among private
persons, but no provision in any such ordinance, law, restriction, covenant
or undertaking shall be deemed to justify noncompliance with any provision
of this chapter.
§ 205-71. Enforcement. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977;
11-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-198868]
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, the Code Enforcement Officer
and the police and they hereby are given the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and issue appearance tickets for any violations
they observe. The Building Inspector, the Code Enforcement Officer and the
police in discharge of their duties shall have authority to enter any building
or premises at any reasonable hour, in accordance with law.
§ 205-72. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No.
2-1977; 1-29-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986]
A. Any owner, lessee, contractor, agent or individual, whether a person,
partnership or corporation, shall be guilty of an offense if he/she
occupies, uses or maintains or causes or permits to be occupied, used
or maintained or erects, enlarges, alters or converts or causes, or
permits to be erected, enlarged, altered or converted any building,
structure or part thereof on any land in the Village, except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter or a decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals or the Planning Board, or in any manner violates or allows,
causes, permits, takes part in or assists in a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated
hereunder.
B. A person convicted of an offense shall be guilty of a violation as defined
in the Penal Law.
C. A violation of two or more sections of this chapter or provisions within a
section shall be separate and distinct offenses for which a fine may be
levied.
67.Editor's Note: The prior Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Lloyd Harbor, as last amended
7-25-1965, was repealed by the ordinance adopting this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 205-70 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-72
197:359
§ 205-73. Filing of plans required.69
No building shall be erected, enlarged or altered structurally unless the
owner or lessee of the premises files or causes to be filed with the Building
Inspector, before such erection, enlargement or alteration is commenced,
a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions,
monuments, radii and angles of the lot to be built upon, the exact size
and location on the lot of the principal building and accessory buildings
to be erected, enlarged or altered and such other information as may be
reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 205-74. Building permit required. [Amended 11-21-1988 by L.L.
No. 4-1988]
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection
or alteration of any building until a building permit has been duly issued
therefor. A fee shall be paid to the Village by the applicant for a permit,
D. Each and every week that a violation exists or continues shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation, conviction for which shall be an
additional offense.
E. Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by:
(1) A fine not to exceed $350 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed
five days, or both, for a conviction of a first offense.
(2) A fine not to exceed $700, but not less than $350, or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or both, for the conviction of a
second offense committed within five years of a prior offense.
(3) A fine not to exceed $1,000, but not less than $700, or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both, for the conviction of a
third or subsequent offense committed within five years of two
prior offenses.
F. If any person fails to abate any such violation of this chapter within five
calendar days after written notice has been served personally upon said
person or within 10 days after written notice has been sent to said
person, by certified mail, at said person's home or business address,
said person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each and every
day that said violation continues, recoverable by suit brought by the
Village.
G. Any violation of this chapter may be enjoined pursuant to law.
H. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law, including injunctive
relief.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 205-72 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-74
197:360
at the time of submitting his/her application for a permit, in the amount
required by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees. No building permit
shall be issued until the Building Inspector has certified that the proposed
building or alteration complies with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-75. Certificates of occupancy and completion. [Amended
11-21-1988 by L.L. No. 4-198870]
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises
or part thereof, hereafter erected, altered, changed, converted or enlarged,
wholly or partly, in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy or
a certificate of completion therefor shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector. Such certificate shall show that such building or premises or part
thereof and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue
a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion as promptly as
practicable after having determined that the building and premises and the
proposed use thereof conform to all the requirements of this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 205-74 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-75
197:361

ARTICLE XV
Amendments
§ 205-76. Making of changes.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, either on its own motion or
on petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal the regulations, restrictions and boundaries herein
established, pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law and local laws of
the Village, as amended from time to time.
§ 205-76 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-76
197:363

ARTICLE XVI
Coastal Erosion Hazard Management
[Added 6-28-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
§ 205-77. Purpose.
The Village of Lloyd Harbor hereby assumes the responsibility and authority
to implement and administer a coastal erosion management program within
its jurisdiction pursuant to Article 34 of New York State Environmental
Conservation Law. In addition, it is the purpose of this article to:
§ 205-78. Findings.
The Village of Lloyd Harbor finds that the coastal erosion hazard area:
A. Establish standards and procedures for minimizing and preventing
damage to structures from coastal flooding and erosion and to protect
natural protective features and other natural resources.
B. Regulate, in coastal areas subject to coastal flooding and erosion, land
use and development activities so as to minimize or prevent damage or
destruction to man-made property, natural protective features and
other natural resources and to protect human life.
C. Regulate new construction or placement of structures in order to place
them a safe distance from areas of active erosion and the impacts of
coastal storms to ensure that these structures are not prematurely
destroyed or damaged due to improper siting, as well as to prevent
damage to natural protective features and other natural resources.
D. Restrict public investment in services, facilities or activities which are
likely to encourage new permanent development in erosion hazard
areas.
E. Regulate the construction of erosion protection structures in coastal
areas subject to serious erosion to assure that when the construction of
erosion protection structures is justified, their construction and
operation will minimize or prevent damage or destruction to man-made
property, private and public property, natural protective features and
other natural resources.
A. Is prone to erosion from action of Long Island Sound and its connecting
water bodies, bays, harbors, shallows and marshes. Such erosion may
be caused by the action of waves, currents running along the shore and
wind-driven water and ice. Such areas are also prone to erosion caused
by the wind, runoff of rain water along the surface of the land or
groundwater seepage, as well as by human activities, such as
construction, navigation and certain forms of recreation.
B. Experiences coastal erosion which causes extensive damage to publicly
and privately owned property and to natural resources as well as
endangers human lives. When this occurs, individuals and private
§ 205-77 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-78
197:365
§ 205-79. Definitions.
businesses suffer significant economic losses, as do the Village and the
state economies, either directly through property damage or indirectly
through loss of economic return. Large public expenditures may also
be necessitated for the removal of debris and damaged structures and
replacement of essential public facilities and services.
C. Experiences erosion-related problems that are often contributed to by
man's building without considering the potential for damage to
property, by undertaking activities which destroy natural protective
features such as bluffs, dunes or vegetation, by building structures
intended for erosion prevention which may exacerbate erosion
conditions on adjacent or nearby property and by water action
produced by wakes from boats.
D. Is the subject of programs which foster erosion protection structures,
either with private or public funds, which are costly and often only
partially effective over time and which may even be harmful to adjacent
or nearby properties. In some sections of the Village, major erosion
protection structures of great length would be required to effectively
reduce future damages due to erosion.
A. The following definitions of terms or words used in this article pertain
to coastal erosion hazard areas only. In the case of a conflict between
the definitions contained in this article and any other definition of a
similar word or term contained in any other Article of this chapter, the
more restrictive definition shall control unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPURTENANCE — A minor or accessory structure attached to, placed
near or used in conjunction with a structure.
BEACH — The zone of unconsolidated earth that extends landward
from the mean low-water line to the waterward toe of a dune or bluff,
whichever is most waterward. Where no dune or bluff exists landward
of a "beach," the landward limit of a "beach" is 100 feet landward from
the place where there is a marked change in material or physiographic
form or from the line of permanent vegetation, whichever is most
waterward. Shorelands subject to seasonal or more frequent overwash
or inundation are considered to be "beaches."
BLUFF — Any bank or cliff with a precipitous or steeply sloped face
adjoining a beach or a body of water. The seaward limit of a "bluff" is
the landward limit of its waterward natural protective feature. Where
no beach is present, the waterward limit of a "bluff" is mean low water.
The landward limit is 25 feet landward of the receding edge or, in
those cases where there is no discernible line of active erosion, 25 feet
landward of the point of inflection on the top of the "bluff." (The point
§ 205-78 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-79
197:366
of inflection is that point along the top of the "bluff" where the trend of
the land slope changes to begin its descent to the shoreline.)
BOARD OF ADMINISTRATION — The local board responsible for
administering this article. The powers and duties of this Board are more
fully described in § 205-93.
COASTAL EROSION HAZARD AREA MAP — The final map and any
amendments thereof issued by the Commissioner of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, which delineates
boundaries of coastal erosion hazard areas subject to regulation under
this article.
COASTLINE and COASTAL WATERS — The lands adjacent to the
Village's coastal waters are the "coastline." "Coastal waters" are Long
Island Sound and its connecting water bodies, bays, harbors, shallows
and marshes.
DEBRIS LINE — A linear accumulation of waterborne debris deposited
on a beach by storm-induced high water or by wave action.
DUNE — A ridge or hill of loose, windblown or artificially placed earth,
the principal component of which is sand.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The local Village official empowered to
enforce this article. The powers and duties of this official are more fully
described in § 205-93.
EROSION — The loss or displacement of land along the coastline due
to the action of waves, currents, wind-driven water, waterborne ice or
other impacts of storms. It also means the loss or displacement of land
due to the action of wind, runoff of surface waters or groundwaters or
groundwater seepage.
EROSION HAZARD AREA — An area of the coastline which is a
structural hazard area or a natural protective feature area.
EROSION PROTECTION STRUCTURE — A structure specifically
designed to reduce or prevent erosion, such as a groin, jetty, revetment,
breakwater or artificial beach nourishment project.
EXISTING STRUCTURE — A structure and appurtenance in existence
or one where construction has commenced or one where construction
has not begun but for which a building permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this article.
GRADING — A redistribution of sand or other unconsolidated earth to
effect a change in profile.
MAJOR ADDITION — An addition to a structure resulting in a twentyfive-
percent-or-greater increase in the ground area coverage of the
structure other than an erosion protection structure or a pier, dock
or wharf. The increase will be calculated as the ground area coverage
to be added, including any additions previously constructed under a
coastal erosion management permit, divided by the ground area
coverage of the existing structure as defined above.
§ 205-79 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-79
197:367
MEAN LOW WATER — The approximate average low-water level for
a given body of water at a given location, determined by reference to
hydrological information concerning water levels or other appropriate
tests.
MODIFICATION — A change in the design, shape, configuration,
materials or use of a structure.
MOVABLE STRUCTURE — A structure designed and constructed to
be readily relocated with minimum disruption of the intended use.
Examples of "movable structures" are gazebos, sheds, statuary or
aboveground pools.
NATURAL PROTECTIVE FEATURE — A nearshore area, beach, bluff,
primary dune, secondary dune or marsh and its vegetation.
NATURAL PROTECTIVE FEATURE AREA — A land and/or water area
containing natural protective features, the alteration of which might
reduce or destroy the protection afforded other lands against erosion
or high water or lower the reserve of sand or other natural materials
available to replenish storm losses through natural processes.
NEARSHORE AREA — Those lands under water beginning at the mean
low-water line and extending waterward in a direction perpendicular
to the shoreline to a point where mean low-water depth is 15 feet or
to a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet from the mean low-water line,
whichever is greater.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE — Periodic replacement or repair of samekind
structural elements or protective coatings which do not change
the size, design or function of a functioning structure. A functioning
structure is one which is fully performing as originally designed at
the time that "normal maintenance" is scheduled to begin. "Normal
maintenance" of a structure does not require a coastal erosion
management permit.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, government agency, public improvement district,
partnership, association, firm, trust or estate or any other legal entity
whatsoever.
PRIMARY DUNE — The most waterward major dune where there are
two or more parallel dunes within a coastal area. Where there is
only one dune present, it is the primary one. Occasionally one or
more relatively small dune formations exist waterward of the "primary
dune." These smaller formations will be considered to be part of the
"primary dune" for the purposes of this article. The waterward limit of a
"primary dune" is the landward limit of its fronting beach. The landward
limit of the "primary dune" is 25 feet landward of its landward toe.
RECEDING EDGE — The most landward line of active erosion or, in
cases where there is no discernible line of active erosion, it is the most
waterward line of permanent vegetation.
§ 205-79 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-79
197:368
RECESSION RATE — The rate, expressed in feet per year, at which an
eroding shoreline moves landward.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The construction, modification, restoration
or placement of a structure or major addition to a structure; or any
action or use of land which materially alters the condition of land,
including grading, excavating, dumping, mining, dredging, filling or
other disturbance of soil.
RESTORATION — The reconstruction without modification of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the estimated
full replacement cost of the structure at the time of restoration.
Modifications, however, may be allowed if they do not exceed
preexisting size limits and are intended to mitigate impacts to natural
protective features and other natural resources.
SECONDARY DUNE — The major dune immediately landward of the
primary dune. The waterward limit of a "secondary dune" is the
landward limit of its fronting primary dune. The landward limit of a
"secondary dune" is 25 feet landward of its landward toe.
SIGNIFICANT FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT — Those habitats which
are essential to the survival of a large portion of a particular fish or
wildlife population, which support rare or endangered species, which
are found at a very low frequency within a geographic area, which
support fish or wildlife populations having significant commercial or
recreational value or which would be difficult or impossible to replace.
STRUCTURAL HAZARD AREA — Those shorelands located landward
of natural protective features and having shorelines receding at a
long-term average recession rate of one foot or more per year. The
inland boundary of a "structural hazard area" is calculated by starting
at the landward limit of the fronting natural protective feature and
measuring along a line perpendicular to the shoreline a horizontal
distance landward which is 40 times the long-term average annual
recession rate.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed, installed or placed in, on or
under land or water, either permanently or temporarily, including but
not limited to a building; shed; deck; gazebo; in-ground and above
ground pools; garage; mobile home; recreation court; road; public
service distribution, transmission, or collection systems; tanks; docks;
piers; wharves; groins; jetties; seawalls; bulkheads; breakwaters;
revetments; or artificial beach nourishment; or any addition to or
alteration of the same.
TOE — The lowest surface point on a slope face of a dune or bluff.
UNREGULATED ACTIVITY — Activities which are not regulated by
this article and which include, but are not limited to, normal beach
grooming or cleanup; normal and customary maintenance of structures
and/or in compliance with an approved maintenance program; planting
vegetation and sand fencing so as to stabilize or entrap sand in primary
dune and secondary dune areas in order to maintain or increase the
§ 205-79 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-79
197:369
§ 205-80. Coastal erosion hazard area established; Map.
The coastal erosion hazard area is hereby established to classify land and
water areas within the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, based upon
shoreline recession rates or the location of natural protective features.
The boundaries of the area are established on the final map prepared
by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation under
§ 34-0104 of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law and
entitled "Coastal Erosion Hazard Area Map of the Village of Lloyd Harbor,"
first issued on December 5, 1988, including all amendments made thereto,
by the Commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to § 34-0104 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law.
§ 205-81. Permit required for regulated activities.
No person may engage in any regulated activity in an erosion hazard area as
depicted on the Coastal Erosion Hazard Map of the Village of Lloyd Harbor
without first obtaining a coastal erosion management permit. No coastal
erosion management permit is required for unregulated activities.
§ 205-82. Standards for issuance of permit.71
A coastal erosion management permit will be issued only with a finding by
the Board of Administration that the proposed regulated activity:
height and width of dunes; routine agriculture operations, including
cultivation or harvesting; and the implementation of practices
recommended in a soil and water conservation plan as defined in
§ 3(12) of the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law; provided,
however, that agricultural operations and implementation of practices
will not be construed to include any activity that involves the
construction or placement of a structure.
VEGETATION — Plant life capable of surviving and successfully
reproducing in the area or region in which it is planted and which is
compatible with the environment of the coastal erosion hazard area.
A. Is reasonable and necessary, considering reasonable alternatives to the
proposed activity and the extent to which the proposed activity requires
a shoreline location.
B. Is not likely to cause a measurable increase in erosion at the proposed
site or at other locations.
C. Prevents, if possible, or minimizes adverse effects on natural protective
features and their functions and protective values, existing erosion
protection structures and natural resources.
71.Editor's Note: See also the provisions of § 175-52 of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land.
§ 205-79 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-83
197:370
§ 205-83. Restrictions in structural hazard areas.
The following restrictions apply to regulated activities within structural
hazard areas:
A. A coastal erosion management permit is required for the installation of
public service distribution, transmission or collection systems for gas,
electricity, water or wastewater. Systems installed along the shoreline
must be located landward of the shoreline structures.
B. The construction of nonmovable structures or placement of major
nonmovable additions to existing structures is prohibited.
C. Permanent foundations may not be attached to movable structures, and
any temporary foundations are to be removed at the time the structure
is moved. Below-grade footings will be allowed if satisfactory provisions
are made for their removal.
D. No movable structure may be located closer to the landward limit of a
bluff than 25 feet.
E. No movable structure may be placed or constructed such that,
according to accepted engineering practice, its weight places excessive
groundloading on a bluff.
F. Plans for landward relocation of movable structures must be included
with each application for a permit. Movable structures which have been
located within a structural hazard area pursuant to a coastal erosion
management permit must be removed before any part of the structure
is within 10 feet of the receding edge. The owner of record, as shown on
the latest assessment roll, is responsible for removing that structure
and its foundation unless a removal agreement was attached to the
original coastal erosion management permit. With the attachment of a
removal agreement to the coastal erosion management permit, the
signator is responsible for the landward relocation of movable
structures. In the event that the signator fails to relocate the movable
structure within the time required, it then shall be the obligation of the
owner of record to remove the structure within 30 days of notice to do
so by the Village. Removal agreements may only be made, with the
approval of the Village at the time the permit is issued, when the owner
of record and the owner of the structure are different.
G. Debris from structural damage which may occur as a result of sudden
unanticipated bluff edge failure, dune migration or wave or ice action
must be removed within 60 days of the damaging event, by the owner of
the structure. In the event that the owner of the structure shall default
in said removal and the owner is different than the landowner of record,
then the landowner of record shall remove the debris within 30 days
after the expiration of the sixty-day period described above.
H. In the event that the removal of movable structures or the removal of
debris is not completed as described above, the Village may contract to
§ 205-83 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-83
197:371
§ 205-84. Restrictions in near shore areas.
§ 205-85. Restrictions in beach areas.
have the work performed after notice of intention to do so is mailed,
certified mail, to the owner of the property at the address last shown
on the Village assessment roll. The cost of the work, together with any
administrative fees, such as attorney's or engineering fees, shall be
made a special assessment against the offending property and shall be
collected with the tax bill next due the Village. Upon the failure of the
assessment to be timely paid, such assessment shall then become a lien
against the property and collectible pursuant to the Real Property Tax
Law.
I. Any grading, excavation or other soil disturbance conducted within a
structural hazard area must not direct surface water runoff over a bluff
face.
A. Nearshore areas dissipate a substantial amount of wave energy before
it is expended on beaches, bluffs or dunes by causing waves to collapse
or break. Nearshore areas also function as reservoirs of sand, gravel
and other unconsolidated material for beaches. Sandbars, which are
located in nearshore areas, control the orientation of incoming waves
and promote the development of ice cap formations which help protect
shorelines during winter storms. The roots of aquatic vegetation in
nearshore areas bind fine grained silts, clays and organic matter to
form a fairly cohesive bottom that resists erosion.
B. The following restrictions apply to regulated activities in nearshore
areas:
(1) Excavating, grading, mining or dredging which diminishes the
erosion protection afforded by a nearshore area is prohibited,
except that construction or maintenance of navigation channels,
bypassing sand around natural and man-made obstructions and
artificial beach nourishment shall be permitted pursuant to a
coastal erosion management permit.
(2) Clean sand or gravel of an equivalent or slightly larger grain size is
the only material which may be deposited within nearshore areas.
Any deposition shall be done pursuant to a coastal erosion
management permit.
(3) All development, including construction, alteration, restoration and
reconstruction of any structure or appurtenance, except an
approved erosion protection structure, or the removal of any
erosion protection structure or appurtenance is prohibited in
nearshore areas unless otherwise specifically provided for by this
article.
§ 205-83 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-85
197:372
§ 205-86. Restrictions in dune areas.
A. Beaches buffer shorelands from erosion by absorbing wave energy that
otherwise would be expended on the toes of bluffs or dunes. Beaches
that are high and wide protect shorelands from erosion more effectively
than beaches that are low or narrow. Beaches also act as reservoirs of
sand or other unconsolidated material for longshore littoral transport
and offshore sandbar and shoal formation.
B. The following restrictions apply to regulated activities in beach areas:
(1) Excavating, grading or mining which diminishes the erosion
protection afforded by beaches is prohibited.
(2) Clean sand or gravel of an equivalent or slightly larger grain size is
the only material which may be deposited within beach areas. Any
deposition shall be done pursuant to a coastal erosion management
permit, which permit may be issued only for expansion or
stabilization of beaches.
(3) Active bird nesting and breeding areas shall not be disturbed
unless such disturbance is pursuant to a specific wildlife
management activity approved, in writing, by the Department of
Environmental Conservation.
(4) Restoration of existing structures on beaches that are damaged or
destroyed by events not related to coastal flooding may only be
undertaken pursuant to a coastal erosion management permit.
(5) All development, including construction, alteration, restoration and
reconstruction of any structure or appurtenance, except an
approved erosion protection structure, or removal of any erosion
protection structure or appurtenance is prohibited on beaches
unless otherwise specifically provided by this article.
A. Dunes prevent overtopping and store sand for coastal processes. High,
vegetated dunes provide a greater degree of protection than low,
unvegetated ones. Dunes are of the greatest protective value during
conditions of storm-induced high water. Because dunes often protect
some of the most biologically productive areas, as well as developed
coastal areas, their protective value is especially great. The key to
maintaining a stable dune system is the establishment and maintenance
of beach grass or other vegetation on the dunes and assurance of a
supply of nourishment sand to the dunes.
B. The following restrictions apply to regulated activities in dune areas:
(1) In primary dune areas:
(a) Excavating, grading or mining of primary dunes is prohibited.
§ 205-85 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-86
197:373
(b) Clean sand of a compatible type and size is the only material
which may be deposited. Any deposition shall be done pursuant
to a coastal erosion management permit.
(c) All depositions must be vegetatively stabilized using species
tolerant of the conditions at the site and must be placed so as
to increase the size of or to restore a dune or dune area.
(d) Active bird nesting and breeding areas must not be disturbed
unless such disturbance is pursuant to a specific wildlife
management activity approved, in writing, by the Department
of Environmental Conservation.
(e) No additions to existing structures are allowed on primary
dunes.
(f) Restoration of existing structures on primary dunes that are
damaged or destroyed by events no related to coastal flooding
and erosion may only be undertaken pursuant to a coastal
erosion management permit.
(g) Stone revetments or other erosion protection structures
compatible with primary dunes will only be allowed at the
waterward toe of primary dunes and must not interfere with
the exchange of sand between primary dunes and their
fronting beaches. Such revetments or other erosion protection
structures shall be constructed, modified or restored pursuant
to a coastal erosion management permit.
(2) In secondary dune areas:
(a) All depositions must be of clean sand of a compatible type and
size, and all grading must be performed so as to increase the
size of or to restore a dune or former dune area.
(b) Excavating, grading or mining must not diminish the erosion
protection afforded by the dune.
(c) No additions to existing structures are allowed on secondary
dunes.
(d) Restoration of existing structures on secondary dunes that are
damaged or destroyed by events not related to coastal flooding
and erosion may only be undertaken pursuant to a coastal
erosion management permit.
(3) All other activities and development, including but not limited to
construction, alteration, restoration and reconstruction of a
structure or appurtenance, except an approved erosion protection
structure, in dune areas are prohibited unless otherwise
specifically provided for by this article.
(4) The restrictions of § 205-89, Traffic control, apply to dune areas.
§ 205-86 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-87
197:374
§ 205-87. Restrictions in bluff areas.
A. Bluffs protect shorelands and coastal development by absorbing the
often destructive energy of open water. Bluffs are a source of
depositional material for beaches and other unconsolidated natural
protective features.
B. The following activities are prohibited on bluffs:
(1) Excavating or mining, except when in conjunction with conditions
stated in a coastal erosion management permit issued for minor
alterations in construction of an erosion protection structure or for
provisions of shoreline access.
(2) All development, including but not limited to construction,
alteration, reconstruction and restoration of a structure or
appurtenance, except an approved erosion protection structure,
unless specifically permitted by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Disturbance of active bird nesting and breeding areas unless such
disturbance is pursuant to a specific wildlife management activity
approved, in writing, by the Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(4) Soil disturbance that directs surface water runoff over a bluff face.
C. The restrictions of § 205-89, Traffic control, apply to bluffs.
D. Activities specifically allowed under this section are:
(1) Minor alteration of a bluff performed in accordance with the
conditions stated in a coastal erosion management permit issued
for new construction, modification or restoration of an erosion
protection structure.
(2) Bluff cuts done in accordance with the conditions stated in a
coastal erosion management permit issued for the provision of
shoreline access, where:
(a) The cut is made in a direction perpendicular to the shoreline.
(b) The ramp slope does not exceed 1:6.
(c) Side slopes do not exceed 1:3 unless terraced or otherwise
structurally stabilized.
(d) Side slopes and other disturbed nonroadway areas are
stabilized with vegetation or other approved physical means.
(e) Completed roadways are stabilized, and drainage is provided
for.
§ 205-87 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-87
197:375
§ 205-88. Erosion protection structures.
The following requirements apply to the construction, modification or
restoration of erosion protection structures:
(3) New construction, modification or restoration of walkways or
stairways done in accordance with conditions of a coastal erosion
management permit.
(4) Nonmajor additions to existing structures, which may only be
undertaken on bluffs pursuant to a coastal erosion management
permit.
(5) The restoration of existing structures on bluffs that are damaged or
destroyed by events not related to coastal flooding and erosion,
which may only be undertaken pursuant to a coastal erosion
management permit.
A. The construction, modification, restoration or removal of erosion
protection structures must:
(1) Not be likely to cause a measurable increase in erosion at the
development site or at other locations.
(2) Minimize and, if possible, prevent adverse effects upon natural
protective features, existing erosion protection structures and
natural resources such as significant fish and wildlife habitats.
B. All erosion protection structures must be designed and constructed
according to generally accepted engineering principles or, where
sufficient data is not currently available, demonstrate a likelihood of
success in controlling long-term erosion. The protective measures must
have a reasonable probability of controlling erosion on the immediate
site for at least 30 years.
C. All materials used in such structure must be durable and capable of
withstanding inundation, wave impacts, weathering and other effects of
storm conditions typical to the site over the last 100 years for a
minimum of 30 years. Individual component materials may have a
working life of less than 30 years only when a maintenance program
included with the permit application ensures that they will be regularly
maintained and replaced as necessary to attain the required 30 years of
erosion protection.
D. A long-term maintenance program shall be included with every permit
application of construction, modification or restoration of an erosion
protection structure. The maintenance program must include
specifications for normal maintenance of degradable materials. To
assure compliance with the proposed maintenance programs, a bond
may be required.
§ 205-87 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-89
197:376
§ 205-89. Traffic control.
Motorized and nonmotorized traffic must comply with the following
restrictions:
§ 205-90. Emergency activities.
A. Motor vehicles must not travel on vegetation, must operate waterward
of the debris line and, when no debris line exists, must operate
waterward of the waterward toe of the primary dune or bluff.
B. Motor vehicle traffic is prohibited on primary dunes and bluffs, except
for officially designated crossing areas.
C. Pedestrian passage across primary dunes must utilize elevated
walkways and stairways or other specially designed dune crossing
structures.
A. Applicability. The requirements of this article do not apply to
emergency activities that are necessary to protect public health, safety
or welfare, including preventing damage to natural resources.
Whenever emergency activities are undertaken, damage to natural
protective features and other natural resources must be prevented, if
possible, or minimized.
B. Notification to Board of Administration and Enforcement Officer. The
Chairperson of the Board of Administration and the Enforcement
Officer must be notified, in writing, by the person responsible for taking
the emergency measures, which writing shall be hand delivered or
mailed within 24 hours from the commencement of an emergency
measure and shall provide a detailed description of the problem and
activities undertaken. The description must outline the public health or
safety or resource for which protection was sought and describe each
measure that was taken to secure the protection.
C. Improper or insufficient notification. If the Chairperson of the Board of
Administration or the Enforcement Officer is not properly notified or
determines that a regulated activity has been undertaken without a
coastal erosion management permit and such activity does not meet the
emergency activity criteria, then the Chairperson of the Board of
Administration or the Enforcement Officer shall order the immediate
cessation of the activity. In addition, the Board of Administration, after
review of the matter, may require:
(1) Removal of any structure that was constructed or placed without a
coastal erosion management permit.
(2) The return to former conditions of any natural protective feature
that was excavated, mined or otherwise disturbed without a coastal
erosion management permit.
§ 205-89 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-91
197:377
§ 205-91. Coastal erosion management permits.
A coastal erosion management permit will be issued for regulated activities
which comply with the general standards (See § 205-82), restrictions and
requirements of the applicable sections of this article, provided that the
following is adhered to:
A. The application for a coastal erosion management permit must be made
upon the form provided by the Board of Administration and must
include the following minimum information:
(1) A description of the proposed activity.
(2) A map drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet,
showing:
(a) The location of the proposed activity.
(b) The landward boundary of the coastal erosion hazard area.
(c) The recession rate last established for the coastal erosion
hazard area on the property.
(3) Any additional information the Board of Administration may
require to properly evaluate the proposed activity.
B. Permits will be issued by and bear the name and signature of the
Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Board of Administration and
will specify:
(1) The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
(2) The address or location where the activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(3) The name and address of the permittee.
(4) The permit number and date of issuance.
(5) The period of permit validity. If not otherwise specified, a permit
will expire one year from the date of issuance.
(6) The terms and conditions of the approval.
(7) That the coastal erosion management permit does not constitute a
building permit and that no work shall begin until all other
necessary permits from the Building Department have been
obtained.
C. When more than one coastal erosion management permit is required
for the same property or premises under this article, a single permit
may be issued listing all activities permitted and any conditions,
restrictions or bonding requirements. Revocation of a portion or
portions of such consolidated permits will not invalidate the remainder.
§ 205-91 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-91
197:378
§ 205-92. Bonds.
The Village may require a bond or other form of financial security. Such
bond or security must be in an amount, with such surety and conditions as
are satisfactory to the Village, so as to insure compliance with the terms
and conditions stated in the coastal erosion management permit.
§ 205-93. Board of Administration; Enforcement Officer.
D. A coastal erosion management permit may be issued with such terms
and conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with the policies
and provisions of Article 34 of the Environmental Conservation Law, the
Coastal Erosion Management Regulations implementing Article 34 (6
NYCRR Part 505) and the laws and policies of the Village.
E. When an application is made for a coastal erosion management permit,
variance thereto or other form of approval required by this article and
such activity is subject to other permit, variance, hearing or application
procedures required by another federal, state or local regulatory
agency pursuant to any federal, state or local law or ordinance, the
Enforcement Officer shall, at the request of the applicant, consolidate
and coordinate the application, permit, variance and hearing
procedures as required by each regulatory agency into a
comprehensive hearing and review procedure. However, nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed to limit or restrict any
regulatory agencies which are properly a party to such a consolidated
review proceeding from the independent exercise of such discretionary
authority with respect to the issuance, denial or modification of such
permits, variances or other forms of approval as they may have been
granted by law.
A. Board of Administration. The authority for administering this article is
hereby conferred upon the Site and Building Permit Review Board of
the Village of Lloyd Harbor, which Board, acting through its
Chairperson, shall have the following powers and duties: [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
(1) Application of the regulations, restrictions and standards or other
provisions of this article.
(2) Explanation to applicants of the map which designates the land and
water areas subject to regulation and the advising of applicants of
the standards, restrictions and requirements of this article.
(3) The reviewing of and taking of appropriate actions on completed
applications.
(4) Issuance and signing of all approved permits.
(5) Preparation and submission of reports other than those prepared
and submitted by the Enforcement Officer.
§ 205-91 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-93
197:379
(6) Performance of such compliance inspections as the Site and
Building Permit Review Board deems necessary, in addition to any
inspection performed by the Enforcement Officer.
(7) The keeping of official records of all permits, inspections,
inspection reports, recommendations and actions of the Site and
Building Permit Review Board and any other reports or
communications relative to this article or requests for information
from the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(8) Performance of normal and customary administrative functions
required by the Village, relative to the Coastal Erosion Hazard
Areas Act, Article 34 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law, 6 NYCRR Part 505, and this article.
(9) In addition, those powers and duties as are established in or
reasonably implied from this article as are necessary to achieve its
stated purpose.
B. Enforcement Officer. The authority for enforcing this article is hereby
conferred upon the Building Inspector or the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor or their deputies or such
other persons as may be specified by the Board of Trustees. Such
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Application of the regulations, restrictions and standards or other
provisions of this article.
(2) Explanation to applicants of the map which designates the land and
water areas subject to regulations and the advising of applicants of
the standards, restrictions and requirements of this article.
(3) Transmission of written notice of violations to property owners or
to other responsible persons.
(4) Preparation and submission of reports.
(5) Performance of compliance inspections.
(6) Service as the primary liaison with the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation.
(7) The keeping of official records of all permits, inspections,
inspection reports, recommendations, actions of the Coastal
Erosion Hazard Board of Review and any other report or
communication relative to this article or requests for information
from the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(8) In addition, those powers and duties as are established in or
reasonably implied from this article as are necessary to achieve its
stated purpose.
§ 205-93 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-94
197:380
§ 205-94. Variances.
§ 205-95. Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review.
The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor is
hereby designated as the Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review and has
the authority to:
A. Strict application of the standards and restrictions of this article may
cause practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. When this can be
shown, such standards and restrictions may be varied or modified,
provided that the following criteria are met:
(1) No reasonable or prudent alternative site is available.
(2) All responsible means and measures to mitigate adverse impacts on
natural systems and their functions and values have been
incorporated into the activity's design at the property owner's
expense.
(3) The development will be reasonably safe from flood and erosion
damage.
(4) The variance requested is the minimum necessary to overcome the
practical difficulty or hardship which was the basis for the
requested variance.
(5) Where public funds are utilized, the public benefits must clearly
outweigh the long-term adverse effects.
B. Format and procedure. Any request for a variance must be in writing
and specify the standard, restriction or requirement to be varied and
how the requested variance meets the criteria of § 205-82 of this
article. The burden of demonstrating that the requested variance meets
those criteria rests entirely with the applicant and must be done at a
public hearing conducted by the Board of Review.
C. Fees. Each variance request must be accompanied by the same fees and
deposits as required for a public hearing before the Board of Zoning
Appeals and set forth in the Chapter 8, Administrative Code.
D. Expiration. Any construction activity allowed by a variance granted by
the Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review must be completed within
one year from the date of approval or approval with modifications or
conditions. Variances expire at the end of this one-year period without
further hearing or action by the Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of
Review.
A. Conduct public hearings, approve, approve with modification or deny
requests for variances or other forms of relief from the requirements of
this article.
§ 205-94 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-95
197:381
§ 205-96. Appeals.
§ 205-97. Interpretation of provisions.
The provisions, regulations, procedures and standards of this article will be
held to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes
of this article.
§ 205-98. Relationship to other provisions.
The provisions of this article will take precedence over any other laws,
ordinances or codes in effect in the Village to the extent that the provisions
of this article are more stringent than such other laws, ordinances or codes.
A coastal erosion management permit issued pursuant to this article does
not relieve the permit applicant from the responsibility of obtaining other
permits or approvals as may be necessary nor does it convey any rights or
interest in real property.
B. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Board of
Administration or the Enforcement Officer in the administration or
enforcement of this article, including any order requiring an alleged
violator to stop, cease and desist.
A. The Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review may, in conformity with
the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirements, decision or determination of the Board
of Administration or the Enforcement Officer, including stop or cease
and desist orders. Notice of such decision will forthwith be given to all
parties in interest. The rules and procedures for filing appeals are as
follows:
(1) Appeals must be filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the
date of the adverse decision.
(2) All appeals made to the Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review
must be in writing on the standard form prescribed by the Board.
The Board will transmit a copy of the appeal to the Commissioner of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation for
his/her information.
(3) All appeals must refer to the specific provisions of this article
involved and specify the alleged errors, the interpretation thereof
that is claimed to be correct and the relief which the appellant
claims.
B. Appeal to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision by the Coastal Erosion Hazard Board of Review,
or any officer, department, Board or Bureau of the Village may apply to
the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 205-95 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-99
197:382
§ 205-99. Applicability of Environmental Quality Review Act.
All regulated activities are subject to the review procedures required by
the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR), Article 8 of
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law. The applicant shall
be required to submit information necessary for compliance with SEQR in
addition to information required under this article.
§ 205-100. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article is punishable by fines or imprisonment as set forth
in Article XIV, except that each day's continued violation of this article XVI
will constitute a separate additional violation. Nothing herein will prevent
the proper local authorities of the Village from taking such other lawful
actions or proceedings as may be necessary to restrain, correct or abate any
violation of this article.
§ 205-101. Amendments.
A. Procedure. The Village legislative body may, on its motion or on
recommendation from the Planning Board, amend, supplement or
repeal the provisions, regulations, procedures or standards of this
article. When an amendment is duly proposed, the Village legislative
body must:
(1) Notify the Commissioner of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, in writing, of all proposed
amendments and request his/her advice as to whether such
amendment is subject to his/her approval and, if so, whether such
amendement conforms to the minimum standards of a certified
program.
(2) Issue a public notice and conduct a hearing on all proposed
amendments. The Village legislative body, by resolution, must
cause notice of such hearing's time, date and place to be published
in the official newspaper not less than five days prior to the date of
the hearing.
(3) Refer to the proposed amendment at least 30 days prior to the
public hearing, in writing, to:
(a) The Planning Board, Board of Zoning Appeals and the
Enforcement Officer, unless initiated thereby, for review of the
amendment and a report to the Village legislative body of
recommendations thereon, including a full statement of
reasons for such recommendations.
(b) The County Planning Board for its review and
recommendations pursuant to Article 12-B, § 239-b of the New
York State General Municipal Law.
§ 205-99 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-101
197:383
B. Commissioner approval. After enactment, the amendment must be sent
to the Commissioner of Environmental Conservation for certification.
C. Recording. After an amendment to this article has been initially
reviewed and found to be in conformance by the Commissioner of the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, has
completed the public hearing process and intergovernmental review,
has been finally approved and adopted by the Village legislative body
and has been certified by the Commissioner, the Clerk will, as
prescribed by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law:
(1) Record the amended Article in the Village Clerk's Minute Book and
in the Recorded Book of Local Laws.
(2) File the amended article within five days after adoption as follows:
(a) One copy in the Clerk's office.
(b) Three copies in the office of the Secretary of State.
(c) One copy with the Commissioner of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 205-101 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-101
197:384
ARTICLE XVII
Coastal Overlay Districts
[Added 4-20-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
§ 205-102. Findings; purpose.
A. Findings.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees hereby finds that for ecological,
public enjoyment, public navigation, aesthetic, visual and public
health, safety and welfare reasons, the coastal areas of the Village
of Lloyd Harbor must be protected.
(2) As recreational boating has grown in popularity, there has been a
concomitant and increasing demand for dock and mooring
facilities, both public and private. The Village of Lloyd Harbor has
not been exempt from this trend. The Village contains no
commercial docking facilities; however, the increase in residential
development along its shoreline has led to an increase in the
number of applications for the construction of private docks.
(3) The harbor of Lloyd Harbor and Lloyd Point are State of New York
designated significant coastal fish and wildlife habitats. All of the
shoreline of Lloyd Harbor has also been designated a critical
environmental area (CEA) by the Village of Lloyd Harbor in
accordance with the New York State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA).72
(4) Docks located in open water (and any boats moored to such docks)
are exposed to increased damage from severe storms, thus creating
pressure to establish docks and piers in protected waters such as
the harbor of Lloyd Harbor. Inlets are more protected from storms
but are often tidal habitats for birds, fish and other wildlife.
Development in small harbor areas often impacts and degrades the
very resources upon which this development depends. The water
quality in such harbors deteriorates, the bird, fish and other
wildlife habitats are thereby adversely impacted and the wildlife is
therefore threatened. Locating docks (and boats) in these areas can
cause significant damage to habitats and wildlife.
(5) In addition to the other significant values of wildlife habitat areas,
habitat areas and waterfront areas, in general, have significant
value for their scenic qualities. A proliferation of docks and their
associated boats causes overcrowding of waterfronts and
waterbodies and can result in visual pollution, depending upon the
number, location, size, height, length and design of the docks.
(6) Docks which are long enough to reach water of sufficient depth for
large boats can be hazardous to navigation if they encroach upon a
72.Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 205-102 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-102
197:385
§ 205-103. Creation; location.
§ 205-104. Coastal Overlay District-1 (COD-1). [Amended 5-15-1995
by L.L. No. 1-1995; 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002; 3-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
navigational channel or if they draw boats into shoals because
of their presence. Long docks can also be an impediment to the
enjoyment of recreational boaters and anglers who desire to
navigate along the shoreline. Docks acting as barriers along the
water's edge also keep pedestrians from enjoying the waterfront.
The desire for the construction of docks and other structures must
be weighed against the environmental value and sensitivity of the
waterfront and against the rights of the boating public to navigate,
the rights of the community and public to walk along the foreshore
and the rights of the community and general public to be protected
from visual pollution. The Board of Trustees finds that private
rights should not supersede those of the public and that an
appropriate balance must be achieved between property owner
desires to access the water and the protection of the public trust
relating to the enjoyment of waters and foreshore in the Village.
B. It is for these reasons that the Village of Lloyd Harbor hereby creates
the Coastal Overlay District-1 (COD-1) and Coastal Overlay District-2
(COD-2).
A. There are hereby created two overlay zoning districts, respectively
known as the "Coastal Overlay District-1 (COD-1)" and the "Coastal
Overlay District-2 (COD-2)." These overlay districts shall be in addition
to the existing underlying zoning which they overlay, and the
regulations of these overlay districts shall supersede any inconsistent
or less restrictive regulations of the existing underlying zoning.
B. The respective locations of the COD-1 and COD-2 Districts are as shown
on the Village Zoning Map. The landward boundary of the COD-1 and
COD-2 Districts shall be 40 feet inland of the mean high-water line and
seaward to the jurisdictional boundaries of the Village.
A. The COD-1 District essentially encompasses relatively small or narrow
waterbodies and lands immediately adjacent thereto. Because of the
small or narrow configuration of these waterbodies, construction of
shoreline structures, such as docks, piers, bulkheads, revetments or
other major shoreline construction, in areas not previously disturbed by
such development (i.e., natural beach, tidal flats, adjacent woodlands or
salt marsh) may have a significant adverse impact upon the
environment.
B. For these reasons and those reasons specified in § 205-102 above, there
shall be no new structures or buildings or the enlargement or alteration
of any existing structures or buildings, as defined by this chapter,
located in the Coastal Overlay District-1, except that:
§ 205-102 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-104
197:386
(1) Private docks, piers, bulkheads, revetments or other major
shoreline construction may be located in the COD-1 upon review
and approval from the Planning Board-and the issuance of a
building permit by the Building Inspector if the Planning Board
determines that such structures will not provoke any of the adverse
effects enumerated in § 205-102 and Subsection A and if the
structure is a dock that the Planning Board further determines that
the dock would meet all of the following conditions:
(a) In order to minimize visual impact, the dock shall be of the
floating variety only and shall only be permitted in those
locations where the rising and lowering of such floating dock
will not have a significant adverse impact upon vegetation,
wildlife or wildlife habitat, including fish and fisheries
resources.
(b) The dock shall be of a length, size and height which has no
significant adverse impact upon the environment from a visual
perspective or otherwise; shall be of a length which does not
impede the navigation of vessels; and shall be of a length
which, in no case, exceeds 75 linear feet seaward from the
mean high-water line.
(c) In no case shall the seaward end of the dock extend beyond the
point where the mean low-water depth at such point exceeds
two feet.
(d) The width of the dock shall not exceed six feet. Such
measurement shall include all appurtenances and appendages
to the dock, including vertical supports and float
configurations.
(e) The dock shall not impede the ability of the public to walk
along the foreshore.
(f) The dock shall be removed from the water during the months
November through March.
(2) After approval by the Planning Board:
(a) The enlargement of existing docks and buildings which have
been specifically approved by the Board of Trustees prior to
the enactment hereof may be permitted.
(b) The construction, enlargement, alteration or repair of an
erosion protection structure located in the coastal erosion
hazard area may be permitted.
§ 205-104 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-105
197:387
§ 205-105. Coastal Overlay District-2 (COD-2). [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002;
3-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
For the purposes specified in § 205-102 above, there shall be no new
structures or buildings, or the enlargement or alteration of any existing
structures or buildings, as defined by this chapter, located in the Coastal
Overlay District-2, except that private docks, seawalls, retaining walls,
jetties or other major construction may be located in the COD-2 District
upon the review and approval from the Planning Board and the issuance of a
building permit by the Building Inspector if the Planning Board determines
that such structures will not provoke any of the adverse effects enumerated
in §§ 205-102 and 205-104 and if the structure is a dock, that the Planning
Board further determines that the dock meets all of the following
conditions:
§ 205-106. Replacement and repair of existing docks. [Amended
3-21-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
No replacement or substantial repair shall be made to any legally existing
docks in the COD-1 or COD-2 District unless the building permit application
is reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. The term "substantial
repair" shall mean the installation or replacement of more than 1/4 of the
pilings of the dock, but shall not be construed to mean the replacement
and securing of existing rails and deck boards or the painting and ordinary
maintenance for such dock.
A. In order to minimize visual impact, the dock shall be of the floating
variety in those locations where the rising and lowering of such floating
dock will not have significant adverse impact upon vegetation, wildlife
or wildlife habitat, including fish and fisheries resources. In locations
where a floating dock would have such significant adverse impact, the
dock shall be of the fixed-pier-type, with or without an accessory float,
and shall be constructed in such a manner so that the float, if any, shall
not rest upon the bottom lands.
B. The total length of the dock shall not be more than 100 linear feet, and
in no case shall the seaward end of the dock or any accessory float
extend beyond the point where the mean low-water depth at such point
exceeds three feet.
C. The width of the dock, including vertical supports, shall not exceed six
feet, and the size of any accessory float shall not exceed 150 square
feet.
D. The dock shall not impede the ability of the public to walk along the
foreshore.
E. All floating docks or floating components of docks shall be removed
from the water during the months November through March.
§ 205-105 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-106
197:388
ARTICLE XVIII
Conservation Recreation District
[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
§ 205-107. Findings; purpose.
This article is adopted in accordance with the findings, purpose and goals
of the Village of Lloyd Harbor Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
adopted by the Board of Trustees on October 16, 1995.
§ 205-108. Creation; location.
§ 205-109. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses in this zoning district are limited to those uses allowed
in the Parklands Overlay District and Estuarine District as well as bathing
beaches, picnic areas or play areas not containing any structures. Permitted
accessory uses are parking areas and shelters for municipal equipment and
vehicles.
§ 205-110. Special use permit.
Any other use for public recreation not described in § 205-19 shall require
a special use permit under Article IX.
A. There is hereby created a zoning district known as the "Conservation
Recreation District."
B. The location of the Conservation Recreation District is as shown on
Map, Figure 5-1, and listed in Table 5-1 of the Village of Lloyd Harbor
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
§ 205-107 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-110
197:389

ARTICLE XIX
Parkland Overlay District
[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 205-111. Findings; purpose.
This article is adopted in accordance with the findings, purpose and goals
of the Village of Lloyd Harbor Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
adopted by the Board of Trustees on October 16, 1995.
§ 205-112. Creation; location.
§ 205-113. Permitted uses.
The only permitted use in the Parkland Overlay District are limited to
conservation of the area as a passive parkland or nature preserve,
observing or studying the indigenous flora or fauna, hiking or fishing.
Minimal accessory uses such as parking areas, restrooms or seating that
support the primary uses described above are also permitted upon receiving
site plan approval from the Planning Board and an affirmative finding
that the accessory use supports the primary use of the area as a passive
parkland and nature preserve.
§ 205-114. Special use permit.
Any other proposed use of the area as a passive parkland or nature preserve
not described in § 205-113 shall require a special use permit under Article
IX.
A. There is hereby created a zoning district known as the "Parkland
Overlay District." This district shall be in addition to the existing
underlying zoning which it overlaps, and the regulations of this district
shall supersede any inconsistent or less restrictive regulations of the
existing underlying zoning.
B. The location of the Parkland Overlay District is as shown on Map,
Figure 5-1, and listed in Table 5-1 of the Village of Lloyd Harbor Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
§ 205-111 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-114
197:391

ARTICLE XX
Estuarine District
[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 205-115. Findings; purpose.
This article is adopted in accordance with the findings, purpose and goals
of the Village of Lloyd Harbor Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
adopted by the Board of Trustees on October 16, 1995.
§ 205-116. Creation; location.
§ 205-117. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses within the Estuarine Zone shall be limited to those uses
allowed in tidal wetlands and Coastal Overlay Districts, as well as vessel use
and navigation, boat moorings, docks, piers, swimming, fishing and similar
uses of surface waters and underwater lands.
A. There is hereby created a zoning district known as the "Estuarine
District."
B. The location of the Estuarine District will encompass all lands below
mean high water within the Local Waterfront Revitalization Area,
including but not limited to those areas locally known as the "Sand
Hole," "Harbor of Lloyd Harbor" and "Puppy's Cove" and all tidal
wetlands, floodplains and all lands within Coastal Overlay District 1 and
2 (COD-1, COD-2) which are under water.
§ 205-115 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-117
197:393

ARTICLE XXI
Excavation, Erosion and Sediment Control Law
[Added 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
§ 205-117.1. Title and purpose.
§ 205-118. Application procedure for excavation, erosion and
sediment control for subdivisions, improved or unimproved lots.
A. Title. This article will be known as the "Excavation, Erosion and
Sediment Control Law."
B. Purpose.
(1) Excessive quantities of soil are eroding within areas that are
undergoing development for nonagricultural uses such as housing
development, roads and recreation areas in the Village of Lloyd
Harbor. This soil erosion makes necessary costly repairs to gullies,
washed out fills, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment
clogs storm sewers, muddies and silts streams, ponds and
surrounding waterbodies. Sediment is expensive to remove and
diminishes the use of water for its most beneficial purposes.
Sediment filled waterways can result in damage to wildlife habitat
and be a threat to the general health, welfare and safety.
(2) The removal of protective topsoil, sod, earth and gravel from areas
in the Village results in the washing of silt and mud into storm
drains and catch basins thereby creating flooding conditions and
unnecessary erosion, storm damage, flooding, pollution and other
damage to the land so altered or to adjoining property and destroys
the natural rural aspect of the community.
A. Application for excavation, erosion and sediment control approval.
Except as provided in § 205-121, no stone, sand, gravel, topsoil, earth of
any kind or other natural material shall be moved, removed or
excavated in any way (including, without limitation, any such moving,
removing or excavating in connection with the reduction or increase of
any kind of grade) from or on any land in the Village, including land
under water within the Village boundaries, unless approval shall first
have been obtained as hereinafter provided.
B. Compliance. No site plan for excavation on an improved or unimproved
lot or subdivision plat shall be approved unless it includes soil erosion
and sediment control measures as deemed necessary by the Site and
Building Permit Review Board in accordance with the standards and
specifications of this article. No approval for a certificate of occupancy
for any building will be granted unless all needed erosion control
measures have been completed or substantially provided for in
accordance with this article. The applicant shall bear the final
responsibility for the installation and construction of all required
erosion control measures according to the provisions of this article and
§ 205-117.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-118
197:395
may be required, as a condition of approval, to post a performance
bond, or cash deposit, in an amount necessary to ensure the proper
construction and completion of the erosion control measures.
[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
C. Data required from applicant. The applicant must submit the following
information for the entire tract of land effected by the proposed project,
whether or not the tract will be developed in stages:
(1) A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be
performed.
(2) Description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding the
site of importance to the proposed development.
(3) Description of general topographic and general soil conditions and
contours on the site.
(4) Location and description of existing and future man-made features
of the proposed development.
(5) Proposed new surface contours.
(6) Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures.
(7) A construction schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion
and sediment control measures.
D. Approval.
(1) Application. A separate application shall be required for each
excavation, erosion and sediment control request. Plans,
specifications and timing schedules shall be submitted with each
application. The plans shall be prepared or approved and signed by
a professional engineer or architect.
(2) Hearing. Upon receipt of any such application, the Board may, in its
discretion, call a hearing for the consideration thereof and may at
such hearing take testimony and receive exhibits from such
witnesses it deems necessary or advisable to assist in its
determination with respect to the application.
(3) Requirement. Upon review of a completed application, the Site and
Building Permit Review Board shall approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the application. Except as exempted by
§ 205-121, no person shall do any grading, stripping, cutting, filling
or other site preparation without an approval issued by the Village
Site and Building Permit Review Board. [Amended 12-18-2000
by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 205-118 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-118
197:396
§ 205-119. Principles and standards for excavation, erosion and
sediment control during construction.
(4) Grant of approval; conditions. The Board shall grant approval to
any applicant, either permanently or temporarily, with or without
conditions, if it finds affirmatively that the proposed excavation is
consistent with the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village and the community, is consistent with all
other ordinances and Articles of the Village and will not create
harm or damage to adjacent property. The Board shall state in its
approval such restrictions and conditions as it may deem necessary
or desirable to protect and preserve the property of the Village and
its inhabitants.
A. Implementation. Since considerable soil erosion can take place during
construction, construction plans shall contain proposed erosion and
sediment control measures. These measures shall be incorporated into
the final plat and the final construction drawings and shall apply to all
features of the construction site, including street and utility
installations, as well as to the protection of individual lots. Measures
shall also be instituted to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation
during various stages of development.
B. General design principles. Practical combinations of the following
general principles will provide effective sediment control when
properly planned and applied:
(1) The subdivision and site plan shall be fitted to the topography and
soils so as to create the least erosion potential.
(2) Grading of land within the one-hundred-year floodplain or
watercourses designated and delineated as being subject to flood
hazard will not be permitted unless Chapter 205, Article VII, is
complied with regarding flood damage prevention.
(3) Permanent vegetation and improvements such as streets, storm
sewers or other features of the development, capable of carrying
storm run-off in a safe manner, shall be scheduled for installation to
the greatest extent possible before removing any existing
vegetation cover from an area.
(4) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
(5) Where inadequate vegetation exists, temporary or permanent
vegetation shall be established.
(6) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during development.
(7) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time.
§ 205-118 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-119
197:397
§ 205-120. Commercial activities prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to allow or permit any commercial
activity of any kind within the Village or any moving, removing or
excavating (including, without limitation, any such moving, removing or
excavating in connection with the reduction or increase of any kind in
grade) of natural material for commercial purposes or for the sale thereof,
and the same is prohibited, except as may be permitted by and approved
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 205-121. Exceptions.
No approval shall be required:
(8) Critical areas exposed during construction shall be protected with
temporary vegetation and/or mulching.
(9) Sediment basins (debris basin, desilting basins or silt traps) shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
(10) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development.
(11) The permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as
soon as practical in the development.
C. Maintenance. Applicants, successors or assigns carrying out
excavation, soil erosion and sediment control measures under this
chapter shall adequately maintain all permanent erosion control
measures, devices and planting in effective working condition.
A. If the amount of such material to be moved, removed or excavated from
any two-acre or larger parcel of land shall be less in aggregate than 50
cubic yards within any two-year period, provided that such work shall
be done at least 100 feet distant from the mean high-water mark of all
neighboring bodies of water, and further provided that such work shall
be incident and necessary to the construction or alteration of a walk,
driveway, building or other lawful structure on such land or to the
landscaping thereof or planting therein.
B. For the excavation for the basement of a building for which a building
permit has been duly issued, provided that the plans submitted to the
Building Inspector in the application for such permit shall include the
dimensions and salient details of such excavation.
C. For any work done by the Village for public purposes.
§ 205-119 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § 205-122
197:398
§ 205-122. Deposit of materials in watercourses.
Except as may be permitted by resolution of the Board, no stone, sand,
gravel, topsoil, earth of any kind or other material shall be deposited in the
bed of any watercourse within this Village or on any land lying within the
Floodplain District as defined in Article VII of Chapter 205, Zoning. The
term "watercourse," as used in this section, shall mean any waterway or
other body of fresh, brackish or salt water having reasonably well-defined
banks, including but not limited to harbors, sounds, bays, rivers, creeks,
rivulets, lakes, ponds, vernal ponds and streams.
§ 205-123. Inspection and enforcement.
§ 205-124. Severance provisions.
All parts of this article shall be deemed severable. Should any section,
paragraph or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the
courts, such holdings shall not affect the validity of the Article as a whole
or any part thereof, other than the part so declared. The Village Board
hereby declares that it would have enacted this article and each part thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more parts, section, subsection,
phrase, sentence or clauses be declared invalid.
A. Inspection. The requirements of this article shall be enforced by the
Building Inspector who shall inspect or require adequate inspection of
the work. If the Building Inspector finds any existing conditions not as
stated in any application or approved plan, the Building Inspector shall
refuse to approve further work and issue a cease and desist order.
B. Violations. Whenever, by the provisions of the Article, the performance
of any act is required or the performance of any act is prohibited, a
failure to comply with such provisions shall constitute a violation of this
article.
C. Correction. All violations shall be corrected within 30 days following
date of issuance of written notice to correct.
D. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects, omits
or refuses to comply with any provision of this article or any permit or
exception granted hereunder or any lawful requirement of the Building
Inspector shall be subject to violations and penalties set forth in
§ 205-72. To promote compliance with the provisions of this article,
each day that a violation is maintained, following notification, it shall be
deemed a separate offense. The imposition of any fine shall not exempt
the offender from further compliance with the provisions of this article.
E. Fees. A fee schedule for permits and inspections based upon relevant
criteria shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
§ 205-122 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § 205-124
197:399
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-1993 7-19-1993 Trees amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 183; Ch. 205
---- 7-19-1993 Investment policy Ch. 25
1-1994 8-15-1994 Tax enforcement Ch. 180, Art. I
2-1994 11-21-1994 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1-1995 5-15-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2-1995 10-16-1995 Waterfront consistency
review law
Ch. 8, Art. XII
1-1996 7-22-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2-1996 7-22-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
3-1996 9-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
4-1996 9-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
5-1996 9-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
6-1996 9-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
7-1996 9-16-1996 Critical environmental
areas amendment
Ch. 106
1-1998 3-16-1998 Moratorium NCM
2-1998 6-15-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
3-1998 6-15-1998 Trees amendment Ch. 183
4-1998 6-15-1998 Tree removal and
trimming businesses
Ch. 184
Res. 11-16-1998 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
5-1998 12-21-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
1-1999 9-21-1999 Planning Board:
alternate members
Ch. 32, Art. I
1-2000 1-18-2000 Village Park
amendment
Ch. 146, Art. I
2-2000 4-17-2000 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 8
§ 205-124 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § DL-1
197:400
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2000 5-15-2000 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
4-2000 7-17-2000 Subdivision moratorium NCM
5-2000 12-18-2000 Administrative Code
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 8; Ch. 205
1-2001 7-16-2001 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 8, Art. XIV
2-2001 7-16-2001 Subdivision moratorium NCM
3-2001 10-15-2001 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
4-2001 10-15-2001 Village Park
amendment
Ch. 146, Art. I
1-2002 Subdivision moratorium
extension
NCM
2-2002 6-17-2002 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 8
3-2002 10-21-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
4-2002 10-21-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
1-2004 7-19-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
2-2004 9-20-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
3-2004 11-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
4-2004 12-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
1-2006 2-28-2006 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
2-2006 4-26-2006 Moratorium on
partitioning and
subdivision of
properties
NCM
3-2006 6-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
1-2007 6-18-2007 Extension of
moratorium on
partitioning and
subdivision of
properties
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § DL-1
197:401
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2007 10-15-2007 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 8
3-2007 10-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
4-2007 12-17-2007 Storm sewers: illicit
discharges, activities
and connections
Ch. 170, Art. I
5-2007 12-17-2007 Stormwater
management and
erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 171
6-2007 12-17-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
7-2007 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
8-2007 12-17-2007 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
1-2008 6-16-2008 Extension of
moratorium on
partitioning and
subdivision
NCM
2-2008 9-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
1-2009 5-18-2009 Boats and boating
amendment
Ch. 71
2-2009 7-20-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
1-2010 1-19-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2-2010 5-17-2010 Outdoor lighting Ch. 135
3-2010 6-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
1-2011 7-18-2011 Procurement policy
amendment
Ch. 34
2-2011 11-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
1-2012 2-21-2012 Tax levy limit override
2012
NCM
2-2012 6-18-2012 Solid waste: garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. I
3-2012 12-17-2012 Signs amendment Ch. 205
1-2013 2-19-2013 Tax levy limit override
2013
NCM
§ DL-1 LLOYD HARBOR CODE § DL-1
197:402
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2013 4-15-2013 Moratorium on
construction of more
than one attached
garage and one
freestanding garage on
a single lot
NCM
3-2013 7-15-2013 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 8
4-2013 10-29-2013 Animal waste Ch. 59, Art. II
5-2013 11-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
6-2013 12-16-2013 Firearms amendment Ch. 114
1-2014 3-17-2014 Tax levy limit override
2014
NCM
1-2015 2-26-2015 Tax levy limit override
2015
NCM
2-2015 5-18-2015 Tax levy limit override
2015 repealer
NCM
3-2015 5-18-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 172
1-2016 3-21-2016 Bamboo Ch. 64
2-2016 3-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
3-2016 4-18-2016 Tax levy limit override
2016
NCM
1-2017 4-17-2017 Animals Amendment Ch. 59
1-2018 5-21-2018 Helicopter Landing
Prohibition
Ch. 128
2-2018 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
1-2019 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2-2019 10-21-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting
Ch. 150 35
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED; UNLICENSED § DL-1
197:403