Part I: Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local
laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Mamaroneck, as codified by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 240, together with
an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Town of Mamaroneck,"
hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Town of Mamaroneck" to any
other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall
be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been
formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local
laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this local law, are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck, and it is the intention of
said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it
appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are
omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of
Mamaroneck in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in
such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not
affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Town of Mamaroneck prior to the effective date of this local law
or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in
violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Mamaroneck or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law
or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or
part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of
the Town of Mamaroneck and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such
copy shall be certified by the Town Clerk of the Town of Mamaroneck by impressing
thereon the Seal of the Town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Town of Mamaroneck.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred
by the Town of Mamaroneck.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Mamaroneck providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place within the Town of
Mamaroneck or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Mamaroneck appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing
the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of Mamaroneck or other
instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to May 1, 1996.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for
municipal employees.
N. Any legislation pertaining to vehicles and traffic.
§ 1-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 1-6
1:4
of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Town of
Mamaroneck" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions, when enacted or adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Board to be a part thereof,
shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law shall affect the status of any
local law, ordinance or resolution contained herein, and such local laws, ordinances or
resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board
deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck required to be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws, ordinances
and resolutions adopted by the Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this local
law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, local
laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of Mamaroneck
upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board, which Board may
also arrange by resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or amends, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck or
who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
legislation of the Town of Mamaroneck to be misrepresented thereby or who violates
any other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code of
the Town of Mamaroneck, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I,
Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13,
inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck, no changes in the meaning or
intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made, except as
provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made herewith, to
become effective upon the effective date of this local law as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof (chapter and section number references are
to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code).1
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the title "Police Commissioner" is hereby
amended to read "Police Chief" or "Chief of Police."
D. Fees. The fees for services provided by, applications made to and licenses or
permits issued by the Town pursuant to the Code are as set forth in § A250-1.
[Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 1-13
1:6
ARTICLE II
Legislation Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain new pieces of legislation or changes
and/or additions to various existing pieces of legislation were approved by the
Town Board for inclusion in the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck. Such
amendments and new enactments are noted in the histories of individual chapters
as "... amended (adopted) during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II." Upon final enactment, a complete enumeration of all chapters and sections in
the Code involved in such enactments will be included in this article, along with
specific dates of adoption.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

Chapter 3
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 5.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 3-1. Legislative purpose and findings.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the community and to preserve and promote the character and
appearance and conserve the property values of the unincorporated area of the
Town, the attractiveness of whose residential and business areas is the economic
mainstay of the community, by providing procedures for an architectural review of
structures henceforth erected, reconstructed, altered or remodeled in the Town, and
thereby:
(1) To encourage quality exterior building design and good appearance and to
relate such design and appearance to the sites and surroundings of structures.
(2) To permit originality and resourcefulness in building design and appearances
which are appropriate to the sites and surroundings.
(3) To prevent such design and appearances as are offensive to visual sensibilities.
B. It has been determined thorough review, which includes the Town's Master Plan
update, that there are elements of design, particularly in the Town's business
districts, which detract from property and have an adverse visual impact on the
community. The Town Board hereby finds that structures which are visually
offensive or inappropriate, by reason of poor qualities of exterior design,
monotonous similarity or striking visual discord, including color, in relation to their
sites or surroundings, mar the appearance of their areas, impair the use, enjoyment
and desirability and reduce the values of properties, are detrimental to the character
of neighborhoods, prevent the most appropriate development and utilization of land
and, therefore, adversely affect the functioning, economic stability, prosperity,
health, safety and general welfare of the entire community.
C. Since its inception, the Board of Architectural Review has played an increasingly
significant role in the review of projects within the Town. However, from time to
time it has been difficult to have the full Board present for meetings which can
impact on the effectiveness of its review. It is therefore found to be necessary to
appoint an alternate member of the Board who will serve in the absence of one of
the regular members. [Added 3-31-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
§ 1-13 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW, BOARD OF § 3-2
3:1
§ 3-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMIT — A sign permit or building permit for the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or remodeling of any structure mentioned in § 3-5 hereof.
§ 3-3. Qualification for membership. [Amended 3-31-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993;
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 4-22-2003 by L.L. No. 12-2003]
All members of the Board of Architectural Review shall be specially qualified either by
reason of training or experience in architecture, land development, city planning, real
estate, landscape architecture, professional property values or other relevant business or
profession or by reason of civic interest and sound judgment, to judge the effects of
a proposed building or alteration or remodeling thereof upon the property values and
development of surrounding areas. At least one regular member shall be a registered
architect in the State of New York.
§ 3-4. Meetings, minutes, rules and regulations of Board.
Meetings of the Board of Architectural Review shall be held monthly or at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as a majority of the Board shall determine, but shall
be held within 30 days of the date of the referral of any application for a building permit
referred to the Board as required in § 3-5. A majority of said Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact and shall also keep copies of its examinations and other official
actions. The Board shall have power from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal rules
and regulations not inconsistent with law or the provisions of this chapter governing its
procedure and the transaction of its business and for the purpose of carrying into effect
the standards outlined in § 3-6 hereof.
§ 3-5. Building permit applications.
A. Every application for a permit for any structure other than a one- or two-family
house or interior modifications to any structure which does not otherwise require
site plan approval or a variance or result in an increase in the number tenants shall
be referred to each member of the Board of Architectural Review within seven days
of the date of application, provided that it conforms in other respects to all other
applicable laws and ordinances.
B. Applications must be accompanied by plans showing all elevations of new
structures and all affected elevations in the case of additions, alterations or
remodeling and such details as to elements of design, exterior materials and
treatments, roof design, exposed mechanical equipment, service and storage areas,
retaining walls, landscaping, signs, awnings, lightposts, parking areas and fences,
service and loading areas and such other information as the Board of Architectural
Review may require. When the applicant is required by any other local law or
ordinance to submit plans for approval, the applicant shall supply the same plans to
the Board of Architectural Review. The Board may also require photographs of all
buildings within 250 feet of the proposed structure, addition, alteration or
§ 3-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 3-5
3:2
§ 3-6. Conditions for approval of application.
remodeling.
A. Approval of any application shall be by a vote of at least a majority of the members
of the Board of Architectural Review.
B. In considering an application for a permit, the Board shall take into account natural
features of the site and surroundings, exterior design and appearance of existing
structures and the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular
purposes, with a view to conserving the values of and encouraging the most
appropriate use of the land.
C. The Board may approve an application referred to it upon finding that the building
or structure for which the permit was requested, if erected or altered in accordance
with the submitted plan, would be in harmony with the purpose of this chapter,
would not be visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality of
exterior design, monotonous similarity or visual discord, including color, in relation
to the site or its surroundings, would not mar the appearance of the area, would not
impair the use, enjoyment and desirability and reduce the values of properties in the
area, would not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood, would not
prevent an appropriate development and utilization of the site or of adjacent lands
and would not adversely affect the functioning economic stability, prosperity,
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
D. In approving any application, the Board may impose appropriate conditions and
safeguards designed to prevent the harmful effects set forth in § 3-1. Such
conditions and safeguards may include screening, planting, fencing or other
methods of keeping from view obviously unsightly features of such buildings or
structures. The Board of Architectural Review shall have the authority to modify or
omit standardized facades, signs, materials, colors or other elements of the
business's design and external appearance which violate the provisions of the
Town's Sign Ordinance and/or so as to achieve the Town's land use and design
objectives. Except that, if site plan approval is required, the Board shall act in an
advisory capacity only, with regard to elements of design and screening reviewed
by the Planning Board, as is more fully set forth in § 3-7 of this chapter. [Amended
3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
E. If the Town Board shall adopt an official design for any portion of any district or
districts established by Chapter 240, Zoning, no building or structure shall be
approved by the Board of Architectural Review unless it shall conform to such
official design.
F. The Board may disapprove any application for a permit, provided that the Board
has afforded the applicant an opportunity for suggestions for change of the plans,
and provided that the Board finds and states that the building or structure for which
the permit was requested would, if erected, altered or remodeled as indicated,
provoke one or more of the harmful effects set forth in § 3-1 by reason of:
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(1) Striking dissimilarity, visual discord or inappropriateness with respect to other
§ 3-5 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW, BOARD OF § 3-6
3:3
§ 3-7. Site plan, variances and special permits.
If any person files an application for site plan approval, variances or a special permit,
the Board of Architectural Review shall require that plans and such other information set
forth in this chapter, as it deems necessary, for all buildings or structures on such site, be
presented to it before a hearing is held on an application for site plan approval, variances
or special permit. The Board of Architectural Review shall act in an advisory capacity
to the Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals on any elements of design
contained in Chapter 177, Site Plan Review, § 177-5, and as to conditions to be set by the
Zoning Board of Appeals and for Planning Board which would otherwise fall under the
authority of the Board of Architectural Review. Approval by the Planning Board of a site
plan or a special permit or approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals of variances shall
not negate the requirements of approval by the Board of Architectural Review, as to the
design items set forth in this chapter which are not otherwise delegated to the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Appeals, prior to the issuance of any building permit. To the
extent that it is practical, the review by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals
and the review of the Board of Architectural Review shall be concurrent. In instances
where the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals do not follow the advisory
recommendations of the Board of Architectural Review, the findings of the Planning
Board and/or Zoning Board of Appeals shall specify the reasons for not applying the
Board of Architectural Review's recommendations.
§ 3-8. Advisory powers.
The Board of Architectural Review shall advise with respect to public buildings and such
other matters as the Town Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Board
business or commercial structures located or proposed to be located on the
same street or a corner thereof, in respect to one or more of the following
features of exterior design and appearance:
(a) Facade, including color.
(b) Size and arrangement of doors, windows, porticos or other openings,
breaks or extensions in the facade.
(c) Cubic content and gross floor area.
(d) Other significant design features, such as but not limited to heights,
widths and lengths of elements of design, exterior materials and
treatments, roof design, exposed mechanical equipment, service and
storage areas, retaining walls, landscaping, signs, lightposts, parking
areas and fences, service and loading areas.
(2) Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of exterior design, including, with
respect to signs, considerations of the harmony or discord of colors or
incompatibility of the proposed building or structure with the terrain on which
it is to be located, including but not limited to excessive divergences of the
height of levels of any part of the structure from the grade of the terrain.
G. The Board of Architectural Review's written findings shall be filed with the Town
Clerk within 10 days of the Board of Architectural Review's decision.
§ 3-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 3-8
3:4
may refer to it or as may be granted it pursuant to other local laws or ordinances.
§ 3-9. Approval of application upon failure to act.
No building permit shall be issued if the Board of Architectural Review does not approve
the application. If the Board of Architectural Review shall fail to approve or disapprove
any application referred to it under § 3-5A within 45 days of the date of referral of
such application to it, the application shall be deemed to have been approved unless the
applicant shall have agreed to an extension of time.
§ 3-10. Appeals. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the Board of Architectural Review in
disapproving a building permit application, and of the Building Inspector or the Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration in denying such permit
because of such disapproval, may request the Board to make formal findings of fact
within 15 days after the request is filed in the Town Clerk's office, shall thereafter
provide the applicant with an opportunity to answer the findings by the submission of
formal proof and shall within 30 days after the answer is filed reconsider the application
on the basis of such answer. If the application is disapproved after such reconsideration,
the applicant may appeal directly from such action of the Board of Architectural Review
to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the
decision of the Board of Architectural Review has been filed in the office of the Town
Clerk. If the appeal is dismissed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the applicant may
bring a proceeding to review in the manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules in the Supreme Court. Such proceeding must commence within 30 days
after the filing in the office of the Town Clerk of the decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 3-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Any person or corporation, including but not limited to the owner, lessee, architect or
builder or the agent or employee of any of them, who violates or is accessory to the
violation of any provision of this chapter or any regulation made under the authority
conferred by this chapter, or who shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, enlarge,
convert or move any building or structure without a building permit or in violation
of any statement or plans submitted and approved and under the provisions of this
chapter, or who shall use any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter
or any regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter or in violation of
the provisions of any building permit or certificate of occupancy, or without a building
permit or certificate of occupancy where one is required by this chapter, shall be liable,
upon conviction, to a fine of up to $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both, for each offense, and each and every day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall serve or mail notice of any violation
of this chapter to the last known address of the owner of such property as shown on the
official assessment rolls or to the person or corporation committing or permitting the
same. In addition, the Inspector shall report all violations to the Town Board. Nothing
§ 3-8 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW, BOARD OF § 3-11
3:5
in this chapter shall be construed as depriving the Town or the Town Board of any other
available remedy, either of a civil or criminal nature, as provided by law.
§ 3-12. Public hearings.
The Board of Architectural Review shall hold a public hearing on every application
made to it, notice of which hearing and the substance of which application shall be given
by publication in the official newspaper of the Town at least five days before the date
of such hearing and by such other notice as the Board of Architectural Review, by duly
adopted rule, shall require.
§ 3-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 3-12
3:6
Chapter 5
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Architectural Review — See Ch. 3.
Coastal Zone Management Commission — See Ch. 8.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26, Art. I.
Removal from office — See Ch. 35.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 45.
Planning Board — See Ch. 240, Art. XV.
§ 5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reorganize the Code by placing in one chapter the
names and organizational features of all standing boards, commissions, authorities and
committees whose members are appointed solely by the Town Board. This chapter does
not list those municipal bodies which, though serving the Town of Mamaroneck, have
members who are appointed by the Town Board and by the Board of Trustees of either
the Village of Larchmont or the Village of Mamaroneck, or both or are appointed by the
Town Board based upon the recommendation of the Trustees of either or both of those
two villages.
§ 5-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, wherever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have these meanings:
MEMBER — A person serving on any of the boards, commissions, authorities and
committees listed in this chapter.
RESIDENT — A person who has a home that is either in:
§ 5-3. General provisions.
A part of the Town of Mamaroneck lying outside the limits of both the Village of
Mamaroneck and the Village of Larchmont;
A.
A part of the incorporated limits of the Village of Mamaroneck that is also part of
the Town of Mamaroneck; or
B.
C. The incorporated area of the Village of Larchmont.
A. Except for current members of the Sustainability Collaborative, all members shall
be residents. [Amended 2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
B. Except for the members of the Board of Assessment Review, all members shall
serve without compensation.
§ 3-12 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND § 5-3
5:1
§ 5-4. Beautification Committee.
§ 5-5. Board of Appeals. [Added by L.L. No. 14-2003]
C. A member shall continue to serve after the expiration of that member's term until
the successor to that position is appointed and qualifies to serve.
D. A member appointed to the position of chairperson shall continue to serve as
chairperson after the expiration of that member's term as chairperson until a
successor chairperson is appointed.
E. The Town Board shall appoint persons to fill vacancies that may occur among
members. A person so appointed shall serve the unexpired term of the member
whose position becomes vacant.
F. Each board, commission, authority and committee shall keep a record of its
meetings and of all actions taken.
A. The Beautification Committee, previously established by the Town Board, shall
continue to exist. It shall consist of seven members. The members shall be known
as Member A, Member B, Member C, Member D, Member E, Member F and
Member G. All of the members shall be appointed by the Town Board. Annually,
the Town Board shall designate which of the members shall serve as the
Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-4D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be three
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A and Member B shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C and Member D shall expire on December 31, 2004; and
(3) Member E, Member F and Member G shall expire on December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31st on which that person's term was scheduled to expire
even though the person shall have served less than three years.
A. The Board of Appeals, previously established by the Town Board, shall continue to
exist. It shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members. The
members shall be known as Member A, Member B, Member C, Member D,
Member E, Alternate Member A and Alternate Member B. All of the members shall
be appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town Board shall designate which
of the members shall serve as the Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
§ 5-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 5-5
5:2
§ 5-6. Board of Architectural Review.
provided in § 5-5D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be five
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A and Member B shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C and Member D shall expire on December 31, 2004; and
(3) Member E, Alternate Member A and Alternate Member B shall expire on
December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31st on which that person's term was scheduled to expire
even though that person shall have served less than five years.
A. The Board of Architectural Review, previously established by the Town Board,
shall continue to exist. It shall consist of five regular members and one alternate
member. The members shall be known as Member A, Member B, Member C,
Member D, Member E and the Alternate Member. All of the members shall be
appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town Board shall designate which of
the members shall serve as the Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-6D of the Code, the term of office of each regular member and the
alternate member shall be three years and shall expire on the 31st day of December
of the year in which the term expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A and Member B shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C and Member D shall expire on December 31, 2004; and
(3) Member E and the Alternate Member shall expire on December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a regular member or an alternate member
after January 1 of the year in which the term of that person's office was scheduled
to begin, that person's term shall expire on the December 31st on which that
person's term was scheduled to expire even though that person shall have served
less than three years.
E. The alternate member shall attend and participate in the meetings of the Board,
including the Board's deliberations, but shall not vote, except in the absence of one
or more of the regular members of the Board, in which case the alternate member
§ 5-5 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND § 5-6
5:3
§ 5-7. Board of Assessment Review. [Amended 6-1-2005 by L.L. No. 11-2005;
5-4-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011; 6-13-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
shall have the same authority to vote on a matter as any other member. When one
or more of the regular members is absent, the alternate member, if present, shall be
counted in determining whether a quorum exists.
A. Portions of § 523 (1) (b) and (c) of the New York Real Property Tax Law hereby
are superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized
words are new matter added thereto. Section 523 (1) (b) and (c) of the New York
Real Property Tax Law, as superseded below, shall apply in the Town of
Mamaroneck.
“Section 523
1. (b) The board of assessment review shall consist of not less than three nor
more than five members appointed by the [legislative body of the local
government or village] Town Board. The Town Board also may appoint up to
two alternates. The alternates shall substitute for a member if such member
is absent or is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest. When
an alternate sits in the place of a member, the alternate shall be considered
a member for all purposes. The alternates shall not be counted for the
purpose of determining whether a quorum exists except in situations where
an alternate substitutes for a member. Members and alternates shall have
a knowledge of property values in the [local government or village] Town
(including its incorporated areas). Neither the assessor nor any member of
his or her staff may be appointed to the board of assessment review or be
appointed an alternate. A majority of such board shall consist of [members]
persons who are not officers or employees of the [local government or
village] Town.
(c) Except as modified by the last sentence of this section, the terms of office
of members of the board of assessment review and of the alternates shall be
five years and shall commence on the first day of October and terminate on
the thirtieth day of September, five years thereafter. [In the case of the first
board appointed under the provisions of this title, however, the terms shall
be of such length that not more than one will expire in each of the first five
years after the members of such board are appointed.] In order to provide for
an orderly succession and to preserve an ‘institutional memory,’ the terms of
each member shall expire in different years."
B. The Board of Assessment Review, previously established by the Town Board, shall
continue to exist. It shall consist of five members. It also shall have two alternates.
The members shall be known as "Member A," "Member B," "Member C,"
"Member D" and "Member E." The alternates shall be known as "Alternate One"
and "Alternate Two." In accordance with § 523(1)(e) of the New York Real
Property Tax Law, annually the members of the Board of Assessment Review shall
designate which of them shall serve as the Chairperson for that year.
C. Except as modified in § 5-7D of the Code, the term of office of each member and
each alternate shall be five years and shall expire on the 30th day of September of
§ 5-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 5-7
5:4
§ 5-8. Board of Ethics.
§ 5-9. Sustainability Collaborative.2 [Added 2-4-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
the year in which the term expires.
D. The term of office of:
(1) Member A shall expire on September 30, 2013;
(2) Member B shall expire on September 30, 2014;
(3) Member C shall expire on September 30, 2015;
(4) Member D shall expire on September 30, 2011;
(5) Member E shall expire on September 30, 2012;
(6) Alternate One shall expire on September 30, 2012; and
(7) Alternate Two shall expire on September 30, 2013.
E. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member or an alternate after October 1 of
the year in which the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that
person's term shall expire on September 30th in the year in which that person's term
is scheduled to expire even though the person shall have served less than five years.
A. The Board of Ethics, previously established by the Town Board, shall continue to
exist. It shall consist of five members. The members shall be known as Member A,
Member B, Member C, Member D and Member E. All of the members shall be
appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town Board shall designate which of
them shall serve as the Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-8D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be three
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A and Member B shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C and Member D shall expire on December 31, 2004; and
(3) Member E shall expire on December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31st on which that person's term is scheduled to expire
even though the person shall have served less than three years.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 5-9, Historic Records Committee, was repealed 2-15-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 5-7 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND § 5-9
5:5
§ 5-10. Planning Board. [Added by L.L. No. 14-2003; amended 2-28-2018 by L.L.
No. 2-2018]
A. The Sustainability Collaborative shall consist of up to 10 members. The members
shall be known as "Member A," "Member B," "Member C," "Member D,"
"Member E," "Member F," "Member G," "Member H," "Member I" and "Member
J." All of the members shall be appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town
Board shall designate which of the members shall serve as the Chairperson for that
year. If at any time there are fewer than 10 members who have been appointed to
the Sustainability Collaborative, the "whole number" (as that term is defined in NY
General Construction Law § 41) shall mean the total number of members who have
been appointed to the Sustainability Collaborative.
B. Except for persons appointed in 2015, and except as provided in § 5-9D of the
Code, the terms of office of each member shall be three years and shall expire on
the 31st day of December of the year in which the term expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed in 2015 shall commence on the date
selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the appointment, but the term
of office of:
(1) Member A, Member B and Member C shall expire on December 31, 2015,
(2) Member D, Member E and Member F shall expire on December 31, 2016, and
(3) Member G, Member H, Member I and Member J shall expire on December
31, 2017.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31 on which that person's term was scheduled to expire
even though that person shall have served less than three years.
A. The Planning Board, previously established by the Town Board, shall continue to
exist. It shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members. The
members shall be known as Member A, Member B, Member C, Member D,
Member E, Alternate Member 1 and the Alternate Member 2. All of the members
shall be appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town Board shall designate
which of the members shall serve as the Chairperson and as the Vice Chairperson
for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed or reappointed to the Planning Board in 2018 and
except as provided in § 5-10D of the Code, the term of each member shall be five
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed in 2018 shall commence on the date that
the Town Board appoints that person to the Planning Board and shall expire in
accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Member A's term and Alternate Member 1's term shall expire on December
31, 2018.
§ 5-9 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 5-10
5:6
§ 5-11. Recreation Commission. [Added by L.L. No. 14-2003]
§ 5-12. Town of Mamaroneck Housing Authority.
(2) Member B's term and Alternate Member 2's term shall expire on December
31, 2019.
(3) Member C's term shall expire on December 31, 2020.
(4) Member D's term shall expire on December 31, 2021.
(5) Member E's term shall expire on December 31, 2022.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
that person's term began, that person's term shall expire on the 31st day of
December of the year when that person's term expires even if that person will have
served less than five years or the length of time associated with that member's term
pursuant to § 5-10C.
A. The Recreation Commission, previously established by the Town Board, shall
continue to exist. It shall consist of seven members. The members shall be known
as Member A, Member B, Member C, Member D, Member E, Member F, and
Member G. All of the members shall be appointed by the Town Board. In
accordance with § 244 of the New York General Municipal Law, annually the
members of the Recreation Commission shall designate which of the members shall
serve as the Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-11D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be seven
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A, Member B and Member C shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member D, Member E and Member F shall expire on December 31, 2004; and
(3) Member G shall expire on December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31st on which that person's term was scheduled to expire
even though that person shall have served less than seven years.
A. The Town of Mamaroneck Housing Authority, established by § 569 of the New
York Public Housing Law, shall consist of five members. The five members shall
be known as Member A, Member C, Member E, Member H and Member I. All of
the members shall be appointed by the Town Board. In accordance with § 32(1) of
the New York Public Housing Law, annually the members of the Town of
Mamaroneck Housing Authority shall designate which of them shall serve as the
§ 5-10 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND § 5-12
5:7
§ 5-13. Traffic Committee.
Chairperson and which shall serve as the Vice Chairperson.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-12D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be five
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C shall expire on December 31, 2004;
(3) Member E shall expire on December 31, 2005;
(4) Member H shall expire on December 31, 2006; and
(5) Member I shall expire on December 31, 2007.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a member after January 1 of the year in which
the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term shall
expire on the December 31st on which that person's term is scheduled to expire
even though the person shall have served less than five years.
A. The Traffic Committee, previously established by the Town Board, shall continue
to exist. It shall consist of seven members. The members shall be known as Member
A, Member B, Member C, Member D, Member E, Member F and Member G. All
of the members shall be appointed by the Town Board. Annually, the Town Board
shall designate which of the members shall serve as Chairperson for that year.
B. Except for persons appointed on or before September 1, 2003, and except as
provided in § 5-13D of the Code, the term of office of each member shall be three
years and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which the term
expires.
C. The term of office of a member appointed on or before September 1, 2003, shall
commence on the date selected by the Town Board in its resolution making the
appointment, but the term of office of:
(1) Member A and Member B shall expire on December 31, 2003;
(2) Member C and Member D shall expire on December 31, 2004;
(3) Member E, Member F and Member G shall expire on December 31, 2005.
D. If a person is appointed or qualifies as a citizen member after January 1 of the year
in which the term of that person's office was scheduled to begin, that person's term
shall expire on the December 31st on which that person's term is scheduled to
expire even though the person shall have served less than three years.
§ 5-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 5-14
5:8
§ 5-14. Tree Preservation Commission. [Amended 5-18-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Tree Preservation Commission, previously established by the Town Board, shall
continue to exist. It shall consist of three members, who shall be the Environmental
Coordinator, the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration,
or if that position is vacant, the Building Inspector, and the Superintendent of Highways
(or the Superintendent's designee). Annually, the Town Board shall designate which of
the members shall serve as the Chairperson for that year.
§ 5-14 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND § 5-14
5:9

Chapter 8
COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 8-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to further the common interests of the Town of
Mamaroneck and the Village of Larchmont and the coastal zone by establishing a
Coastal Zone Management Commission to monitor and coordinate the implementation
of the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Town of Mamaroneck and the
Village of Larchmont.
§ 8-2. Establishment; organization.
A. The Coastal Zone Management Commission shall be a bimunicipal commission
established and appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck3 and the
Village Board of the Village of Larchmont.
B. The Commission shall consist of 11 members, five of whom are appointed by the
Village of Larchmont Village Board and five of whom are appointed by the Town
of Mamaroneck Town Board. The 11th member, who shall be the Chair, shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the Village of Larchmont and the Supervisor of the
Town of Mamaroneck.
C. The term of office of Commission members shall be for a period of three years,
except the Chair, who shall be appointed for a one-year term. However, the first
Commission shall consist of three members appointed for three years, four
members appointed for two years and four members appointed for one year.
D. Each member appointed by the village shall be a resident of the village, and each
member appointed by the Town shall be a resident of the unincorporated area of the
Town, with the Chair residing in either the village or the Town. Members shall be
chosen for their demonstrated knowledge, ability and readiness to serve the
Commission in the functions described in this chapter and with due regard for
maintaining among the membership a range of special aptitudes and expertise in
areas relevant to the work of the Commission.
E. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
3. Editor's Note: By resolution adopted 8-6-1986, the Town Board established the Coastal Zone Management
Commission.
§ 5-14 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION § 8-3
8:1
§ 8-3. Expenses.
The Commission, subject to prior budget appropriations by each municipality, may incur
necessary expenses for the carrying out of its duties, the costs to be borne equally by the
municipalities.
§ 8-4. Meetings. [Amended 1-22-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 8-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall monitor and coordinate the implementation of the Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program, its policies and projects, and in furtherance thereof
it shall:
A. The Commission shall normally hold its regular meetings at no more than onemonth
intervals; however, the Chair may call a special meeting of the Commission
by giving at least seven days' notice in writing to the other members of the time and
place where the special meeting will be held.
B. Notice of each of the Commission's regular meetings shall be posted by the Town
Clerk on the signboard which the Town Clerk is required to maintain pursuant to
§ 30(6) of the New York Town Law no less than seven days prior to the date of that
meeting. Notice of any special meeting of the Commission shall be posted by the
Town Clerk on that same signboard no less than four days prior to the date of that
meeting.
C. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary to record the minutes of its meetings,
copies of which shall be filed with the Village Clerk and the Town Clerk for
distribution to the public upon request.
A. Advise the two municipal governments on implementation priorities, work
assignments, timetables and budgetary requirements for the implementation of the
program.
B. Consult with the appropriate agencies, boards, commissions, departments and staff
of the two municipalities and, where appropriate, render opinions on proposed
actions in order to ensure implementation of the program and consistency of their
actions with the program.
C. Maintain a liaison with related municipal bodies, including but not limited to the
Town and Village Planning and Zoning Boards and the Conservation Advisory
Commission, and with appropriate civic groups to ensure the implementation of the
program.
D. Monitor and, where appropriate, recommend action by the Town and/or village
with regard to planned actions by state or federal agencies within the coastal zone
in order to ensure consistency with the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
E. Subject to approval of the Town and/or village, make application for appropriate
funding or other assistance in furtherance of projects under the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program.
F. Develop and maintain a liaison with neighboring municipalities and with state and
§ 8-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 8-5
8:2
§ 8-6. Limitations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or of the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program, no powers, duties or functions are conferred by it on the Coastal
Zone Management Commission other than those set forth herein, and no provisions
of the program shall be construed as altering or diminishing the powers, duties and
functions of the existing Municipal Planning and Zoning Boards or any other agency,
commission or committee of the Village of Larchmont or the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 8-7. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon the appointment of 11 members to the
Commission as provided for in this chapter.
county governments with a view towards strengthening and developing cooperation
in and common management of shared drainage basins for flood control and other
purposes.
G. Make an annual report, in addition to such other reports as the Commission may,
from time to time, feel are necessary, to the Town Board and the Village Board on
the activities of the Commission, progress achieved and problems encountered
during the year and recommendations on such actions as the Commission considers
necessary for the further implementation of the Local Waterfront Revitalization
Plan.
H. Make and prepare, subject to the approval of the Town Board and the Village
Board, such reports and communications concerning the program to the Department
of State and other agencies of the State of New York and County of Westchester
and to other municipalities by or on behalf of the two municipal governments as
may be appropriate or required.
I. Perform such other functions with regard to the Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program and the coastal zone as may, from time to time, be assigned by the Town
Board and Village Board.
§ 8-5 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION § 8-7
8:3

Chapter 12
(RESERVED)
§ 8-7 (RESERVED) § 8-7
12:1

Chapter 17
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 5. Officers and employees — See Ch. 26.
§ 8-7 ETHICS § 8-7
17:1

ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
[Adopted 7-8-1970 by L.L. No. 3-1970; amended in its entirety 4-3-1991 by L.L.
No. 2-1991 (Ch. 24 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 17-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck recognizes that there are state statutory
provisions mandating Towns to codify rules and standards of ethical conduct for
employees and persons engaged in business with the Town which, when implemented
and adhered to, will further enhance public confidence in local government. It is the
purpose of this article to comply with state law, to create a Board of Ethics, to establish
standards of conduct for employees, to prescribe certain disclosure by employees and
persons engaged in business with the Town and to set forth functions of the Board of
Ethics.
§ 17-2. Provisions implementing state law.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established by this article are promulgated
in addition to any provisions prescribed by the State of New York and administrative
rulings, common law rules and judicial decisions relating to the conduct of employees
and not in derogation thereof.
§ 17-3. Board of Ethics. [Amended 7-2-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997; 4-22-2003 by L.L.
No. 12-2003]
A majority of the members of the Board of Ethics shall be persons other than Town
employees but shall include only one member who is an elected or appointed Town
employee. There shall be no more than three members who are enrolled in the same
political party as defined in the Election Law of the State of New York.
§ 17-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE — Each officer, volunteer or employee of the Town of Mamaroneck,
whether paid or unpaid, whether elected or appointed, whether serving in a full-time,
probationary or permanent part-time or advisory capacity. Volunteers whose
responsibilities do not give rise to possible violations of these rules shall not be
considered "employees" for the purpose of this article. The Town Board shall determine
which volunteers shall be considered "employees" for this purpose.[Amended
3-20-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
SENSITIVE POSITION — The following positions entail potential conflicts of interest
and are deemed to be sensitive positions:[Amended 6-21-2000 by L.L. No. 8-2000;
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002; 11-20-2002 by L.L. No. 11-2002; 12-20-2005 by
L.L. No. 18-2005; 11-3-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010; 1-18-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012;
12-16-2015 by L.L. No. 10-2015]
Alternate member of the:
(1) Board of Appeals.
A.
§ 17-1 ETHICS § 17-4
17:3
(2) Board of Architectural Review.
(3) Board of Assessment Review.
(4) Planning Board.
B. Ambulance District Administrator.
C. Assessor.
D. Assistant Building Inspector.
E. Assistant to the Town Administrator.
F. Assistant Town Administrator.
G. Assistant Town Superintendent of Highways.
H. Building Inspector.
I. Confidential Secretary to the Town Supervisor.
J. Consulting Engineer.
Counsel to the:
(1) Board of Appeals.
(2) Planning Board.
(3) Town.
K.
L. Court Clerk.
M. Deputy Fire Chief.
N. Deputy Town Administrator. [Added 3-20-2019 by L.L. No. 2-20194]
O. Deputy Town Assessor.
P. Deputy Town Comptroller.
Q. Deputy Receiver of Taxes.
R. Deputy Town Supervisor.
S. Deputy Town Clerk.
T. Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
U. Director, Section 8 Rental Assistance Program.
V. Environmental Coordinator.
W. Environmental Planner.
4. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsections N through QQ as Subsections O through RR,
respectively.
§ 17-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 17-4
17:4
TOWN — Any board, commission, district, council, court or other agency, department,
unit or subdivision of the government of the Town of Mamaroneck.
X. Fire Chief.
Y. Fire Inspector.
Z. General Foreman.
AA. Junior Civil Engineer.
Member of the: [Amended 3-3-2021 by L.L. No. 3-2021]
(1) Board of Appeals.
(2) Board of Architectural Review.
(3) Board of Assessment Review.
(4) Board of Ethics.
(5) Town of Mamaroneck Housing Authority.
(6) Planning Board.
(7) Town Board.
BB.
CC. Police Chief.
DD. Real Property Appraiser.
EE. Receiver of Taxes.
FF. Record Officer/Police Department.
GG. Senior Civil Engineer.
HH. Senior Engineering Aide.
II. Senior Typist/Police Department.
JJ. Superintendent of Highways.
KK. Superintendent of Recreation.
LL. Technical Support Specialist (aka IT Director and Webmaster).
MM.Town Administrator.
NN. Town Clerk.
OO. Town Comptroller.
PP. Town Engineer.
QQ. Town Justice.
RR. Town Prosecutor.
§ 17-4 ETHICS § 17-5
17:5
§ 17-5. Standards of conduct for employees.
Each employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct that will avoid not only
an actual conflict of interest but also the appearance of a conflict of interest, and each
employee shall avoid engaging in any acts that would violate his/her public trust.
A. Conflicts of interest.
(1) No employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect,
or engage in any business, service, transaction or professional activity or incur
any obligation of any nature that is or might reasonably appear to be in conflict
with the proper and impartial discharge of his/her public duties.
(2) No employee shall engage in any transaction as a representative or agent of the
Town with any business entity in which he/she has a direct or indirect interest,
financial or otherwise, if such transaction will conflict or would reasonably
appear to conflict with the proper and impartial discharge of his/her public
duties.
(3) No employee shall solicit, negotiate for, accept or promise to accept
employment by any person, firm or corporation with which the employee or
his/her department is engaged in the transaction of business on behalf of the
Town and which might reasonably appear to affect or impair his/her
independence of judgment in the exercise of official duties.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a) an employee may be
compensated by the Town for services which the employee performs for the
Town; and b) a business, by which the employee is employed or in which the
employee or his/her spouse, parent or child has an interest, may be
compensated by the Town for services which such business performs for the
Town; provided that such employee or business follows the protocols
contained in the Town's Administrative Manual promulgated by the Town
Administrator. For the purpose of the preceding sentence, the term "Town"
includes the Town's departments, boards, commissions, authorities and
agencies. [Added 1-18-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
B. Improper conduct.
(1) No employee shall, except in the performance of his/her duties, use or attempt
to use his/her official position to secure or deny privileges, benefits or
exemptions for himself/herself or others nor shall an employee act so that a
reasonable person might conclude that the employee intended to use his/her
official position to secure or deny privileges, benefits or exemptions for
himself/herself or others or that any person could improperly influence him/
her in the performance of his/her official duties by offering the employee a
privilege, benefit or exemption.
(2) No employee, in the performance of his/her official duties, shall give any
special consideration, treatment, favor or advantage to any citizen beyond that
which is available to every other citizen.
C. Treatment of confidential information.
§ 17-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 17-5
17:6
(1) No employee shall disclose confidential information acquired by him/her in
the course of performing his/her public duties or use such information to
further his/her private interests or the private interests of any other person or
entity.
(2) No employee shall accept employment or engage in any business or
professional activity that will require him to disclose confidential information
that he/she has gained by reason of his/her official position or authority.
D. Use of Town property or employees.
(1) No employee shall direct or cause any other employee to do or perform any
service or work within the hours of employment by the Town where the
service or work is outside the scope of his/her official duties or employment
for the Town nor shall any Town employee perform such service or work.
(2) No employee shall request or permit the use of Town-owned vehicles,
equipment, materials or property for his/her own personal convenience or
profit other than for the use of the employee in the conduct of his/her official
duties.
E. Solicitation or acceptance of gifts and favors. No employee shall solicit or accept
any gift, favor or other thing of value, irrespective of form, either directly or
indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation which the employee has a
reasonable basis to believe is interested, directly or indirectly, in any matter or
business dealing with the Town and under circumstances in which a reasonable
person could infer that the gift or favor was intended to influence the employee in
the performance of his/her official duties.
F. Prohibited political activities. No paid employee or employee in a sensitive position
shall solicit, directly or indirectly, any contribution of money, property or service
for any Town political organization, campaign or candidate from a paid, nonelected
employee. No paid, nonelected employee shall make any such contribution.
G. Representation of private interests before the Town. No employee in a sensitive
position shall represent an interest in a matter, either in support or in opposition,
that is pending before the Town nor shall an employee in a sensitive position
represent any party other than the Town in litigation in which the Town is a party.
In this subsection, the term "employee" shall include any partner or employee of a
partnership or shareholder or employee of a personal service corporation which
represents such interest. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting
an employee from appearing before the Zoning Board on an application for a
variance concerning his/her personal residence or from participating as a litigant
against the Town.
H. Future employment. No employee, after the termination of his/her public service to
the Town, may represent a party or appear before the Town in connection with any
matter, case or application in which he/she personally participated during the period
of his/her Town service or which was pending or under consideration in the
department in which the employee worked at the time of his/her Town service and
of which the Town employee had personal knowledge. Employees in sensitive
positions may not appear before any authority, board, commission or committee of
§ 17-5 ETHICS § 17-5
17:7
§ 17-6. Disclosure.
the Town or the Justice Court of the Town on behalf of anyone, other than the
employee himself/herself or a member of that employee’s family, during the first
12 months after the employee no longer holds a sensitive position with the Town.
In this subsection, the term "employee" shall include any partner or employee of a
partnership or shareholder or an employee of a personal service corporation which
represents such party or appears in such matter. This provision does not apply to
investigations by the Town or court actions for which the employee might be asked
to serve as a witness regarding actions during his/her Town service. [Amended
4-13-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
I. Violations. [Amended 1-18-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(1) A charge for violating a provision of this article shall be brought by the Town
Administrator. If the charge is against the Town Administrator, such charge
shall be brought by the Supervisor.
(2) For employees entitled to be disciplined pursuant to the New York Civil
Service Law, a charge for violating a provision of this article shall be
adjudicated in accordance with the New York Civil Service Law. All other
such charges shall be heard by a person appointed by the Town Board who
shall report his/her findings to the Town Board.
(3) If the person conducting the hearing finds that the person charged violated a
provision of this article, that person shall recommend a form of punishment
which may be: i) a reprimand; ii) a fine not to exceed $100; iii) suspension,
without pay, for a period not to exceed two months; iv) demotion in grade and
title; or v) dismissal from service. Based upon the record developed at the
hearing, the Town Board may accept, reject or modify the hearing officer's
findings of fact and conclusion as to whether the person charged violated a
provision of this article. If the Town Board finds that the person charged did
violate a provision of this article, it either: i) shall impose the punishment
recommended by the hearing officer; or ii) shall impose one of the other
possible disciplines listed above.
A. Each employee in a sensitive position, on or before January 31 of each year, or if
not in such a position on that date, then within 30 days after assuming such a
position, and any employee requested at any time by the Board of Ethics to file a
disclosure statement shall file a disclosure statement setting forth his/her property
ownership in the Town and such information as to his/her employment and
financial interests as may be set forth in a form prescribed by the Board of Ethics.
The information requested of an employee may also include information about the
employee's spouse or other person to whom the employee is related or with whom
the employee has a business or financial relationship. Such form shall be filed with
the Town Clerk's office and shall be available for inspection by all persons upon
written request. Further information shall be filed by an employee in a sensitive
position when reasonably requested by the Board of Ethics at any time. The
employee shall promptly file a report of any change as to the information previously
filed.
§ 17-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 17-6
17:8
§ 17-7. Functions of the Board of Ethics.
B. On or before the date set forth in § 17-6A, each employee shall also file a statement
on the form prescribed by the Board of Ethics stating that he/she has read the Code
of Ethics and has not knowingly or willfully violated the Code of Ethics. [Amended
7-2-1997 by L.L. No. 10-1997]
C. Any employee who has a direct or indirect financial or other interest in any matter
before the Town Board and who participates in any discussion before or makes a
recommendation to or gives an opinion to the Town Board on that matter shall
publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of such interest.
D. Refusal by an employee to file a disclosure statement may be grounds for dismissal
from employment or for other disciplinary action.
E. Persons seeking to do business with the Town or engaged in business with the Town
must inform the Town, in writing, about any contribution of money, property or
service to any Town political organization, campaign or candidate. Failure of a
person making such a contribution to inform the Town about it will be grounds for
the Town's turning down a proposal for business or terminating existing business
with such person.
A. Disclosure procedure.
(1) Review of disclosure statements. The Board of Ethics shall review all
employee disclosure statements. It shall consider possible conflicts of interest
and render advisory opinions to the Town Board where conflicts of interest
may exist.
(2) Notification. An employee shall be notified by mail if the Board of Ethics
requires clarification or has questions about his/her disclosure statement or
intends to render an opinion that a conflict of interest may exist. The employee
shall have an opportunity to file a written responses to such communication
prior to the Board of Ethics' reporting a possible conflict of interest.
(3) Personal conference. A personal conference with an employee shall be held if
requested by the employee or by the Board of Ethics.
B. Advisory opinions.
(1) The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to employees upon their
written request and to the Town Board upon its written request.
(2) An advisory opinion rendered at the request of an employee asking about a
possible, prospective action or situation shall be confidential, and the identity
of the employee shall not be disclosed if no action is taken by the employee in
apparent violation of the code.
(3) An advisory opinion rendered at the request of the Town Board shall be filed
with the Town Board.
C. Violations. The Board of Ethics shall refer apparent violations to the Counsel to the
Town for appropriate action.
§ 17-6 ETHICS § 17-7
17:9
§ 17-8. Copies distributed to employees; posting. [Amended 11-3-2010 by L.L. No.
8-2010]
The Town Supervisor shall cause a copy of this article to be distributed to every Town
employee. Each employee shall acknowledge receipt of a copy of this article and affirm
that his/her compliance with its provisions is a condition of his/her employment or
elected position. The failure to distribute a copy of this article to any employee shall
not relieve that or any other employee from complying with this article. Nor shall such
failure curtail or limit the Town’s ability to enforce the provisions of this article. The
Town Clerk shall post a copy of this article conspicuously on the sign board which the
Town Clerk is required to affix on or near the main entrance to the Town Clerk’s office.
The failure to post this article shall have no effect on any employee’s duty to comply
with this article nor curtail or limit the Town’s ability to enforce its provisions.
§ 17-9. Copy to be filed.
Within 30 days of the adoption of this article, the Town Clerk shall file a copy thereof in
the office of the State Comptroller.
§ 17-10. Appropriation of funds.
The Town Board may appropriate necessary moneys from the general Town funds for
the maintenance of and for the personnel services to the Board of Ethics established
hereunder. The Board of Ethics may not, however, commit the expenditure of Town
moneys except within the appropriations provided by the Town Board.
D. Request for opinion of the Counsel to the Town. The Board of Ethics may consult
with and request the opinion of the Counsel to the Town.
E. Recommendations. Upon request of the Town Board, the Board of Ethics shall
make recommendations to the Town Board as to any amendments of this article.
F. Referral. The Board of Ethics may refer any matter within its jurisdiction to the
County Ethics Board.
G. Rules and regulations. The Board of Ethics, upon its formation, shall promulgate its
own rules and regulations as to its form and procedures, shall maintain appropriate
records of its opinions and proceedings and shall make such reports as it believes
useful.
§ 17-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 17-10
17:10
ARTICLE II
Disclosure Statement
[Adopted 7-16-1986]
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
pursuant to
Code of Ethics of the Town of Mamaroneck
(TO BE SIGNED BY EMPLOYEES LISTED
IN § 17-4 AND BY OTHERS REQUESTED
TO DO SO BY THE TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.)
I, _________________________________, holding the position of
__________________, within the Town of Mamaroneck, hereby make this statement
in accordance with the provisions of the Ethics Code of the Town of Mamaroneck.
1. I do not nor does a member of my immediate family nor, to my knowledge,
does a close business associate own any real property within the Town of
Mamaroneck other than a family residence except as follows: (If property
other than a family residence is owned, I am listing the owner, the location of
any such property owned, whether it is improved or unimproved, and if it is
unimproved, whether it is residential or commercial.)
2. I list below the name and address of any partnership, corporation, joint venture
or similar commercial enterprise which I or a member of my immediate
family or, to my knowledge, a close business associate is a partner, officer,
senior executive or shareholder, excluding any corporation, partnership or
other business venture in which I, such family member or business associate
have less than a five-percent interest:
3. I am listing any other holding, association, position or business enterprise
which I believe might in any way create a conflict of interest with regard to my
duties for the Town:
............
Witness:
............
ETHICS § 17-10
17:11

Chapter 26
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 17. Police Department — See Ch. 32.
§ 17-10 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 17-10
26:1

ARTICLE I
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 10-19-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983 (Ch. 53, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 26-1. Benefits conferred. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 18 of the Public Officers Law, as it may from time to time
be amended, the Town of Mamaroneck hereby confers upon its employees, as that term
is defined in said section, the benefits provided by said section, subject to the conditions
and limitations set forth therein.
§ 26-2. Town to be liable for costs.
The Town of Mamaroneck shall be liable for the costs incurred pursuant to § 18 of the
Public Officers Law and to § 26-1 of this Article.
§ 26-3. Purchase of liability insurance.
Pursuant to Subdivision 8 of said § 18, the Town of Mamaroneck shall purchase public
officers liability insurance with appropriate limits and coverage against any liability
assumed under this section to the extent that such insurance is available at reasonable
cost.
§ 26-3.1. Supplemental defense and indemnification. [Added 1-6-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless the context otherwise requires:
TOWN — The Town of Mamaroneck, its departments and agencies
EMPLOYEE — Any commissioner, member of a public board or commission,
trustee, director, officer, employee, volunteer expressly authorized to participate in
a publicly sponsored volunteer program or any other person holding a position by
election, appointment or employment in the service of the Town, whether or not
compensated. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his/her estate
or judicially appointed personal representative.
B. Supplemental defense. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of
Subsection D of this section, the Town shall provide for the defense of the
employee in any civil administrative action or proceeding, state or federal, arising
out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly occurred while the
employee was acting within the scope of his/her public employment or duties. This
duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil administrative action
or proceeding is brought by or at the behest of the Town.
C. Supplemental indemnification.
(1) The Town shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of
any judgment obtained against such employees in a state or federal civil
administrative action or proceeding, or in the amount of any settlement of a
claim, provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or claim
§ 26-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-3.1
26:3
arose occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his/her
public employment or duties; provided, further, that, in the case of a
settlement, the duty to indemnify and save harmless shall be conditioned upon
the approval of the amount of settlement by the Town. The duty to indemnify
and save harmless prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or
damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing, maliciousness or recklessness
on the part of the employee.
(2) The Town shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of
any costs, attorney's fees, damages, fines or penalties which may be imposed
by reason of an adjudication that any employee, acting within the scope of his/
her public employment or duties, has, without willfulness or intent on his/her
part, violated a prior order, judgment, consent decree or stipulation of
settlement entered in any civil administrative action or proceeding of this state
of the United States.
(3) The Town shall also indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount
of any punitive damages in accordance with the following procedure and such
additional procedures as may be established by the Town Attorney as follows:
(a) Within 20 days of an employee's delivery of a summons, or complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading containing a demand for punitive
damages, the Town Attorney shall make findings and an initial
determination whether the employee should or should not be indemnified
against any punitive damages based upon the facts and circumstances
then known to the Town Attorney as follows:
[1] Whether the employee's actions were or were not within the scope
of his/her employment.
[2] Whether the employee's actions were or were not reckless,
malicious, grossly negligent or otherwise outside of the standards
required for employees holding comparable positions with the
Town.
[3] Whether the employee's actions were or were not made in good faith
in the best interest of the Town.
[4] Whether the employee did or did not willfully violate a clearly
established provision of law or Town policy.
(b) In the event that the Town Attorney is a named defendant in an action or
proceeding or cannot serve for any other reason, the Town Administrator
shall appoint another Town officer to serve instead of the Town Attorney
on the matter under review.
(c) In the event of a final judgment of punitive damages against the
employee, the employee shall serve copies of such judgment personally
or by certified or registered mail within 10 days of entry upon the Town
Attorney and upon the Town Clerk on behalf of the Town Board. The
Town Board shall meet as soon as practicable in executive session to
review, make findings, taking into consideration and giving weight to the
§ 26-3.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 26-3.1
26:4
initial and any additional findings made by Town Attorney (provided
that the employee did not formerly misrepresent or omit material facts
evidenced at trial), and determine if the following have been met and,
if so met, shall appropriate the funds necessary to pay such punitive
damages:
[1] The judgment of punitive damages based on an act or omission of an
employee acting within the scope of his/her employment.
[2] At the time of the action or omission giving rise to the liability, the
employee acted:
[a] Without recklessness;
[b] Without maliciousness;
[c] Without gross negligence; and
[d] Otherwise within the standards required for employees holding
comparable positions within the Town.
[3] At the time of the act or omission, the employee acted in good faith
and in the best interests of the Town.
[4] At the time of the act or omission, the employee did not willfully
violate a clearly established provision of law or Town policy.
(d) Deliberation, findings and determinations of the Town Attorney and
Town Board shall remain confidential.
D. The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this section shall
be conditioned upon:
(1) Delivery by the employee to the Town Counsel of a written request to provide
for his/her defense together with the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within 10 days after he/she is
served with such document.
(2) The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or
proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against the Town based
upon the same act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal.
E. The benefits of this section shall inure only to employees as defined herein and shall
not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party nor shall any provision of this
section be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision of the Workers'
Compensation Law.
F. This section shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to give notice
to the Town under § 10 of the Court of Claims Act, § 50-e of the General Municipal
Law or any provision of law.
G. The Town Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase
insurance from any insurance company created by or under the laws of this state, or
authorized by law to transact business in this state, against any liability imposed by
§ 26-3.1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-3.1
26:5
the provisions of this section, or to act as a self-insurer with respect thereto.
H. All payments made under the terms of this section, whether for insurance or
otherwise, shall be deemed to be for a public purpose and shall be audited and paid
in the same manner as other public charges.
I. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify
the rights or obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
J. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the provisions of this
section shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or
restrict any immunity to liability available to or conferred upon any unit, entity,
officer or employee of the Town by, in accordance with or by reason of any other
provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
K. Benefits accorded to employees under this section shall be in supplement to defense
or indemnification protection accorded the same employees by other enactment.
L. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance to held unconstitutional or invalid in whole or in part by any court,
such holding of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or impair any
other provision of this section or the application of any such provision to any other
person or circumstance.
M. This section shall apply to all actions or proceedings in which final judgment has
not yet been entered.
§ 26-3.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 26-3.1
26:6
ARTICLE II
Receiver of Taxes
[Adopted 11-21-1984 by L.L. No. 8-1984 (Ch. 53, Art. II, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 26-4. Purpose.
It has been determined by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck that it is
appropriate for the efficient and successful administration of the property, affairs and
government of the Town of Mamaroneck to have a Receiver of Taxes who is appointed
by the Town Board. Therefore, this article is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in
the Town under Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10.
§ 26-5. Duties and powers.
The Receiver of Taxes shall have such duties and authorities as are prescribed under the
Town Law of the State of New York and the Westchester County Tax Law.
§ 26-6. Appointment.
The Receiver of Taxes shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Board.
§ 26-7. Compensation.
The Receiver of Taxes shall receive such salary and other benefits as shall be determined
by the Town Board at the time of appointment and from time to time thereafter.
§ 26-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-7
26:7

ARTICLE III
Term of Town Clerk
[Adopted 9-5-1990 by L.L. No. 5-1990]
§ 26-8. Term to be four years.
The term of office of the elective Town Clerk of the Town of Mamaroneck shall be four
years. Such four-year term shall commence on the first day of January following the first
biennial Town election after the effective date of this article.
§ 26-9. Election of Clerk.
At the biennial Town election next following the effective date of this article and every
four years thereafter, the Town Clerk shall be elected for a term of four years.
§ 26-10. Effect on other legislation.
This chapter shall supersede, in its application to the Town of Mamaroneck, Town Law
§ 24, with respect to the term of office of the elective Town Clerk.
§ 26-11. Public approval.
This chapter shall be submitted for approval to the electors of the Town of Mamaroneck
at an election held not less than 60 days after its adoption.5
5. Editor's Note: This article was approved at referendum 11-6-1990.
§ 26-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-11
26:9

Chapter 32
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 26.
Summonses — See Ch. 40.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 45.
§ 26-11 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 26-11
32:1

ARTICLE I
Police Escort Service
[Adopted 10-16-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974 (Ch. 59, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 32-1. Escort service available.
The Police Department of the Town of Mamaroneck, New York, shall provide escort
service to any business or industry within its jurisdiction at the request of said business
or industry in the transportation of money or other valuables within the Town.
§ 32-2. Direction and scheduling. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
The service shall be provided as scheduled and directed by the Chief of Police.
§ 32-3. Fee. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
The fee to be paid to the Town of Mamaroneck for each such escort service shall be as set
forth in § A250-1. All fees for such escort service shall be paid to the Town Comptroller
of the Town of Mamaroneck, New York.
§ 32-4. Exemption.
The fee above stated for such escort service shall not apply to charitable or other not-forprofit
corporations or similar associations, for which such escort service there shall be
no charge.
§ 32-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 32-4
32:3

ARTICLE II
Administration
[Adopted 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 7-19956]
§ 32-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to provide for the efficient administration of the
Police Department of the Town.
§ 32-6. Board of Police Commissioners.
The Town Board hereby establishes a Board of Police Commissioners which shall
consist of the Town Board. The Supervisor shall Chair the Board of Police
Commissioners.
§ 32-7. Powers and duties of Board of Police Commissioners.
The Board of Police Commissioners shall have all of the powers and duties granted to
a Board of Police Commissioners under Chapter 104 of the Laws of 1936, as amended,
except to the extent those powers or duties are otherwise delegated to the Chief of Police
by this article.
§ 32-8. Powers of Chief of Police.
A. The Chief of Police shall hire, discipline and promote members of the Department,
establish departmental rules and regulations and be responsible for the day-to-day
operation of the Department, all subject to approval by the Board of Police
Commissioners and all other applicable laws governing such activities.
B. In carrying out the day-to-day operations of the Department, the Chief of Police
shall have reasonable discretion to take such actions as are necessary to ensure the
safe and efficient operation of the Department, in a manner consistent with accepted
police practices; provided, however, that fundamental policy changes, including
those which should properly be included in Department rules and regulations, shall
be subject to the restrictions contained in Subsection A of this section.
C. The Chief of Police shall periodically and not less than quarterly report to the Board
of Police Commissioners personally on the status of the Police Department and its
personnel.
D. Except as to the discipline of the Chief of Police, all formal departmental
disciplinary charges shall be brought by the Chief of Police, subject to the
requirements of applicable law. All such charges shall be heard by a hearing officer
appointed by the Board of Police Commissioners. In the case of discipline of the
Chief of Police, such charges shall be brought by the Board of Police
Commissioners and shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the Board of
Police Commissioners.
E. In all other instances, the Board of Police Commissioners shall be granted all the
6. Editor's Note: This local law repealed former Article II, Administration, adopted 10-3-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984, as
amended.
§ 32-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 32-8
32:5
§ 32-9. Inconsistencies with state law.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to supersede Chapter 104 of the Laws of 1936,
as amended, as it relates to the powers and duties of the Chief of Police and the Board
of Police Commissioners. The Town Board, pursuant to the authority granted to the
Town Board by the Municipal Home Rule Law, may supersede such a special act of the
legislature, and to the extent that such special act of the legislature is inconsistent with
this article, then Chapter 104 of the Laws of 1936, as amended, is hereby superseded.
§ 32-10. Applicability of other laws.
In all other respects, the Police Department of the Town of Mamaroneck shall be
governed by applicable law.
powers and duties granted to a Board of Police Commissioners under Chapter 104
of the Laws of 1936, as amended.
§ 32-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 32-10
32:6
Chapter 34
QUALITY OF LIFE LAWS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 34-1. Purpose. [Amended 11-1-2006 by L.L. No. 15-2006]
The Town of Mamaroneck has adopted numerous statutes designed to maintain the high
quality of life that the residents of the Town have always enjoyed. These laws protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the Town and its residents. To maintain such
standards requires vigilance and vigorous enforcement of these laws. The purpose of this
chapter is to grant the Town’s constables the authority to issue appearance tickets for
violations of the quality of life laws of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 34-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-1-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005; 11-1-2006 by L.L.
No. 15-2006; 3-7-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated below:
CONSTABLES — The persons serving in any of the following positions in the Town
of Mamaroneck: Assistant Building Inspector, Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer, Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration,
Environmental Coordinator, Environmental Planner, Fire Inspector, Parking
Enforcement Officer, police officer, Senior Engineer (Civil), Superintendent of
Highways and Deputy Superintendent of Highways (if such a position is
created).[Amended 11-19-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
QUALITY OF LIFE LAWS — The following chapters and sections of the Code
constitute the quality of life laws:
Chapters.
(1) Chapter 58, Animals.
(2) Chapter 77, Conservation Areas.
(3) Chapter 95, Erosion and Sediment Control.
(4) Chapter 108, Fire Safety Zones.
(5) Chapter 117, Garage Sales.
(6) Chapter 141, Noise.
Chapter 147, Parking Lots, Town-Owned.7 [Added 11-19-2014 by L.L. No.
6-20148]
(7)
(8) Chapter 148, Parks and Fields.
(9) Chapter 161, Property Maintenance.
A.
7. Editor's Note: Said chapter was repealed 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018. See now Ch. 219, Vehicles and Traffic, Art.
IV, Paid Parking.
8. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection A(7) through (14) as Subsection A(8) through (15),
respectively.
§ 32-10 QUALITY OF LIFE LAWS; ENFORCEMENT § 34-2
34:1
§ 34-3. Enforcement. [Amended 11-1-2006 by L.L. No. 15-2006]
The Town Board finds that the quality of life laws specifically protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the Town and its residents. Invoking the power given to it by
Paragraph 4(a) of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Town Board hereby
authorizes the constables of the Town to issue appearance tickets to anyone who a
constable has reasonable cause to believe has violated one or more of the quality of life
laws. That appearance ticket shall direct the person upon whom it is served to appear
in the Justice Court of the Town of Mamaroneck on the date and at the time of day
designated in the appearance ticket in connection with that person's alleged commission
of a violation of the quality of life law or laws identified in the appearance ticket.12
(10) Chapter 173, Sewers.
(11) Chapter 175, Signs.
(12) Chapter 183, Solid Waste.
(13) Chapter 207, Trees.
(14) Chapter 231, Water.
(15) Chapter 233, Waterfowl.
Sections.
(1) Section 106-49, Discharge compliance certificate required.
(2) Section 106-58.1, Duration and hours for mechanical rock removal.
(3) Section 187-13, Prompt removal of snow and ice.
(4) Section 219-1, restricting idling motor vehicles.9
B.
Local laws. [Added 11-19-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
(1) Local Law No. 2-2010, Residential parking system for Lester Place.10
Local Law No. 4-2014, Residential parking system for:11
(a) Washington Square;
(b) A section of North Chatsworth Avenue;
(c) New Jefferson Street; and
(d) Murray Avenue between Myrtle Boulevard and Leafy Lane.
(2)
C.
9. Editor's Note: See now § 219-23, Idling.
10. Editor's Note: Said local law was repealed 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018. See now § 219-61, Permit parking on Lester
Place.
11. Editor's Note: Said local law was repealed 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018. See now § 219-62, Permit parking on
Washington Square, New Jefferson Street, North Chatsworth Avenue and Murray Avenue.
12. Editor's Note: Former § 34-4, Form and content, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-1-2006 by
L.L. No. 15-2006.
§ 34-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 34-3
34:2
Chapter 35
REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Architectural Review — See Ch. 3.
Coastal Zone Management Commission — See Ch. 8.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 36.
§ 35-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Removal from Boards, Commissions, Council and
Committees of the Town of Mamaroneck."
§ 35-2. Intent.
The intent of the chapter is to specify the number of absences allowed before members of
boards, commissions, councils and committees of the Town of Mamaroneck are subject
to be removed.
§ 35-3. Absences.
Persons appointed to serve on boards, commissions, councils and committees of the
Town of Mamaroneck are subject to removal from office by reason of three unexplained
absences within a twelve-month period. Failure to notify the Chairman of the Board, etc.,
prior to the meeting shall be considered an unexplained absence.
§ 34-3 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE § 35-3
35:1

Chapter 36
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 26.
§ 36-1. Purpose; findings.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish residency requirements for appointed Town
officers and to supersede the requirements of Public Officers Law § 3 and any similar
residency requirements contained in Town Law to the extent that such requirements
pertain to residency of appointed Town officers. Public Officers Law § 3 provides that
Town officers shall reside within the Town. This law has been substantially amended
over the years to provide for exceptions for various municipalities and for all positions
within those municipalities; it therefore no longer has general applicability. These
amendments recognize that there is no longer the need to have qualified candidates for
appointment to Town office reside within the geographic confines of the Town and that it
is preferable to leave to the judgment of each municipal government whether a particular
candidate's residence will interfere with that individuals ability to properly perform the
functions of a particular position.
§ 36-2. Residency.
All appointed officers of the Town must reside within Westchester County or a county
which adjoins Westchester County.
§ 35-3 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 36-2
36:1

Chapter 40
SUMMONSES
§ 40-1. Purpose. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to grant power to the Building Inspector, Deputy
Building Inspector and/or Assistant Building Inspector and code enforcement officers as
well as the Fire Inspector (herein referred to as the "Building Inspector") of the Town of
Mamaroneck to issue summonses for the enforcement of laws or ordinances under their
respective jurisdictions.
§ 40-2. Authorization for issuance; prior notice; emergencies. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
§ 40-3. Form and content.
The form of summons issued pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York and the Uniform Justice Court Act of the State
of New York and shall be subject to approval by the Town Board. The content of such
summons and the method of prosecution thereunder shall at all times be subject to the
Criminal Procedure Law and the Uniform Justice Court Act of the State of New York
and any other applicable law, rule or ordinance.
A. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration of the Town of Mamaroneck is authorized, in all instances in
which such official is empowered to enforce a law or ordinance, to issue
summonses returnable within 10 days to the Town Court of the Town of
Mamaroneck for any violation of any provision of the Code of the Town of
Mamaroneck or any other law or ordinance, rule or regulation that the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration is empowered to enforce under his/her respective jurisdiction. The
term "summonses," as used herein, shall include an appearance ticket, within the
meaning of § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York.
B. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration of the Town of Mamaroneck shall, however, be required to give
written notice of the existence of any violation of any law or ordinance prior to the
issuance of the summons, where such notice is required by said law or ordinance,
except as provided in § 40-2C below.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 40-2B above or any notice requirement of any
law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Town of Mamaroneck, if, in the opinion of
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, a violation exists which creates an imminent threat to the life or
health of any individual or where construction, renovation, repairs or other work is
being performed without a license or permit and, under the laws or ordinances of
the Town of Mamaroneck, a license or permit is required prior to the
commencement of such work, a summons may be issued immediately.
§ 36-2 SUMMONSES § 40-3
40:1

Chapter 45
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Summonses — See Ch. 40. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 45-1. Establishment.
The Justice Court of the Town of Mamaroneck is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic
Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic
violations. Such Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons and shall be open
at such hours as the Court may designate.
§ 45-2. Functions.
A. Such Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of
traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, when such offenses shall not
constitute the traffic infraction known as "speeding" or a misdemeanor or felony,
by permitting a person charged with an offense within the limitations herein stated
to answer within a specified time at the Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person
or by written power of attorney in the form hereinafter prescribed in this chapter,
by paying the prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in Court, pleading
guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make such
plea and pay such fine in Court.
B. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be
deemed complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a
receipt which so states.
C. If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer, as hereinbefore
prescribed, within a time designated by the Court, the Bureau shall cause a
complaint to be entered against him forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his
arrest and appearance before the Court.
D. Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty of a
number of parking violations in excess of such maximum number as may be
designated by the Court or of three or more violations other than parking violations
shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent violation at the Traffic
Violations Bureau but must appear in Court at a time specified by the Bureau.
E. Such Traffic Violations Bureau is not authorized to deprive a person of his right to
counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer,
explain or defend any charge of a violation of a traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 40-3 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 45-3
45:1
§ 45-3. Fines designated by Court.
The Court shall designate the fines to be paid for offenses which may be satisfied at the
Bureau, as hereinbefore stated, provided that such fines are within the limits established
as penalties for such offenses.
§ 45-4. Record of violations and fines.
The Traffic Violations Bureau herein authorized shall keep a record of all violations of
which each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was established in Court or in the
Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected and the dispositions thereof. It shall also
perform such other or additional duties and keep such other or additional records as shall
be prescribed by the Court and/or Town Board.
§ 45-5. Power of attorney.
Such written power of attorney shall be in substantially the following form or in such
form as to carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter:
Traffic Violations Bureau
Power of Attorney and Waiver
I, the undersigned, have read fully the annexed summons and hereby waive a hearing
in the Justice Court of the Town of Mamaroneck, New York, and plead guilty to the
charge specified in said summons. I authorize ................................., as the person in
charge of the Traffic Violations Bureau of said Court, to make such plea and pay the
prescribed fine in Court.
......................
(signature)
Date:
§ 45-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 45-5
45:2
Part II: General Legislation
§ 45-5 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 45-5
45:3

Chapter 50
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106. Noise — See Ch. 141.
§ 50-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations and standards applicable to alarm
devices, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm users and to provide a schedule of
charges applicable for false alarms transmitted through such alarm devices.
§ 50-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is employed by any commercial entity that
is licensed hereunder as an alarm business, whose activities include selling, leasing,
installing, repairing, servicing or maintaining, in or on any building, place or premises,
any alarm device within the Town of Mamaroneck.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity
which is in the business of selling, leasing, installing, repairing, servicing or maintaining
an alarm device or devices and performs such services within the Town of Mamaroneck.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated by an unauthorized entry, fire,
smoke or medical or other emergency requiring Police Department or Fire Department
response, transmits a signal to the alarm indicator panel at police headquarters or to
a private central alarm station and/or produces any audible or visual signal to which
the Police Department or Fire Department is expected to respond. Excluded from this
definition and from the provisions of this chapter are devices designed to alert the
occupants of the building of an emergency condition therein and which do not produce
any audible or visual signal which is perceptible outside of such building. Also excluded
from the definition and the provisions of this chapter are alarm devices installed in or on
any motor vehicle.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD — A committee consisting of the following: the Town
Administrator or his designee; the Police Chief or his designee; the Fire Chief or his
designee; and the Town Clerk.
ALARM USER — Any person or entity on whose premises an alarm device is installed
in the Town of Mamaroneck.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any private or commercial entity which receives
signals from alarm devices within the Town of Mamaroneck and relays information
pertaining to such alarm devices to police headquarters.
DIALER ALARM — A telephone-interfaced device that automatically connects to
police or fire headquarters and transmits a recorded message to report an emergency
§ 45-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 50-2
50:1
condition requiring Police Department or Fire Department response.
FALSE ALARM—Any alarm activation to which Police or Fire Department personnel
respond which is not the result of an unauthorized entry, fire, smoke or other emergency.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — Any false alarm, as defined herein, which is
intentionally activated by any person.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — For alarm business and alarm agent licenses or permits,
the "licensing authority" shall be the Westchester County Department of Consumer
Affairs. For alarm user permits, the "licensing authority" shall be the Town Clerk or his
designee.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which, when activated, causes an audible or
visual signal perceptible to persons on the outside of the premises within which said
alarm device is installed.[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
MALFUNCTION — A deficiency or other failure of an alarm device which results in
a false alarm but which is not attributable to any fault or negligence on the part of the
alarm device user.
TOWN — The unincorporated area outside the territorial limits of any incorporated
village within the Town.
§ 50-3. License required; application; fees.
A. Authority to grant licenses, permits and identification cards.
(1) The Westchester County Department of Consumer Affairs is hereby
authorized to grant a revocable license, upon the approval of the Police Chief
of said Department, to any alarm business, as defined within this chapter.
(2) The Westchester County Department of Consumer Affairs is hereby
authorized to grant a revocable license and identification card, upon the
approval of the Police Chief of said Department, to any alarm agent, as defined
within this chapter.
(3) The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to grant a revocable permit, upon the
approval of the Police Chief, to any alarm user, as defined within this chapter.
B. Application for licenses, permits and identification cards.
(1) All alarm businesses, as defined within this chapter, who desire to conduct
such business within the Town of Mamaroneck shall apply to the licensing
authority for an alarm business license on a form designated by the licensing
authority.
(2) Each person desiring to be an alarm agent in the Town of Mamaroneck, before
acting as such an alarm agent, shall apply to the licensing authority and comply
with the requirements of said authority.
(3) Any property owner or lessee of property in the Town of Mamaroneck having
on his or her premises an alarm device shall apply to the licensing authority
for an alarm user permit, on a form designated by the licensing authority. Such
alarm user permit is nontransferable. Such permit shall be valid for a one-year
§ 50-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 50-3
50:2
§ 50-4. Responsibility for systems; equipment; false alarms.
period on a calendar-year basis, expiring on December 31 of each year.
Notwithstanding this provision, a holder of an alarm user permit may continue
to operate his permitted alarm system until January 31 of the year following
the expiration of his alarm user permit.
C. License and permit fees. Annual license and user permit fees shall be as set forth in
§ A250-1. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
D. Violations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, business or commercial entity
to operate, sell, lease, install, repair, service or maintain an alarm device within the
Town of Mamaroneck, as defined in this chapter, without first having obtained a
license as provided in this chapter.
E. Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit and disconnection of alarm
system.
(1) The Alarm Review Board may require the denial, suspension or revocation of
any permit when deemed necessary for violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the violation of any standards or regulations promulgated by the
licensing authority pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be surrendered immediately
upon suspension or revocation by the Alarm Review Board. It shall be a
misdemeanor to fail to surrender such license, permit or identification card
which has been suspended or revoked as herein provided.
A. Town assumes no responsibility for such systems. Notwithstanding the payment of
any fee and/or the issuance of any permit as herein required, the Police Department,
Fire Department and the Town of Mamaroneck shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or the maintenance of the alarm
device so installed, and the Town of Mamaroneck and its authorized agents hereby
assume no liability whatsoever for any failure of any such alarm device or for
failure to respond to any such alarms or for any act of omission or commission as a
result of any such alarm device or system.
B. Specific equipment required and/or prohibited.
(1) Effective January 1, 1989, no person shall use, cause or permit to be used any
dialer alarm, as defined within this chapter.
(2) Alarm users directly or indirectly utilizing the services of a central station
monitoring facility must ensure that, prior to police notification of an alarm
activation, the central system monitoring facility shall first attempt to verify
the authenticity of the alarm and the need for emergency response by police
personnel. This procedure shall be initiated by the central system monitoring
facility and shall include an attempt to contact persons at the alarmed premises.
This requirement shall not apply to holdup/panic alarms or fire alarms, as
defined in this chapter.
§ 50-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 50-4
50:3
(3) The alarm user shall be responsible for compliance with these provisions.
C. Removal of unlawful equipment. The Alarm Review Board, whenever aware of the
existence or use of any alarm device which is not operated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or which does not meet standards for such alarm devices
as set pursuant to § 50-4B(1) of this chapter, may order the disconnection of such
alarm device, and it shall be unlawful to disobey such an order.
D. False alarms.
(1) Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm device or system of devices
on his, her or its premises and any user of any services or equipment furnished
by a licensee under this chapter shall pay to the Town of Mamaroneck, upon
demand, the charge set forth in § A250-1 for false alarms to which Police
Department or Fire Department personnel responds. [Amended 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
(2) More than five false alarms in any calendar year may constitute grounds for
the suspension or revocation of an alarm user's permit, as determined by the
Alarm Review Board. Any alarm user charged with a false-alarm penalty as
prescribed herein may appeal such charge or penalty, in writing, within the
(10) days after receipt of the notice of such penalty and may appear before the
Alarm Review Board at a place and time selected by the Board. False alarm
penalties or charges may be waived only by order of the Alarm Review Board.
All penalties as prescribed herein shall be collected and recorded by the
licensing authority and remitted to the Town Clerk. Failure to pay a false alarm
charge or penalty as prescribed herein shall subject such alarm user to the
suspension or revocation of his alarm user permit, as determined by the Alarm
Review Board.
E. Users of medical alert alarms shall provide the Town with a release, on a form
approved by the Counsel to the Town, authorizing the forcible entry to premises
occupied by the medical alert alarm user in cases where the central alarm station
has been unable to gain entry to the premises. Unless such a release is on file with
the Town of Mamaroneck Police Department, the Town shall have no obligation to
enter onto premises except through permission of the medical alert alarm user or
another party having access to the premises occupied by the medical alert alarm
user.
§ 50-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 50-4
50:4
Chapter 52
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 52-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as "Town of Mamaroneck Local Law No. 1 of
1981, Regulating the Possession and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public
Places."
§ 52-2. Purpose.
The Town of Mamaroneck recognizes that consumption of alcoholic beverages in public
places and transportation facilities must be adequately controlled so as to prevent public
disorder, nuisances, littering and other acts and conditions detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town, and this chapter is intended to provide
such control and regulation.
§ 52-3. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings below set forth:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Includes all such beverages as defined in § 3 of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, cup or similar receptacle suitable for or used to
hold any liquid.
PUBLIC PLACE —
"Public place" shall mean the following:
(1) Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground or school (public or private).
The parking lots of shopping centers, schools, churches or other religious
institutions, and train stations.
(2)
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any other place to which the
public or a substantial group of persons has access.
(3)
A.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall not be deemed "public places"
for the purpose of this chapter:
Any public place or transportation facility wherein the use and consumption of
alcoholic beverages is authorized pursuant to a license or permit issued under
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
(1)
The interior of the building premises of any firehouse within the Town of
Mamaroneck.
(2)
The interior of any premises of any business establishment within the Town of
Mamaroneck.
(3)
(4) The interior of any building occupied for use as a church, synagogue or other
B.
§ 50-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 52-3
52:1
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance (other than the interior of a
train), premises or place used for or in connection with public or private passenger
transportation, whether by railroad, motor vehicle or any other method.
§ 52-4. Consumption in public places or transportation facilities prohibited.
No person shall consume or ingest any alcoholic beverage in any public place or
transportation facility within the Town of Mamaroneck. Carrying on the person, holding
or possession of any open can or container which contains an alcoholic beverage in a
public place as hereinabove defined shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
§ 52-5. Prima facie evidence of possession. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996]
Any open bottle, can or container which contains an alcoholic beverage found in any
vehicle in any such public place or transportation facility shall be prima facie evidence
that the same is in possession of all the occupants of said vehicle and in possession of
the person last having control and custody of said vehicle.
§ 52-6. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibition against drinking alcoholic beverages in public places and
transportation facilities or possessing open bottles, cans or containers of such alcoholic
beverages shall not apply to nor be a violation of this chapter in the event of a gathering
which has been granted a special permit by the Town Clerk according to regulations
approved by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 52-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, upon conviction for violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation,
as defined in Article 10, § 10.00, Subdivision 3 of the Penal Law, which shall be
punishable as follows: for a first offense, by payment of a fine not exceeding $25;
for a second or subsequent offense, by payment of a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
house of worship.
The parks and playgrounds of the Town of Mamaroneck during the times and
in accordance with the rules and regulations prepared by the Superintendent of
Recreation, approved by the Town Board and filed with the Town Clerk.
(5)
§ 52-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 52-7
52:2
Chapter 55
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, MECHANICAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 55-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the payment
of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated
by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include but is not limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic bowling machines,
electronic baseball, football, hockey or basketball machines, video games, any and all
air-propelled machines or games, pool tables, shooting games and all games, operations
or transactions similar thereto, under whatever name they may be indicated, whether
or not electronically operated. This definition shall be deemed to include the terms
"machine" or "device," where such terms are used herein.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION—Includes the following: any
person, firm, corporation or association which owns, rents or leases any such machine;
the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such machine
is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having
control over such machine.
§ 55-2. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any
gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to
be a gambling device or in any way contrary to existing or future local, state or federal
laws or regulations nor shall this chapter be construed to permit the use of a mechanical
amusement device, as defined herein, as a gambling device.
§ 55-3. License required.
Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public patronage or keeping
for operation any mechanical amusement device, as defined herein by § 55-1, shall be
required to obtain a license from the Town of Mamaroneck upon payment of a license
fee. Application for such license shall be made to the Town Clerk upon a form to be
supplied by the Clerk for that purpose.
§ 55-4. Application.
The application for such license shall be made to the Town Clerk and shall contain the
§ 52-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, MECHANICAL § 55-4
55:1
following information:
§ 55-5. Inspection. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The application for a license hereunder shall be made out in four copies, one copy to
be referred to the Police Chief, one copy to the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, one copy to the New York
Board of Fire Underwriters or other qualified inspection agency approved by the Town
and one copy to be maintained by the Clerk.
§ 55-6. License fees; term.
A. The name and address, age and date and place of birth of the applicant. No license
shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 21 years of age.
B. Prior criminal convictions of the applicant, if any.
C. The floor plan of the place where the machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place.
D. A description of the machine to be covered by the license, mechanical features, the
name of the manufacturer and the name of the game.
A. The Police Chief shall investigate the applicant proposing to operate such machine
and ascertain if the applicant has a record of criminal convictions and shall either
approve or disapprove the application if, in his opinion, the criminal history of an
applicant warrants a denial of the application, in the interests of the public health,
safety and welfare.
B. The New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other qualified inspection agency
approved by the Town shall inspect all wiring and connections to the machine,
determine if the same complies with the National Electrical Code and approve the
application only if it finds no violations of said code.
C. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative shall investigate the
establishment and location where the machine is proposed to be located for
compliance with applicable zoning, building and fire code regulations and shall
recommend approval only if said location and establishment complies in all
respects with said regulations.
D. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the Police Chief, the
Board of Fire Underwriters or other qualified inspection agency approved by the
Town and the Building Inspector.
E. Any applicant whose application for license has been denied shall have the right to
appeal said decision to the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck at a meeting
thereof, and the same may be granted or refused by said Board, in its discretion.
A. Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay the annual license fee for
the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each mechanical amusement
device, as defined in § 55-1 herein, and the separate annual license for maintaining
§ 55-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 55-6
55:2
§ 55-7. Display of license; licenses not transferable.
§ 55-8. Prohibitions and restrictions.
premises that contain said devices that are set forth in § A250-1. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
B. Each license granted hereunder shall be granted for an annual term running from
January 1 to December 31 of that year.
A. Device license:
(1) The device license or licenses provided for herein shall be posted
conspicuously in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or
maintained to be operated.
(2) Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and the
applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every
machine displayed or operated by him.
B. Premises license. A premises license shall not be transferable from person to person
nor place to place and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated
in the license.
A. No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit the operation of mechanical
amusement devices within 600 feet of any church, public school or private school,
except that such mechanical amusement devices may be operated within 600 feet
of a public or private school when such school is not in session. [Amended
5-1-1996 by L.L. No. 10-1996]
B. Except as set forth below, no person, firm, corporation or association may receive a
license to operate more than two mechanical amusement devices.
C. On all premises where more than two licensed mechanical amusement devices are
located on the date of adoption of this chapter, the following standards must be met:
(1) There must be 20 square feet of floor space for each licensed mechanical
amusement device. This square footage may not include areas devoted to other
uses such as passageways, dining rooms, food preparation and service areas,
ingress and egress areas, lavatories and the like.
(2) The mechanical amusement devices must be segregated from other uses, such
as dining, by a solid wall, with no openings to exceed 44 inches in width per
opening and no more than two openings per device area, unless more are
required as a means of egress by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
D. No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit the operation of any
mechanical amusement device except during the following hours:
(1) Sunday through Thursday: 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Friday, Saturday, holiday eves, school holidays and vacations (other than a
§ 55-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, MECHANICAL § 55-8
55:3
§ 55-9. Revocation of licenses.
§ 55-10. Seizure and destruction of machine.
If the Police Chief shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement device is
used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded,
and if, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, said
exhibitor shall be found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police.
§ 55-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be liable to a fine or
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $250 for each offense. Each day such violation
shall exist shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Each unlicensed device
shall contribute a separate violation hereof.
§ 55-12. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to and no license shall be required for the operation of
mechanical amusement devices of the kind or purpose herein specified:
night preceding a school day): 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
E. No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit children under the age of
14 years to operate a mechanical amusement device during school hours, unless
accompanied by a responsible adult.
A. Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right of the Town Board,
which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly
or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck or the Laws of
the State of New York or the United States. A notice of proposed revocation shall
be served by the Town Clerk or a designee of the Town Clerk upon the person or
entity named in the license application by mailing a copy, certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address set forth in the license application. The notice shall
indicate that a hearing on the proposed revocation will be held at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck or at such other
time as the Town Board may direct. Said hearing shall be conducted by the Town
Board or its designee.
B. After giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard or upon the licensee's default,
the Town Board may revoke, modify or suspend any license granted under this
chapter. Such suspension, modification or revocation shall be based upon the
licensee's failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, other applicable
laws of the Town of Mamaroneck, the County of Westchester and the State of New
York.
A. For special events, not exceeding five days in duration, wherein the proceeds
therefrom are to be devoted exclusively to charitable, benevolent or religious
purposes.
§ 55-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 55-12
55:4
§ 55-13. Nonconforming devices.
All persons, firms, corporations or associations, as described in § 55-1, which display
or operate devices which do not conform to the provisions of § 55-8B of this chapter at
the date of its adoption may continue said operation as a nonconforming use in the same
way and to the extent that lawfully existed at their location as of the date of the adoption
of this chapter, subject to the provisions of § 55-8C hereof.
B. Where the operation thereof is upon the property and premises of a private
membership club and for the sole enjoyment of its members or their guests;
provided, however, that said exemption will terminate if said private membership
club operates any mechanical amusement devices for the use and enjoyment of the
general public or for gambling or other illegal purposes.
§ 55-12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, MECHANICAL § 55-13
55:5

Chapter 58
ANIMALS
§ 55-13 ANIMALS § 55-13
58:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as ordinances of 2-17-1937 and 9-5-1962 (Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 58-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 58-2. Definitions. [Added 5-3-1939]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.
§ 58-3. Swine.
No swine shall be kept in the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 58-4. Permits for calves.
No person shall sell or keep at any place in the Town of Mamaroneck any calves, without
a permit therefor issued by the Town Board, or otherwise than in accordance with the
terms of said permit granted by the Town Board.
§ 58-5. Running at large; nuisances.
The following shall apply to all animals, except cats or dogs, and to all fowl:
§ 58-6. Dogs; penalties for offenses.
Dogs, whether licensed or not, shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. No animal, bird or fowl shall be allowed to run at large in the Town of Mamaroneck
except upon the premises of the person who owns, keeps, harbors or otherwise has
the care or custody of such animal or except upon the premises of any other person
with the knowledge and consent of such other person.
B. When a Town Justice, upon written complaint and after a hearing upon due notice
to each owner, custodian or person in charge of any animal, bird or fowl, shall find
the noise, damage or injury to property made by such animal, bird or fowl a public
nuisance, such animal, bird or fowl shall be forthwith impounded, at his direction,
unless the owner, custodian or person in charge shall give assurance satisfactory to
such Town Justice that such nuisance shall be forthwith abated. If such assurance is
violated, the animal, bird or fowl shall be forthwith impounded.
A. No person owning or having the custody and control of a dog shall permit such dog
to be at large in the Town of Mamaroneck elsewhere than on the premises of the
§ 58-1 ANIMALS § 58-6
58:3
§ 58-7. Licensing of dogs; dog control; fees. [Added 11-1-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978;
amended 10-3-1979 by L.L. No. 4-1979; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 11-30-2010
by L.L. No. 10-2010]
owner, except it may be on the premises of another person with the knowledge and
consent of such other person.
B. The owner or person having the custody and control of a dog, in said Town of
Mamaroneck, which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises of
another person with the knowledge and consent of such person, shall control and
restrain such a dog by a leash.
C. The fact that a dog is at large in the Town of Mamaroneck elsewhere than on the
premises of the owner shall be presumptive evidence that the dog has been
permitted to be at large with the knowledge of the owner or person having custody
and control of the dog.
D. A violation of this section shall be an offense and shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $150 or by imprisonment of not more than 25 days.
[Amended 7-11-1979]
A. Unless exempted, the Town of Mamaroneck shall license all dogs located within
the Town which are four months of age or older. The owner of each dog required to
be licensed shall obtain, complete and return to the Town Clerk a dog license
application together with the license application fee set forth in § A250-1, any
applicable license surcharges and such additional fees that may be established by
the Town Board. Each license application shall be accompanied by proof that the
dog has been vaccinated against rabies or a statement from a licensed veterinarian
that such vaccination would endanger the dog’s life in which case vaccination shall
not be required. Each dog license issued shall be valid for a period of one year and
shall not be transferable. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
B. The application for a dog license shall be on a form approved by the Town Clerk.
The application shall state the sex, the actual or approximate age, the breed, the
color and other identification marks of the dog; in the case of a renewal of a license,
shall state the identification number of the dog; shall state the name, the address
(both postal and e-mail) and a telephone number of the owner; and shall contain a
certificate of rabies vaccination or statement in lieu thereof, as required by
Subdivision two of § 109 of the New York Agricultural and Markets Law. The
application for a spayed or neutered dog which the Town is asked to license for the
first time also shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner, showing that the dog has been
spayed or neutered. In lieu of the spay or neuter certificate or the affidavit, an owner
may present a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he or she
has examined the dog and found that because of old age or other reason, the life of
the dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering. In such case, the license fee
for the dog shall be the same as for a spayed or neutered dog.
C. The Town Clerk shall not issue a dog license for a period which expires after the
last day of the eleventh month following the expiration date of the rabies certificate
included with the application for a dog license.
§ 58-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 58-7
58:4
§ 58-8. Impoundment and redemption fees. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 11-30-2010 by L.L. No. 10-2010; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
A dog owner whose dog is impounded shall be liable for the fees for impoundment and
redemption from impoundment set forth in § A250-1.
§ 58-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-17-1953; 10-20-1954; 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 14-1996]
D. All dog licenses issued by the Town shall expire on the last day of the twelfth month
following the month in which the Town issued such license.
E. Though their dogs are required to be licensed, the owners of a guide dog, hearing
dog, service dog, war dog, working search dog, detection dog, police work dog or a
therapy dog shall not be required to pay the fee for licensing such a dog.
F. A dog participating in a dog show shall not be required to wear its dog license while
participating in such show.
G. All dog owners shall respond to the Town whenever the Town conducts an
enumeration of dogs pursuant to § 113 (6) of the New York Agricultural and
Markets Law. Failure to respond within the time allotted for doing so shall result in
the dog owner being liable for the fine set forth in section A250-1. [Amended
8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
H. Any violation of this law or of Article 7 of the New York Agricultural and Markets
Law shall be prosecuted as a violation under the New York State Penal Law. Such
prosecutions shall be commenced by the issuance of an appearance ticket by any
dog control officer, peace officer, constable or police officer.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, as the same may be from
time to time amended, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by imprisonment for not more than 15 days or by a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
B. Additional penalties.
(1) Violation of §§ 58-3 and 58-4 of this article shall subject the offender, for each
offense, to a civil penalty not to exceed $50.
(2) The penalty for violation as above provided shall be in addition to any fine
provided for in § 58-9A.
(3) Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
be a separate and distinct violation of the several provisions of this article and
shall render every person liable for a separate penalty for each such violation.
§ 58-7 ANIMALS § 58-9
58:5

ARTICLE II
Removal of Canine Waste
[Adopted 7-11-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979 (Ch. 6, Art. II, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 58-10. Removal required.
No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any public
property nor on any private property without the permission of the owner of said
property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to that portion of a street lying
between the curblines, which portion may be used to curb such dog under the following
conditions:
§ 58-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine and penalty of not less than
$50 nor more than $250.
A. Any person who so curbs a dog shall immediately remove all feces deposited by
such dog as follows: Feces shall be picked up with a scoop, shovel, broom, tong or
other similar implement and deposited directly in an airtight container, plastic or
otherwise, and then subsequently deposited in a container used for the disposal of
refuse or by any other method approved by the Town Board.
B. In no event shall any feces be deposited in sewers or drains, whether storm or
sanitary.
§ 58-10 ANIMALS § 58-11
58:7

Chapter 60
BAG WASTE REDUCTION
§ 60-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Bag Waste Reduction Law of the Town of
Mamaroneck."
§ 60-2. Purpose.
§ 60-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EXEMPT BAG —
A. The State of New York amended Article 27 of the Environmental Conservation
Law by adding a new Title 28 (Bag Waste Reduction) which will become effective
on March 1, 2020. The purpose of this chapter is to incorporate the new state law
into the laws of the Town of Mamaroneck.
B. The Town Board determines that a shift to reusable bags in most retail transactions
will benefit the overall health, safety and welfare of the Town and the environment.
The Town Board also finds that a fee for using nonreusable bags is essential if there
is to be a transition to reusable bags because such a fee will encourage consumers
to use reusable bags rather than bags for which a fee is charged. Furthermore, the
Town Board agrees with the Supreme Court of the State of Colorado which in Colo.
Union of Taxpayers Found. v City of Aspen, 418 P.3d 506 (Colo. 2018) held that
the imposition of a fee for using single-use bags is not a tax; but a fee designed to
promote health, safety and welfare.
A. A bag used solely to contain or wrap uncooked meat, fish or poultry;
A bag used by a customer solely to package bulk items such as fruits, vegetables,
grains or candy;
B.
C. A bag used solely to contain food sliced or prepared to order;
D. A bag used solely to contain a newspaper for delivery to a subscriber;
E. Bags sold in bulk to a consumer at the point of sale;
F. Trash bags;
G. Food storage bags;
H. Garment bags;
I. Bags prepackaged for sale to a customer;
Plastic carryout bags provided by a restaurant, tavern or similar food service
establishment, as defined in the state sanitary code, to carry out or deliver food; or
J.
§ 58-11 BAG WASTE REDUCTION § 60-3
60:1
PAPER CARRYOUT BAG — A paper bag, other than an exempt bag, that is provided
to a customer by a person required to collect tax to be used by the customer to carry
tangible personal property, regardless of whether such person required to collect tax sells
any tangible personal property or service to the customer, and regardless of whether any
tangible personal property or service sold is exempt from tax under Article 28 of the Tax
Law.
PERSON REQUIRED TO COLLECT TAX — Any vendor of tangible personal
property subject to the tax imposed by Subdivision (a) of § 1105 of the Tax Law.
PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG — Any plastic bag, other than an exempt bag, that is
provided to a customer by a person required to collect tax to be used by the customer to
carry tangible personal property, regardless of whether such person required to collect
tax sells any tangible personal property or service to the customer, and regardless of
whether any tangible personal property or service sold is exempt from tax under Article
28 of the Tax Law.
REUSABLE BAG —
§ 60-4. Plastic carryout bag ban.
§ 60-5. Paper carryout bag reduction fee.
K. Bags provided by a pharmacy to carry prescription drugs.
A. A bag made of cloth or other machine-washable fabric that has handles; or
A durable bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for
multiple reuse.
B.
A. Commencing on December 1, 2019, no person required to collect tax shall
distribute any plastic carryout bags to its customers unless such bags are exempt
bags as defined in § 60-3 of the Mamaroneck Town Code.
B. Commencing on December 1, 2019, no person required to collect tax shall prevent
any person from using a bag of any kind that they have brought for purposes of
carrying goods.
A. Commencing on December 1, 2019, a person required to collect tax may provide a
customer with a paper carryout bag only if it collects from the customer a paper
carryout bag reduction fee of $0.05 for each paper carryout bag it provides to the
customer. The paper carryout reduction fee and the number of paper carryout bags
provided must be separately stated on the sales slip, invoice, receipt, or other
statement of the price rendered to the customer. The persons collecting paper
carryout bag reduction fees shall be allowed to retain the sums collected.
B. The paper carryout bag reduction fee shall not be collected from any customer using
the supplemental nutritional assistance program, special supplemental nutrition
program for women, infants and children, or any successor programs used as full or
partial payment for the items purchased.
§ 60-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 60-6
60:2
§ 60-6. Westchester County paper carryout bag reduction fee.
If the County of Westchester imposes a paper carryout bag reduction fee through
the adoption of a local law, ordinance or resolution, the paper carryout reduction fee
imposed by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect until the day before the
first anniversary of the effective date of County of Westchester's local law, ordinance or
resolution imposing a paper carryout bag reduction fee.
§ 60-7. Penalties for offenses; continuing violations.
A person required to collect tax who violates any provision of this chapter shall receive a
warning notice for the first such violation but shall be liable to the Town of Mamaroneck
for a civil penalty of $250 for the first violation after receiving a warning and a civil
penalty of $500 for any subsequent violation. A person required to collect tax may
request a hearing before the Town Board to contest the imposition of a civil penalty
pursuant to § 60-7 of the Mamaroneck Town Code.
§ 60-6 BAG WASTE REDUCTION § 60-7
60:3

Chapter 65
BINGO
§ 65-1. License required; restrictions.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of Article 14-H
of the General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Town of Mamaroneck, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article 19-B of
the Executive Law and the following restrictions.
§ 65-2. Unlicensed operation prohibited.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a licensee under the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law shall conduct such game or
shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting bingo a hall or other premises, for
any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect.
§ 65-3. Leased premises.
No bingo game shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if
rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the
receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game.
§ 65-4. Disposition of proceeds.
The entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes
of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
§ 65-5. Single prizes.
No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250.
§ 65-6. Series of prizes.
No series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $1,000.
§ 65-7. Management.
No person except a bona fide member of any organization shall participate in the
management or operation of such game.
§ 65-8. Remuneration.
No person shall receive any remuneration for participation in the management or
operation of any such game.
§ 65-9. Suppliers.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General
§ 60-7 BINGO § 65-9
65:1
Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically
designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier
licensed under the Bingo Control Law13 or from another authorized organization.
§ 65-10. Penalties for offenses.
The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of any provision of
this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 65-11. Statutory provisions.
The provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law (Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law) of the State of New York shall apply to the licensing and conducting of the game
of bingo, and the provisions of such law are hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference.
13. Editor's Note: See Art. 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 65-9 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 65-11
65:2
Chapter 71
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
§ 71-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the removal or repair of buildings in
business, industrial and residential sections of the Town of Mamaroneck that, from any
cause, may now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the public.
§ 71-2. Inspections and notices.
A. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative shall inspect and record
any dangerous or unsafe condition in any building or structure within the limits of
the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Should the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration or either's designated representative determine that any
building or structure is unsafe or dangerous or that any dangerous or unsafe
condition shall exist within any building or structure, he shall submit notice by
serving on the owner or one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents,
lessees or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the property,
either personally or by registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any,
of the owner or one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees
or other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as shown by the
records of the Receiver of Taxes and/or in the office of the County Clerk,
containing a description of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the
building or structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order requiring the same to be
made safe and secure or removed. If such service is made by registered mail, a copy
of such notice shall be posted on the premises. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Such notice shall further provide that the person so served shall commence the
securing or removal of the buildings or structures within 10 days of receipt of said
notice.
D. In any instance where the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative
shall determine that an emergency condition exists which is dangerous to the life or
safety of any individual, he may require that the person so served shall commence
§ 65-11 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 71-2
71:1
§ 71-3. Emergencies. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
Should the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative determine that such an unsafe
or dangerous condition exists within a building or structure that said building or structure
constitutes an imminent threat to life, then the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated
representative may cause to be posted at each entrance of such building a notice that
said building is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the Building
Department of the Town of Mamaroneck, and he shall further be permitted to require,
upon service of such written notice upon the occupants of said building, their removal
from said building until said building had been secured or removed.
§ 71-4. Filing of notices.
A copy of any such notice served pursuant to § 71-2 shall be filed in the office of the
County Clerk of the County of Westchester, which notice shall be filed in the same
manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules and shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency, as therein provided, except
as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section. A notice so filed shall be effective for
a period of one year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated
upon the order of a Judge or Justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the
Counsel to the Town. The Clerk of the County where such notice is filed shall mark such
notice in any record or docket thereof as canceled of record upon the presentation and
filing of such consent or a certified copy of such order.
§ 71-5. Hearings.
§ 71-6. Costs.
The cost and expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the proceedings set forth
in this chapter for the correction of any unsafe or dangerous condition or the removal
by the Town of any said building or structure upon the failure of the owner or other
person notified to secure or remove the building or structure shall be assessed against
the securing or removal of the buildings or structures within a period of less than
10 days from the receipt of said notice. However, in such instance, the notice shall
state that there is such an emergency condition and shall specify both the condition
and the time in which it must be corrected. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Upon noncompliance with the order to remove or make safe and secure as provided
in § 71-2 herein, a hearing shall be held before the Town Board. Notice of the time
and place thereof shall be specified in the notice to repair or demolish served upon
the owner or such persons having an interest in the property or structure as herein
prescribed.
B. In the event that such owner fails or refuses to repair or remove the same within the
time provided, the Town Board shall be authorized to remove such building or
structure after a hearing as provided for in § 71-5A.
§ 71-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 71-6
71:2
the land on which said building or structure is located by the Assessor for the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 71-6 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 71-6
71:3

Chapter 74
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 74-1. Purpose.
The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 authorizes
franchising authorities to regulate certain rates for cable television service and
equipment. The Town of Mamaroneck desires to regulate cable rates except to the
extent that it is prohibited from doing so by applicable law. Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) regulations implementing the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 require franchising authorities to adopt
regulations before rate regulation of basic service and equipment can begin.
§ 74-2. Regulation of rates.
§ 74-3. Filing of rates required.
A. This chapter governs the regulation of rates for basic service and equipment within
the Town of Mamaroneck for any franchisee which as been notified that the Town
has been certified to regulate its basic service and equipment rates; and the Town
has adopted regulations governing regulation of basic service and equipment rates.
In addition, the Town of Mamaroneck may regulate the rates for cable services and
equipment to the extent not prohibited by law, pursuant to such resolutions,
ordinances or regulations as it may hereafter adopt. The provisions set forth below
are intended to be consistent with all FCC regulations governing the regulation of
basic service rates and equipment and the Town and all those acting on its behalf
will regulate and interpret its rules so that they are consistent with FCC regulations,
as if those regulations were set forth in full herein; the franchisee is prohibited fray
engaging in any activity it is prohibited in engaging in under FCC rules, as if those
rules were set forth in full herein. For purposes of these provisions, the term "basic
service" or "basic cable service" has the same meaning as the term "basic service"
at the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section 901, and the term
"equipment" refers to all equipment and services subject to regulation under the
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section 923.
B. To the extent the New York State Cable Commission establishes final rules for rate
regulation that must be followed by franchising authorities, those rules will govern
as if fully set forth herein. However, to the extent the rules of the New York State
Cable Commission allow franchising authorities to follow different or additional
rules, the provisions set forth herein that may be enforced consistent with the rules
of the New York State Cable Commission shall continue to apply. [Added
12-1-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
A. A franchisee that is notified that its basic service and equipment rates are subject to
regulation must file a submission ("the rate filing") within 30 days of the
notification (but no earlier than November 15, 1993), justifying its basic service and
equipment rates. All basic service and equipment rates for all customer
classifications must be justified. Once a franchisee has been so notified by the Town
that its rates are subject to regulation, it may not thereafter increase its rates for
§ 71-6 CABLE TELEVISION § 74-3
74:1
§ 74-4. Submission requirements.
Subject to FCC regulations governing the burden of proof, a rate filing submitted by a
franchisee must show that the rates the franchisee proposes to charge for basic service
and equipment are reasonable. Except as inconsistent with FCC rules:
§ 74-5. Rates to cover costs.
basic service or equipment without the prior approval of the Town. This
requirement applies in all cases, including with respect to increases in rates
announced prior to the date the operator was notified its rates were subject to
regulation where the increases were not implemented prior to the date of notice.
A franchisee must submit a rate filing to justify any increase in basic service or
equipment rates or any new basic service or equipment rate (collectively referred
to herein as rate increases). An "increase" occurs, without limitation, when there is
an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. Rate filings
proposing and supporting rate increases must be filed for review at least 30 days in
advance of the proposed effective date of the increase. This requirement does not
alter or eliminate any other notice requirement.
B. Every rate filing must be submitted to the Larchmont-Mamaroneck Cable TV
Board of Control (the "Board"). A rate filing shall be considered filed for review on
the date the required rate filing and all required copies are received by the Board.
Five copies of each rate filing (including all supporting materials) must be
submitted. If the operator claims any part of the filing is proprietary, it shall
additionally file five copies, which omit the proprietary information. For the
purposes of this section, the term "proprietary" shall mean as pertaining to
information primarily and exclusively owned by the operator. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
A. Every rate filing must clearly state in a covering letter whether it justifies existing
rates, or proposes an increase in rates. The covering letter must also identify any
rate that is derived in whole or in part based upon cost of service, and identify any
pages of the rate filing that contain information that the franchisee claims is
proprietary. It must state whether any part of the proposed increase is based on an
inflation adjustment or an alleged increase in external costs. The cover letter should
also contain a brief, narrative description of any proposed changes in rates or in
service.
B. The pages of each rate filing must be numbered sequentially.
C. The rate filing must contain all applicable FCC forms and these forms must be
correctly completed.
D. If different rates are proposed for basic service for different classes of customers,
the filing must show that the classifications and the differences in the rate charged
are reasonable and consistent with federal law.
A. If the franchisee seeks to support a rate based upon a cost of service, the Town will
establish a rate that provides the franchisee an opportunity to recover the reasonable
costs associated with providing basic cable service, including a reasonable profit.
§ 74-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 74-5
74:2
§ 74-6. Initial Town review.
An expense or investment is not presumed reasonable merely because the
franchisee has incurred or made it. A franchisee is not entitled to recover monopoly
profits in any form.
B. In addition to information the Town or Board requires the franchisee to provide,
and unless the Town grants a waiver of this provision, a franchisee who seeks to
justify all or any part of its rates based upon its cost of service must submit a
complete cost-of-service analysis that shows all expenses it incurs and all revenues
derived from the system, directly or indirectly, by the franchisee or any person that
constitutes a cable operator of the system within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
The cost of service must identify the accounting level (as that term is used in the
FCC's regulations) at which each expense or revenue identified was aggregated and
show clearly how the expense or revenue was allocated. The franchisee may not
include costs at an accounting level unless it also includes all revenues from that
same level attributable to the system or to a group of systems of which the system
servicing the Town is a part. The replacement cost of a comparable system must be
identified and supported. The franchisee must identify the name and address of any
entity with which it has a contract, other than a programmer, which derives
revenues from the system, and must state whether and how the revenues of that
entity were included in the cost of service. In addition, the cost of service shall
clearly show the derivation of a proposed charge per channel and the application of
that charge to yield a basic service rate. It must also show and support the derivation
and allocation of any amounts included in the derivation of the rate for:
(1) Operation and maintenance expenses.
(2) Administrative and general expenses.
(3) Programming expenses (identifying retransmission consent costs and
copyright fees separately).
(4) Costs for PEG access and any institutional network.
(5) Franchise fee expenses.
(6) Investment in the system and associated depreciation.
(7) Other expenses, including federal, state and local taxes, itemized.
(8) The proposed return on equity and actual interest expense paid by the
franchisee.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchisee is not required to submit the cost of
service specified in § 74-5A for equipment rates, and instead initially shall
complete, submit and support the costs of equipment using applicable FCC forms.
Any cost of service submitted to justify basic service rates must show that the cost
of service does not include equipment costs.
A. After receiving a rate filing, the Board promptly shall publish a notice that a filing
has been received and that, except for those parts which may be withheld as
proprietary, it is available for public review. The notice shall state that interested
§ 74-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 74-6
74:3
§ 74-7. Inflation rate adjustments.
parties may comment on the filing and shall provide interested parties seven days
to submit written comments on the filing to the Board. The Board shall submit
the comments received and its recommendations for action to the Town and shall
make those recommendations and comments available for public inspection. The
franchisee may submit a response to public comments or Board recommendations,
but must do so no later than three business days after the Board recommendations
are submitted to the Town. The response shall be filed with the Board, and if
submitted in a timely fashion, the Board shall forward a copy to the Town.
B. Within 30 days of the date of the filing, the Town shall issue a written order, which
may be in any lawful form, approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying
the proposed rate in whole or in part; or tolling the proposed rate in whole or part.
If the Town tolls the rate in whole or in part, its written order at a minimum shall
explain that it requires additional time to review the rate filing and state that the
franchisee may cure any deficiency in its filing by submitting a supplementary
filing as provided in Subsection D. For the purposes of this section, the term
"tolling" shall mean to hold in abeyance or to suspend. [Amended 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 14-1996]
C. With respect to existing rates, tolling means the rates may remain in effect, subject
to refund; with respect to rate changes, tolling means the portion of the rate change
that is tolled may not go into effect.
D. Supplementary filings.
(1) If a proposed rate is tolled in whole or in part, the franchisee shall submit a
supplementary filing 20 days from the effective date of the tolling order,
containing corrections, if any, to its filing (including any supplement to its
cost-of-service filing) and any response to information filed by interested
parties or to the recommendations of the Board, or any additional information
necessary to support the proposed rate. Supplementary filings must be filed in
accordance with § 74-3B.
(2) A supplementary filing also must contain such information as the Board or the
Town directs the franchisee to provide.
A. In addition to information the Board or the Town requests the franchisee to provide,
and unless the Board or the Town grants a waiver of this provision, a franchisee
who claims that it is entitled to a rate in whole or in part based upon the adjustments
for inflation and external costs contemplated by the Code of Federal Regulations,
Title 47, Part 76, Section 922(d)(1) and (2) must submit the following:
(1) A calculation showing how each part of the adjustment was derived.
(2) A statement itemizing each external cost (as defined by FCC regulations), the
amount of that external costs for the two calendar years prior to the date of the
filing and the year-to-date in which the filing is made and the projected amount
of the external cost for the remainder of the year in which the filing is made
and for the following calendar year. The statement must specifically show any
increases in revenues from programming services. "Revenues" include all
§ 74-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 74-7
74:4
§ 74-8. Rate orders.
revenues, in whatever form received.
(3) If the increase is attributable to any increase in programming service costs, the
contract for each programming service whose cost has increased, a sworn
statement identifying each programming service whose costs increased where
the programmer is an affiliate of the franchisee (as defined by FCC
regulations); and, for any contract that has been in effect less than 12 months,
the prior contract for the service.
(4) A sworn statement by the franchisee's chief financial officer or an
independent, certified accountant stating that he or she has examined all
external costs (including all programming costs) and has offset against any
increase claimed the amount of any decreases in external costs and the amount
by which any increase in external costs was below the GNP-PI, as required by
the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section 922(d)(2);
affirming that the franchisee has only sought to recover any external cost to
the extent that cost exceeded the GNP-PI; and affirming that the franchisee has
not attempted to recover any increase in the cost of programming purchased
by an affiliate except as provided in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47,
Part 76, Section 922(d)(2)(vi).
B. Upon receiving the supplementary filing, the Board promptly shall publish a notice
that a filing has been received and that it is available for public review (except those
parts which may be withheld as proprietary). The notice shall state that interested
parties may comment on the filing and shall provide interested parties 20 days to
submit written comments on the filing to the Board. The Board shall submit the
comments received and its recommendations for action to the Town.
C. The Board's recommendations and the public comments shall be made available for
public inspection. The franchisee may submit a response to public comments or
Board recommendations, but must do so no later than 10 days after the Board
recommendations are submitted to the Town. The response shall be filed with the
Board, and if submitted in a timely fashion, the Board shall forward a copy to the
Town.
D. The Town shall issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form, approving
the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in whole or in part;
or allowing the rate to go into effect in whole or in part, subject to refund. If the
Town issues an order allowing the rates to go into effect subject to refund, it shall
also direct the franchisee to maintain an accounting in accordance with the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section 933.
E. The order specified in § 74-6B shall be adopted within 90 days after the tolling
order for any rate the franchisee justifies based on the FCC benchmark. The order
shall be adopted within 150 days of the tolling order for any rate the franchisee
justified with a cost of service showing.
A. Any rate order of the Town shall be issued and effective upon adoption. Each rate
order shall be released to the public and the franchisee. In any case where the Town
§ 74-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 74-8
74:5
§ 74-9. Franchisee to implement remedy.
approves, denies or tolls a rate, orders that a rate may go into effect subject to refund
or orders refunds or establishes rates, a public notice shall be published stating that
the order has issued and is available for review. Any such order shall be in writing.
B. The Board and the Town may take any steps that they are not prohibited from taking
by federal law to protect the public interest as part of any rate order or by any other
means. By way of illustration and not limitation, the Town may require refunds, set
rates and impose forfeitures and penalties directly or through its delegated
representatives and enforce refund orders. Any order prescribing a rate shall explain
why the franchisee's proposed rate was unreasonable and why the prescribed rate is
reasonable. However, before prescribing a rate or ordering a refund to subscribers,
the Town shall ensure that the franchisee has had notice and opportunity to
comment on the proposed rate or refunds. If the recommendations of the Board
propose a refund or a rate, then mailing a copy of the recommendation to the
franchisee at the time it is submitted to the Town shall be deemed to provide the
franchisee this notice, and the franchisee must comment on the refund or rate in its
response to the recommendations.
C. No order approving or setting a rate using the FCC benchmarks shall be interpreted
to establish the just and reasonable rate to subscribers. Every such rate approved or
established shall be subject to further reduction and refund to the extent permitted
under applicable laws and regulations, as the same may be amended from time to
time. By way of illustration and not limitation, should the FCC reduce the
benchmarks, the Town shall have the right to reduce a franchisee's rates and to
require the franchisee to refund any amounts collected above the benchmark, except
to the extent prohibited by federal law.
A. A franchisee must implement remedial requirements, including prospective rate
reductions and refunds, within 60 days of the date the Town issues an order
mandating a remedy.
B. Within 90 days of the date an order mandating a remedy is issued, a franchisee must
file a certification, signed by an authorized representative of the cable company:
(1) Stating whether the franchisee has compiled fully with all provisions of the
Town order.
(2) Describing in detail the precise measures taken to implement the Town order.
(3) Showing how refunds (including interest) were calculated and distributed.
C. It is each franchisee's responsibility to keep books and records of accounts so that it
can refund any amounts owed to subscribers.
D. It is each franchisee's duty to submit as complete a filing as possible, and knowingly
withholding information or making a filing that is incomplete under applicable law
shall be treated as an evasion of this resolution.
E. Information requests.
(1) A franchisee and any other entity that has records of revenues or expenses that
§ 74-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 74-9
74:6
§ 74-10. Responsibilities of Board.
The Board shall be responsible for administering the provisions herein. Without
limitation and by way of illustration:
§ 74-11. Penalties for offenses.
Except as prohibited by federal law, a franchisee shall be subject to penalties and
forfeitures under the Executive Law, and its request for approval of a rate may be denied
if it:
are allocated to the franchisee's system must respond to requests for
information from the Board or Town by deadlines established by the Board.
A franchisee is responsible for ensuring that such other entity responds to the
requests.
(2) Because federal law limits the time available for an initial response to a filing
by a franchisee before the order contemplated by § 74-6 issues, the franchisee
must be prepared to respond to requests for information regarding its filing
within five days of the date an information request is mailed to it. The
information may include the information the franchisee would be required to
provide as part of any supplementary filing.
A. The Board shall ensure that notices are given to the public and each franchisee as
required herein and by FCC regulations.
B. The Board may submit requests for information to the franchisee and establish
deadlines for response to them, as provided in § 74-9.
C. For good cause, the Board may waive any provision herein or extend any deadline
for filing or response except as to such matters that are mandatory under FCC
regulations.
D. The Board shall rule on any request for confidentiality.
E. The Board shall prepare the recommendations to the Town contemplated by § 74-6.
If the Board recommends that any increase be denied in whole or in part, it shall:
(1) Propose a rate and explain the basis for its recommendation (it may propose
that rates remain at existing levels).
(2) Recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue.
(3) Notify the franchisee of its recommendation at the time it is submitted to the
Town.
A. Knowingly submits false or fraudulent information to the Board or the Town in
connection with any rate proceeding.
B. Fails to comply with any lawful order or request of the Board or the Town,
including but not limited to a request for information or an order setting rates; or
C. Evades or attempts to evade federal or local rate regulation; provided that filing for
approval of a rate that is later determined to be unreasonable is not in and of itself
§ 74-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 74-11
74:7
§ 74-12. Proprietary information.
§ 74-13. Petition for change in status.
Any franchisee may petition for a change in status in accordance with the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section 915, and the Town shall consider that
petition in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 76, Section
915. The petition and five copies must be filed with the Board.
an evasion of federal or local rate regulation.
A. If these provisions or any request for information requires the production of
proprietary information, the franchisee must produce the information. However, at
the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a franchisee may
request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential
and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the
information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons.
The request for confidentiality will be granted if the Board determines that the
preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. If the Board decides
that information can be withheld, it will issue a written decision explaining the basis
for withholding the information and place that decision in a public file for
inspection. If the franchisee requests confidentiality and the request is denied,
where the franchisee is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in
which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or the
franchisee may seek review within five working days of the denial in any
appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review.
B. Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary
with the Board. The Board shall weight the policy considerations favoring
nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts
of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable
franchisee that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may
grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the franchisee may seek
review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure
will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal.
§ 74-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 74-13
74:8
Chapter 75
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 74. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
§ 75-1. Legislative intent.
The Town of Mamaroneck has the authority to grant franchises and other authorizations
for the use and occupancy of the streets and has determined that the streets are a valuable
public resource that has required and will continue to require substantial investment by
the Town. The Town desires to structure and implement a fair and orderly process for
the grant of franchises and other authorizations (and renewals of such franchises and
authorizations) to occupy and use the streets to provide telecommunications services (as
hereinafter defined) in the Town, including the negotiation of terms and conditions to
protect the public interest consistent with applicable law. In addition, consistent with
applicable law, the Town desires to manage the streets and obtain fair and reasonable
compensation from telecommunications providers (as hereinafter defined) on a
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis for the use of the streets on a
nondiscriminatory basis. The Town also desires to minimize inconvenience and
disruption to the public, provide for the orderly and efficient use of the streets now and
in the future and preserve adequate capacity for existing and future uses of the streets;
and the Town intends to exercise, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, its
authority with respect to the regulation of the occupation and the use of the streets in
connection with the provision of telecommunications services.
§ 75-2. Definitions; word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that
another meaning intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number and words used in the singular number include the plural number.
AFFILIATED PERSON —
Each person who falls into one or more of the following categories:
Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the
applicant;
(1)
Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling
interest;
(2)
Each officer, director, joint venture or joint venture partner of the applicant;
and
(3)
A.
§ 74-13 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND § 75-2
75:1
CABLE SERVICES — As defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended
by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and
as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that
"cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act
otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined
in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable
Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.
CHAPTER — This chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working control in whatever
manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant
or the equipment in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or
a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly,
by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than 10%, of any person
(which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person").
"Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more
than one person or group of persons.
EQUIPMENT — The poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes,
fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used to provide telecommunications
services.
FRANCHISE—An initial authorization, or reenrollment thereof, issued by the Town in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use
of the streets to provide telecommunications services.
MAY — Being permissive.
PERSON — Any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but
shall not mean the Town or the Town school district of the Town of Mamaroneck.
REVOCABLE LICENSE — An initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the
Town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the limited
occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license
shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in § 75-3B and § 75-3F of this
chapter.
SHALL — Being mandatory, not merely directive.
STREETS — The surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all
streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks,
parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging
Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under
common control with, the applicant; provided that
(4)
"Affiliated person" shall in no event mean the Town or any creditor of the applicant
solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated
person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being
under common ownership, common management or common control with, the
applicant.
B.
§ 75-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 75-2
75:2
to the Town.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All transmissions, between or among points specified
by the user, of information of the user's choosing without change in the form or content
of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Any person who:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The offering of telecommunications for a
fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available to the
public, regardless of the facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall
not include cable services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — The plant, equipment, real property
(including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal property,
buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical fibers, amplifier,
antenna and all other electronic devices, equipment and facilities used to provide
telecommunications services.
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of the Town and his/her designee.
TOWN — The Town of Mamaroneck, New York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town and its designee or any successor
thereto.
§ 75-3. Granting authority.
Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used to provide
telecommunications services, regardless of whether such telecommunications
services originate or terminate in the Town; or
A.
Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the Town by
means of specifically identifiable equipment in the streets, which equipment is
owned by such person or made available to such person under a lease or any other
arrangement for a period of longer than 120 days; or equipment in the streets if the
use of such equipment is continuing and substantial, and the Town has determined
that it is necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter in
order to preserve the application of this chapter on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law.
B.
A. No person shall use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications provider, or
construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets used to provide
telecommunications, without a franchise or revocable license granted by the Town.
A franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable
services in the Town, and any person seeking to provide cable services in the Town
shall first obtain a separate franchise in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain equipment
to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the internal operations of
such person's business, residence or employment and not for sale or resale to any
person in the Town shall first obtain a revocable license in accordance with the
§ 75-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND § 75-3
75:3
§ 75-4. Compliance with rules; permits required.
provisions of this chapter.
C. The Town Board may grant one or more franchises and revocable licenses in
accordance with this chapter, provided that the Town Board reserves the right to
modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof.
D. The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a
separate chapter by the Town Board and shall be on such terms and conditions as
shall be specified in said separate chapter and/or a franchise or license agreement
between the Town and the franchisee or licensee.
E. Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The Town
specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises,
revocable licenses or other authorizations for use of the streets by any means, as the
Town deems appropriate.
F. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the Town.
G. Limitations on grant of revocable licenses.
(1) A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and
occupy specifically identified streets to provide telecommunications services
and shall be granted only if:
(a) The use or occupation of such streets, together with all revocable licenses
previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed
2,500 linear feet; or
(b) The use or occupation of such streets does not involve the offering or
provision of telecommunications services to any person within the Town.
(2) In the event that an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits
specified Subsection G(1)(a) and/or G(1)(b) of this § 75-3G, then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified streets
pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be
pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Town may adopt rules, policies and
requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter. Each
applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with such rules, policies and
requirements.
B. No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets used to provide
telecommunications services without first obtaining such permits or other
authorizations as may be required by the Town. No permits or other authorizations
for such construction or installation shall be issued prior to the granting of a
franchise or a revocable license pursuant to this chapter or such other authorization
as maybe required by applicable law.
§ 75-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 75-5
75:4
§ 75-5. Submission of application.
§ 75-6. Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license
to comply with all applicable laws, chapters, resolutions, rules, regulations and other
directives of the Town and any federal, state or local governmental authority having
jurisdiction.
§ 75-7. Negotiation of agreement.
If an application is complete and otherwise complies with applicable law, chapters,
resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the Town, including the provisions
of this chapter, the Town shall enter into negotiations with the applicant to determine
whether such applicant and the Town are able to reach agreement on the terms of the
proposed franchise or revocable license in accordance with §§ 75-10 and 75-11 of this
chapter. The Town may reject any application which is incomplete or otherwise fails to
comply with applicable law, chapters, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives
of the Town and any federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction.
§ 75-8. Factors for review of application.
A. Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to the Town
Administrator with a copy also to be submitted to the Town Counsel.
B. An application shall contain the following information with respect to the proposed
franchise or revocable license and such other information with respect to the
proposed franchise or revocable license as the Town may deem necessary or
appropriate, consistent with applicable law:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person the
Town may contact concerning the application.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be provided,
including, without limitation, a description of facilities and equipment.
(3) A description of the proposed franchise area or, in the case of a revocable
license, the specifically identified streets and/or portions thereof proposed to
be used.
(4) A proposed construction schedule and sequence.
(5) A map showing the proposed location of the applicant's telecommunications
system.
(6) Proposed financing plans for the construction and operation of the
telecommunications system by which the proposed telecommunications
services would be provided.
(7) A description of the legal, financial, technical and other appropriate
qualifications of the applicant to hold the franchise or revocable license.
(8) Ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated persons.
§ 75-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND § 75-8
75:5
§ 75-9. Procedure for consideration of and action on applications.
A. In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise or
revocable license, the Town Board may consider such factors as it deems
appropriate and in the public interest, provided that such factors are consistent with
applicable law, including, without limitation;
(1) The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the Town, including
the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the
applicant to the Town.
(2) The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the
applicant.
(3) The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the Town in good
condition throughout the term of the franchise or revocable license.
(4) Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the grant of the
franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact of the proposed
franchise or revocable license on the efficient use of the streets or utilities at
present and in the future.
(5) The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical
requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions, limitations, requirements
and policies with respect to the franchise or revocable license.
(6) The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise or
revocable license agreement to protect the public interest, consistent with
applicable law.
(7) Any other public interest factors or considerations that the Town has a lawful
right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the Town for safeguarding
the interests of the Town and the public.
B. Consistent with applicable law, the Town may develop and implement policies and
requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient capacity reasonably to
accommodate existing and future uses in a rational and efficient manner. In
evaluating an applicant for a franchise or revocable license, the Town may consider
an applicant's proposals for addressing capacity needs and compliance with Town
policies and requirements.
A. The Town Board may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of
such other steps as the Town Board deems necessary or appropriate to consider and
act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses and to determine whether a
franchise or revocable license should be granted to an applicant, and may require
the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In
considering applications, the Town Board may seek advice from Town officials,
departments, agencies, boards, commissions or bodies, from such other advisory
bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may
request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the Town Board,
which may include recommendations with respect to such applications.
§ 75-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 75-9
75:6
§ 75-10. Terms and conditions of franchise.
B. Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate
by the Town Board, the Town Board may grant or deny the franchise or revocable
license, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise or revocable
license is granted.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be set forth in the separate chapter granting the franchise and/or in a
separate written agreement. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not
become effective until said separate chapter becomes effective and any separate
agreement is executed by both parties.
B. Such separate chapter or written agreement, among other things, shall address the
following subjects:
(1) The term of the franchise.
(2) The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be offered.
(3) The compensation to be paid to the Town, which shall include the payment of
fees and/or the provision of facilities or services.
(4) The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled.
(5) The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of
credit, to be put in place to insure the performance of the franchisee's
obligations under the franchise.
(6) The Town's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee.
(7) Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee.
(8) The obligation of the franchise to maintain complete and accurate books of
account and records, and the Town's inspection rights with respect thereto.
(9) Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods.
(10) Provisions to ensure that the franchise will comply with all applicable Town,
state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies.
(11) The obligation of the franchisee to supply an engineering site plan showing the
proposed location of the applicant's telecommunications system to all existing
poles, utilities, sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications systems and other
improvements in the streets, all of which shall be subject to approval by the
appropriate Town departments.
(12) Provisions to place reasonable limitations upon the assignment or other
transfer of the franchise.
(13) Remedies available to the Town to protect the Town's interest in the event of
the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise.
(14) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and
§ 75-9 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND § 75-10
75:7
§ 75-11. Terms and conditions of revocable license.
§ 75-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this chapter is,
for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission,
legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion, such declaration shall not affect
permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of
any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the
Federal Communications Commission.
(15) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the Town
and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations
resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of
improvements related to the franchise;
(16) Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the
streets of the Town are disrupted in connection with the construction of
improvements relating to the franchise.
(17) Such other provisions as the Town determines are necessary or appropriate in
furtherance of the public interest, consistent with applicable law.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted pursuant to
this chapter shall be set forth in the separate chapter granting the revocable license
and/or in a separate written agreement. A revocable license granted pursuant to this
chapter shall not become effective until the separate chapter granting the license
becomes effective and any separate written agreement is executed by both parties.
Such separate chapter and/or written agreement shall address the same subjects
listed in § 75-10 of this chapter, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The revocable license shall be for a term not to exceed 10 years from the date
that the chapter granting the revocable license becomes effective.
(2) The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the Town for cause or
for the Town's purposes.
(3) The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses previously granted
to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and
use of more than 2,500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the
use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of
telecommunications services to any person in the Town.
B. In the event that an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified
in Subsection A(3) of this § 75-11, then such telecommunications provider must
apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use
of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable
licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise
that may be granted.
§ 75-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 75-12
75:8
the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 75-13. Delegation.
The Town Board shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any
such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under
this chapter to any body, organization or official of the Town. Any such delegation,
redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an
amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or
revocable license or franchisee or licensee.
§ 75-14. Applicability to existing providers, franchisees and licensees.
To the extent permitted by law, the Town may determine to apply all or certain
provisions of this chapter to telecommunications providers and franchises, revocable
licenses and other right-of-way authorizations existing on the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 75-12 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND § 75-14
75:9

Chapter 76
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM
§ 76-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
A. It is the policy of both the Town of Mamaroneck and the State of New York to
reduce, and provide a certain amount of control over, the cost of purchasing energy
for the purpose of economic development, to promote deeper penetration of energy
efficiency and renewable energy resources, such as wind and solar, and wide
deployment of distributed energy resources, as well as to examine the retail energy
markets and increase participation of and benefits for residential and small
commercial (defined in § 76-2 below) consumers in the Town of Mamaroneck.
Among the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is community
choice aggregation, which allows local governments to determine the default
supplier of electricity and natural gas on behalf of its residential and small
commercial consumers.
B. The purpose of this Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program (defined in
§ 76-2 below) is to allow participating local governments, like the Town of
Mamaroneck, to procure energy supply service for their residential and small
commercial citizens, who will have the opportunity to opt out of the procurement,
while maintaining transmission and distribution service from the distribution utility
(defined in § 76-2 below) that currently supplies them with natural gas or
electricity. This chapter establishes a program that will allow Sustainable
Westchester (defined in § 76-2 below) to put out for bid the total amount of natural
gas and/or electricity being purchased by local residential and small commercial
consumers. Bundled customers (defined in § 76-2 below) will have the opportunity
to have more control over their overall energy costs, to spur clean energy innovation
and investment, to improve customer choice and value, and to protect the
environment, thereby fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and fulfilling an
important public purpose.
C. The Town of Mamaroneck is authorized to implement this Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New York
Municipal Home Rule Law, and State of New York Public Service Commission
Case No. 14-M-0564, Petition of Sustainable Westchester for Expedited Approval
for the Implementation of a Pilot Community Choice Aggregation Program within
the County of Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part (issued February 26,
2015), as may be amended, including subsequent orders of the Public Service
Commission issued in connection with or related to Case No. 14-M-0564
(collectively, the "Order"). "Order" shall also mean orders of the Public Service
Commission related to State of New York Public Service Commission Case No.
14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community
Choice Aggregation Programs (issued December 15, 2014), to the extent that orders
related to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Town of Mamaroneck not
otherwise permitted pursuant to orders related to Case 14-M-0564; provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict between orders from Case No. 14-M-0564
and orders from Case No 14-M-0224, orders from Case No 14-M-0564 shall govern
this Community Choice Aggregation(Energy) Program.
§ 75-14 COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) § 76-1
76:1
§ 76-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context
otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have the meanings employed in the
State of New York Public Service Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not
so defined there, as indicated below:
BUNDLED CUSTOMERS — Residential and small commercial consumers of
electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing fuels from the distribution utility
that currently supplies natural gas or electricity within the Town of Mamaroneck.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM or CCA
PROGRAM — A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the
distribution utility that currently supplies natural gas or electricity within the Town
of Mamaroneck as the default supplier for all bundled customers within the Town of
Mamaroneck.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — The owner or controller of the means of distribution of
the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service Commission.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — The New York State Public Service
Commission.
SMALL COMMERCIAL — Nonresidential customers as permitted by the Order.
SUPPLIERS — Energy service companies (ESCOs) that procure electric power and
natural gas for bundled customers in connection with this chapter or, alternatively,
generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities who procure and resell
electricity or natural gas.
SUSTAINABLE WESTCHESTER — The not-for-profit organization comprised of
member municipalities in Westchester County, New York, that utilize that name.
§ 76-3. Program established.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the Town of Mamaroneck."
A. A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program hereby is established by the
Town of Mamaroneck, whereby it intends to work together with Sustainable
Westchester to implement the CCA Program to the full extent permitted by the
Order, as set forth more fully herein. The role of the Town of Mamaroneck under
the CCA Program involves the aggregating of the electric and/or natural gas supply
of its residents and the entering into a contract with one or more suppliers for supply
and services. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of the utility
service shall remain with the distribution utility.
B. The Town of Mamaroneck's purchase of energy supply through a CCA Program is
not intended to constitute either the purchase of a public utility system, or the
furnishing of utility service. The Town of Mamaroneck will not take over any part
of the electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any
type of utility service, but instead will limit its activities to negotiating with
suppliers on behalf of participating residential and small commercial customers.
§ 76-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 76-3
76:2
§ 76-4. Procedures for eligibility; customer data sharing.
§ 76-5. Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and procedure.
C. In order to implement the CCA Program, the Town Board of the Town of
Mamaroneck will adopt one or more resolutions that outline the process of and
conditions for participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to
signing a contract for a compliant bid with one or more suppliers, all as consistent
with this chapter and the Order.
D. The Town of Mamaroneck recognizes that the Public Service Commission
supervises retail markets and participants in these markets through legislative and
regulatory authority and the uniform business practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which ESCOs
provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may be enrolled with
ESCOs. It will conduct the CCA Program in a manner that conforms to those rules
and acknowledges the Public Service Commission's role in this area.
A. As permitted by the Order, the Town of Mamaroneck may request from the
distribution utilities aggregated customer information by fuel type and service
classification on a rolling basis.
B. Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the Town of Mamaroneck, shall issue one or
more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to participants and may
then award a contract in accordance with the CCA Program.
C. Sustainable Westchester, or the Town of Mamaroneck if it so chooses, will then
request individual customer data from the distribution utility in accordance with the
CCA Program.
D. Sustainable Westchester, or the Town of Mamaroneck if it so chooses, and the
selected supplier will then notify bundled customers of the contract terms and their
opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
E. In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, the distribution utility operating
within the Town of Mamaroneck will provide to Sustainable Westchester, and to
the Town of Mamaroneck if it so chooses, aggregate and customer-specific data
(including usage data, capacity tag obligations, account numbers, and service
addresses) of all bundled customers in the Town of Mamaroneck not enrolled with
an ESCO.
F. Sustainable Westchester and the Town of Mamaroneck will protect customer
information as required by law, subject to the Order and the limitations of the law,
including but not limited to the New York State Freedom of Information Law.14
A. The Town of Mamaroneck independently or in conjunction with the supplier
chosen under the CCA Program will notify the residential and small commercial
consumers of fuels in the Town of Mamaroneck, by letter, and other means of
communication decided upon by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck, of
the decision to establish the CCA Program, of the contract terms with an ESCO,
14. Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 85 et seq.
§ 76-3 COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) § 76-5
76:3
§ 76-6. Verification and reporting.
Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report with the Public
Service Commission, which identifies the number of customers enrolled in the CCA
Program by municipality and customer class, the number of customers who returned
to utility service or service with another supplier during the reporting period, and the
average cost of commodity supply, by month, for the reporting period.
and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
B. The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided by the
distribution utility and will explain the CCA Program and the material provisions
of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by which the customer can opt out of
the CCA Program, and provide information on how the customer can access
additional information about the CCA Program. The supplier chosen under the
CCA Program will present a draft of the letter notice to the Town of Mamaroneck
for its review and approval before sending it to the residential and small commercial
customers of fuels in the Town of Mamaroneck.
C. The residential and small commercial customers of fuels in the Town of
Mamaroneck will have 20 days from the date that the letter notice is sent to opt out
of the CCA Program.
D. CCA Program bundled customers, upon enrollment, will receive a welcome letter
that will explain the customers' options for canceling the enrollment if they believe
they were enrolled incorrectly or otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA
Program in favor of another supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that
residential customers are entitled to the added protection of the mandated three-day
rescission period as detailed in Section 5(B)(3) of the Uniform Business Practices.
§ 76-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 76-6
76:4
Chapter 77
CONSERVATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 52.
Animals — See Ch. 58.
Firearms — See Ch. 100.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 114.
Noise — See Ch. 141.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 154.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
§ 77-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as "Local Law No. 3-1966 of the Town of
Mamaroneck."
§ 77-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSERVATION AREA — Any place or area in the Town of Mamaroneck legally
set apart and accepted as such and placed under the jurisdiction and care of the Town
Board, including any lake, pond, pool, river, brook or other body or stream of water,
either natural or artificial, located therein.
PERMIT — A written authorization for the exercise of a specified privilege authorized
by the Town Board.
PERSONS — Any individual, firm or corporation and all other entities of any kind
capable of being sued.
TOWN — The unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 77-3. Hours of use.
Conservation areas of the Town shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk only. No
person shall enter upon the conservation lands at any other time except for emergency
purposes, unless by written permit issued by the Town Board or its duly authorized
agent.
§ 77-4. Disturbing areas or improvements.
No person shall disturb any conservation lands or take up or remove or in any manner
disturb or interfere with any trees, shrubs, plants, soil, sod, compost, gravel, fences, signs
or any other property, except by direction of the Town Board and under the supervision
of its duly appointed custodian.
§ 76-6 CONSERVATION AREAS § 77-5
77:1
§ 77-5. Property damage.
No person shall cut, break, destroy or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub,
plant, grass, fence, post, railing, chain, sign, signpost, tree guard, lamp, lamppost, bridge
structure or any other property in or upon any conservation lands nor shall any fallen
trees or branches be cut or removed except under emergency circumstances and with the
exception of routine maintenance by the Town government.
§ 77-6. Wildlife.
No person shall hunt, chase, shoot, trap, catch, discharge or throw missiles at or disturb
any living creature in any conservation area.
§ 77-7. Fire prevention.
No person shall make, cause or allow any fire to be set in any part of any conservation
area or suffer or permit any person in or under his or her charge, custody or control to
make or cause any fire. All cigarettes, cigars or other such material must be thoroughly
extinguished in order to prevent fire, and no stubs, butts, matches or other such materials
shall be scattered or disposed of except in designated receptacles placed along the trails
in the area.
§ 77-8. Littering.
No person shall throw, place, deposit, drop, excrete, discharge or leave in or on any
conservation lands or any waters therein or on any paths, walks, trails or roads thereof
any garbage, organic refuse, offal, urine, fecal or other offensive matter, ashes, cinders,
stone, dirt, filth, dross, rubbish, grass clippings, leaves, paper, pasteboard, wood, metal,
fruits, vegetables or any other foodstuffs, vehicles or any parts thereof or any
manufacturing, trade or household waste or any other refuse material or any substance
or material of any nature whatsoever.
§ 77-9. Sports.
No person shall wade or bathe in or enter in or upon the waters in any conservation area;
or place or enter or operate any raft, float or similar object thereon; or place or operate
any toy boat or similar device thereon. No person shall skate, ski, toboggan, sleigh or
indulge in any of the so-called "winter sports" in or on any conservation area or any of
the waters therein, except within such areas as the Town Board may, in its discretion,
from time to time designate and set apart for such purpose and then only at such times,
in such manner and subject to such regulations as said Board may direct and determine.
§ 77-10. Camping and picnicking.
No person shall camp, bivouac, pitch tent, picnic, feast or consume food or beverages in
or upon any conservation area or on any of the waters, paths or trails thereof.
§ 77-11. Games.
No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick or strike with any implement whatsoever
any baseball, golf ball, football or other object or play at any game in or upon any
§ 77-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 77-11
77:2
conservation lands.
§ 77-12. Animal damage to plantings.
No person shall tie any animal to any tree, plant or shrub in or upon any conservation
area or, having charge of any such animal, allow or cause it to injure any such tree, plant
or shrub.
§ 77-13. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall in any recreation area:
§ 77-14. Traffic regulations.
No person shall operate, drive or propel and no owner thereof shall cause or permit
to be operated, driven or propelled on any conservation area any bicycle, motorcycle,
motor-tricycle, automobile or other vehicles, however propelled, or any vehicle drawn
by horses or other animals, recklessly or negligently or at a speed or in a manner so as
to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. No person shall propel, ride, drive
or operate on any footpath, walk or elsewhere in any conservation area, other than on
the streets and roadways thereof, any bicycle, tricycle, scooter or roller skates or other
vehicle of any nature whatsoever other than baby carriages, wheelchairs and similar
vehicles designed exclusively for the transportation of infants and of disabled persons.
No horseback riding shall be permitted in any conservation area. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the operation of the fire-fighting equipment or police vehicles on the trails,
nor shall trucks or other equipment operated by duly authorized personnel under the
direction of the Town Board be prohibited.
A. Use any threatening, abusive or insulting language.
B. Do any obscene or indecent act.
C. Throw stones or missiles.
D. Beg or publicly solicit subscriptions or contributions.
E. Tell fortunes.
F. Play cards or other games of chance or use or operate any gaming table or
instruments.
G. Climb upon any tree, building, wall, fence, shelter, seat, sign pole or other
construction.
H. Fire or carry any firearms, firecrackers, torpedo or fireworks.
I. Make a fire.
J. Do any act tending to a breach of the public peace.
K. Carry on any commercial activity.
§ 77-11 CONSERVATION AREAS § 77-15
77:3
§ 77-15. Parking.
No person shall park a motorcycle, automobile or horse-drawn vehicle in any
conservation area except within such area as the Town Board may, in its discretion from
time to time, designate and set apart for such purpose and then only at such times, in such
manner and subject to such rules and regulations as said Board may direct and determine.
No person shall park, place or leave any bicycle, tricycle, scooter, wheelchair, baby
carriage or similar vehicles or any object or thing whatsoever on any footpath, walk,
trail or steps or any other place designated for the use of pedestrians in any conservation
area or in any place where such objects might or could obstruct or interfere with the free
passage of pedestrians therein.
§ 77-16. Advertisements.
No person shall post, affix, place or leave any bill, placard, notice or other paper in
or upon any structure, tree, fence, post, railing, bench, rock, article or thing within any
conservation area nor paint, write, mark, draw or affix with any substance or material
whatsoever thereon or therein any advertisement, notice of exhortation or any other
writing, drawing or making of any kind whatsoever, and no person shall distribute, hand
out or cast about any card, circular, pamphlet or other printed matter or other property or
material of any nature whatsoever within any conservation area.
§ 77-17. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a violation, and
any person violating the same shall be guilty of a violation and shall, on conviction
before a Town Justice, be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 77-15 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 77-17
77:4
Chapter 82
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 82, Dances and Dance Halls, adopted 2-17-1937 (Ch. 21 of the 1975
Code), as amended, was repealed 10-2-2019 by L.L. No. 10-2019. See now Ch. 147,
Operating Permits.]
§ 77-17 (RESERVED) § 77-17
82:1

Chapter 86
DISCRIMINATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tenant protection — See Ch. 202.
§ 86-1. Findings and purpose. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
The Town Board hereby finds and declares that acts of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry
and discrimination which deny a person the opportunity to sell, purchase, lease, rent
or obtain financing for the purchase or lease of housing accommodations because of
race, creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual preference or disability threaten the
fundamental rights and privileges of residents and/or those seeking residency in the
Town of Mamaroneck and undermine the foundations of a free, democratic state. The
Town Board further declares it to be public policy of the Town of Mamaroneck to
eliminate and prevent discrimination and segregation based on race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, sexual preference or disability and to safeguard the right of every
person to sell, purchase, lease or rent or obtain financing for the purchase or lease of land
and housing accommodations without regard to race, creed, color, national origin, sex,
sexual preference or disability. In accordance with this policy, it shall be the duty of all
Town officers, officials and employees to exercise any governmental function relating
to the use, sale or occupancy of land, real property or housing accommodations in such
manner, consistent with law, that all discrimination be prevented.
§ 86-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are described as follows:
COUNSEL TO THE TOWN—The Counsel to the Town or other attorney at law acting
on behalf of the Town of Mamaroneck.
EFFECT THE ELIMINATION OF THE DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE — The
respondent shall make the specific housing accommodation available to the complainant.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION—Any place in which human habitation is permitted
by Town ordinances.
NATIONAL ORIGIN — Includes ancestry.
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal
representatives and successors, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers. The plural shall
include the singular and vice versa.
RESPONDENT—Any person charged with a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
TOWN OF MAMARONECK — All land in the geographical boundaries of the Town
and any lands held in a proprietary capacity by the Town outside said geographical
limits, but no land in incorporated villages.
§ 77-17 DISCRIMINATION § 86-3
86:1
§ 86-3. Certain acts prohibited.
A. No person or agent acting on behalf of any person shall: [Amended 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 14-1996]
(1) Refuse to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation or land in the Town
of Mamaroneck to any person or persons or refuse to accept an application
from or negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation
or land to any person or persons or represent that any housing accommodation
or land is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available or otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation or any
facilities of any housing accommodation or land from any person or persons
because of race, creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual preference or
disability of such person or persons. The provisions of this § 86-3A(1) shall
not apply to the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two families who live
independent of each other if the owner or members of his family reside in one
of such housing accommodations or to the rental of a room or rooms in a
housing accommodation designed for a one-family occupancy if such rental is
by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing
accommodation and he or members of his family reside in such housing
accommodation.
(2) Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color, national
origin, sex, sexual preference or disability in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
(3) Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement,
advertisement or publication or use any form of application for the purchase,
rental or lease of any housing accommodation or land or make any record of
inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation or land which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national
origin, sex, sexual preference or disability or any intent to make any such
limitation, specification or discrimination.
B. No person, bank, trust company, private banker, savings bank, industrial bank,
savings and loan association, credit union, investment company, mortgage
company, insurance company or other financial institution or lender doing business
in the Town of Mamaroneck (and, if incorporated, regardless of whether
incorporated under the laws of the State of New York, the United States or any
other jurisdiction) or any officer, agent or employee thereof to whom application is
made for financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation or land in the
Town of Mamaroneck shall: [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(1) Discriminate against any such applicant or applicants because of the race,
creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual preference or disability of such
applicant or applicants or of any member, stockholder, director, officer or
employee of such applicant or applicants or of the prospective occupants or
§ 86-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 86-3
86:2
§ 86-4. Enforcement.
tenants of such housing accommodation or land in the granting, withholding,
extending or renewing or in the fixing of the rates, terms or conditions or any
such financial assistance.
(2) Use any form or application for such financial assistance or make any record
of inquiry in connection with applications for such financial assistance which
expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination
because of race, creed, color, national origin, sex, sexual preference or
disability.
C. No person shall aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts
forbidden under this chapter or attempt to do so.
D. No person engaged in any activity to which this chapter applies shall retaliate or
discriminate against any person because such person has opposed any practices
forbidden under this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified
or assisted in any proceeding under this chapter.
A. The Counsel to the Town of the Town of Mamaroneck is authorized to receive at
all times verified complaints setting forth, in writing, the following: the name and
address of the property owner; the address of the property involved; the name and
address of the individual, agent or lending institution which allegedly engaged in
one of the acts prohibited by § 86-3 of this chapter; and a detailed statement
describing the alleged prohibited act.
B. Upon receipt of such complaint, the Counsel to the Town shall forthwith serve
copies thereof upon the following:
(1) The respondent.
(2) The Town of Mamaroneck Commission on Human Rights.
(3) The New York State Division of Human Rights.
(4) The United States Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department.
C. Immediately after receipt of the complaint, but no later than three business days
thereafter, the Counsel to the Town shall conduct an investigation to determine
whether the complaint has merit and, if he finds such to be the case, shall attempt
to obtain from the respondent a written agreement to withhold the housing
accommodation in question from sale or rental for a reasonable period pending
disposition of the complaint and, by conference and conciliation, to effect the
elimination of the discriminatory practice. The Town of Mamaroneck Commission
on Human Rights may participate in such investigation in such manner as it may
deem to be proper.
D. The Counsel to the Town is hereby authorized to apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a restraining order or temporary injunction, or both, to compel
compliance with or prevent a breach of this chapter.
E. If the respondent agrees to the elimination of the discriminatory practice, such
§ 86-3 DISCRIMINATION § 86-4
86:3
§ 86-5. Penalties for offenses.
agreement shall be reduced to writing, shall be subscribed by the respondent and
shall contain a provision that the respondent will refrain from the commission of
discriminatory practices in the future and may contain such further provisions as
are agreed upon between the respondent and the Counsel to the Town. Any such
agreement shall be subject to ratification by the Commission on Human Rights. The
Counsel to the Town shall not otherwise disclose what has transpired in the course
of such endeavors, except as provided in § 86-4F immediately following.
F. In the event that conference and conciliation fail to produce an agreement for the
elimination of the discriminatory practice, the Counsel to the Town shall promptly
seek the imposition of a fine, as hereinafter provided, for any violation of this
chapter and may, at the request of the complainant, refer the entire record of the
proceedings conducted by his office to the New York State Division on Human
Rights for appropriate action.
A. Any person who shall engage in any of the acts prohibited by § 86-3 of this chapter,
as hereinabove defined, shall be subject to a fine for the first offense of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or
both, and for each and every subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both.
B. Any person who shall execute a verified complaint falsely charging another with
any of the prohibited acts, as hereinabove defined, knowing such charge to be false,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.
§ 86-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 86-5
86:4
Chapter 90
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
§ 90-1. Purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical energy,
this chapter shall regulate the design, installation, alteration, replacement, maintenance,
repair and inspection of wiring for electric light, power, heat, signal systems and other
uses operating in excess of 50 volts and the installation of all electrical equipment and
apparatus operating in excess of 50 volts located in or on any real property in the Town
of Mamaroneck, County of Westchester, State of New York.
§ 90-2. License required for electricians. [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Electricians must possess a valid license from any Westchester County municipality or
be the owner/occupant of a one-family residence in which the electrical work is to be
done.
§ 90-3. Adoption of standards.
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code except when the provisions of this chapter
or any other local law, ordinance or building code of the Town of Mamaroneck shall
prescribe differently, in which event compliance with the provisions of such local law,
ordinance or building code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this chapter.
The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as "National Fire
Protection Association Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and adopted by the American
Standards Association.
§ 90-4. Enforcing agency designated.
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New York Board
of Fire Underwriters Electrical Bureau are hereby authorized and deputized as agents
of the Town of Mamaroneck to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical
installations heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or disapprove the same.
In no event, however will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be
a charge against the Town of Mamaroneck. Whenever reference is hereinafter made to
the "Inspector," such reference shall be to the aforesaid Chief Inspector or to any of said
duly appointed inspectors of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters.
§ 90-5. Duties of Inspector. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
§ 86-5 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 90-5
90:1
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
It shall be the duty of the Inspector upon making an inspection or reinspection of any
electrical installation in or on real property in the Town of Mamaroneck to issue a written
report to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, whose duty it shall be to enforce all the provisions of the Electrical
Code. The Inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations,
devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties in the Town of Mamaroneck
upon the written request of an authorized official of the Town of Mamaroneck, upon the
written request of the owner of a building in the Town of Mamaroneck or his electrical
contractor or upon his own volition. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the
Inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an authorized official
of the Town of Mamaroneck. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written
reports of all inspections to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or to the proper officials of the Town of
Mamaroneck and to the owners and/or lessees of property where defective electrical
installations and equipment are found upon inspection. He shall authorize the issuing of
a certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in conformity
with the Electrical Code. He shall send a copy of said certificate of compliance to the
Clerk of the Town of Mamaroneck, to the owner, lessee or electrical contractor involved
or to any official designated to receive such certificate or reports.
§ 90-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of the Electrical Code shall not apply to electrical installations in railway
cars, automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a railway,
electrical or communication utility in the exercise of its function as such utility and
located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. The Electrical Code
shall not apply to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, testing or repair
of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing or repair as its principal business. It
shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the government
of the United States or the State of New York.
§ 90-7. Construal of provisions.
The Electrical Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility
of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices,
appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to a person or property caused by
any defect therein nor shall the Town of Mamaroneck or the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection
made pursuant to the Electrical Code.
§ 90-8. Penalties for offenses; other remedies.
A. It shall be a violation of the Electrical Code for any person, firm or corporation to
install or cause to be installed or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat or
power in or on properties in the Town of Mamaroneck until an application for
inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters. It shall be
a violation of the Electrical Code for a person, firm or corporation to connect or
§ 90-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 90-8
90:2
cause to be connected electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on premises
in the Town of Mamaroneck to any source of electrical energy supply prior to the
issuance of a temporary or a final certificate of compliance by the New York Board
of Fire Underwriters Electrical Bureau.
B. Any person, firm, entity or corporation and/or principal of a corporation found to
be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $250 for each
violation and/or up to 15 days' imprisonment for the active officer. Each week in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. In the event that any person, firm, entity or corporation and/or principal of a
corporation shall continue a violation and the Town Board shall make a finding that
such violation is detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town, then the Town Board may direct the Counsel for the Town
to apply to the Supreme Court for relief, directing that the violation be corrected or
removed and that all costs and expenses incurred by the Town of Mamaroneck in
connection with such proceeding, including the actual cost of correction or removal
of the condition causing the violation, shall be assessed against the offender and
shall be added to the next year's tax roll and become a lien against said property.
The Town Board may direct, by resolution, that the Town may correct violations
creating emergency conditions of danger by forthwith entering the property and
correcting the violation and assessing the cost of the same to the violator as set forth
above.
§ 90-8 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 90-8
90:3

Chapter 91
EMERGENCY ACCESS TO BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 50.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Fire safety zones — See Ch. 108.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 91-1. Findings; legislative intent.
§ 91-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this
section:
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Chief's designee.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of the Town of Mamaroneck.
FIRE DISTRICT — The unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
KEY BOX—A box of a size and type approved by the Fire Department that utilizes the
security key adopted by the Fire Department.
KEY SWITCH — A two-position key switch, approved by the Fire Department that
utilizes the security key adopted by the Fire Department.
A. The Town Board finds that in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck, during fires or
when other emergencies arise, the Fire Department must be able to gain access to
buildings of a certain size or which contain a certain use and to properties where
access is restricted.
B. One recognized method for providing access to firefighters and other emergency
responders is the installation of "key boxes." Key boxes are located outside
buildings. They contain keys to locks within the building which lock areas, such as
mechanical rooms, to which firefighters need access to, for example, to shut off
electrical service during a conflagration. To maintain security, only the Fire
Department will have the keys that open the key boxes.
C. For properties to which access is restricted by locked fences or gates, security
padlocks or key switches provide access to firefighters and other emergency
responders when there is an emergency. As with key boxes, for security purposes,
only the Fire Department will have the keys that unlock the security padlocks or
turn the key switches.
D. This chapter of the Code provides the rules and the requirements for key boxes,
security padlocks and key switches.
§ 90-8 EMERGENCY ACCESS TO BUILDINGS § 91-2
91:1
MANDATORY STORAGE CABINET — A container which holds the material safety
data sheets regarding the hazardous materials or controlled substances located within a
protected building and such other information as the Fire Chief may require.
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS — Information regarding hazardous materials
or controlled substances located within a protected building.
PROTECTED BUILDING — Any structure located within the Fire District which
contains or was built to contain a use which meets the description of either a principal
use or a special use in §§ 240-21A(2), 240-21B(1), (2) or (3), 240-21.1, 240-24A(2),
240-25, 240-30, 240-31, 240-32 or 240-32.1 of the Code. Notwithstanding the previous
sentence, a building which contains more than one dwelling unit but either contains no
commercial uses or contains commercial uses that are used primarily by the residents of
that building is a protected building only if it contains five or more dwelling units.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The owner of and any person designated by the owner to
manage a protected property or a restricted property.
RESTRICTED PROPERTY—Property to which access is restricted by a barrier which
can be opened only by a key, a swipe card, the entry of a code or some other means not
known by the general public.
SECURITY PADLOCK—A padlock approved by the Fire Department that utilizes the
security key adopted by the Fire Department.
§ 91-3. Contents of key box.
Key boxes for a protected building shall contain:
A. Three individual duplicate rings of keys for all locked:
(1) Points of ingress to, or egress from that building;
(2) Mechanical rooms;
(3) Utility rooms;
(4) Storage rooms;
(5) Garages;
(6) Control valves;
(7) Fire alarm panels;
(8) Fences or secured areas;
(9) Accesses to elevators;
(10) Control rooms;
(11) Panels containing controls or shut-off devices for systems within the building;
(12) Firefighter service operations for facility elevators;
(13) Common areas of the occupancy;
§ 91-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 91-3
91:2
§ 91-4. Requirements.
§ 91-5. Installation and maintenance of key box.
(14) Mandatory Storage Cabinets; and
(15) Other areas that may be required by the Fire Chief.
B. A card the minimum size of which is three inches by five inches, which contains
the names and the telephone numbers of the people to be contacted in the case of an
emergency.
C. If required by the Fire Chief, floor plans of the building showing the location of all
shutoff valves.
A. One or more key boxes shall be installed on the exterior wall of each protected
building. The Fire Chief shall determine the number and designate the location(s)
of the key box or key boxes. Once installed, a key box shall not be relocated without
the express written consent of the Fire Chief.
B. Any protected building storing hazardous materials or controlled substances shall
have one or more mandatory storage cabinets. A mandatory storage cabinet shall
contain material safety data sheets for the hazardous materials or controlled
substances stored in such building. The Fire Chief shall determine the number and
designate the location(s) for the mandatory storage cabinet. Once installed, a
mandatory storage cabinet shall not be relocated without the express written
consent of the Fire Chief.
C. All barriers to a restricted property shall be equipped with a key box, a key switch
or a security padlock. The Fire Chief shall determine the number and designate the
location(s) for each key box, key switch and/or security padlock. Once installed,
neither a key box, a key switch nor a security padlock shall be relocated without the
express written consent of the Fire Chief. If a restricted property is equipped with a
key box, such key box shall not be required to contain all of the items specified in
§ 91-3 but shall contain the device by which such barrier can be opened or the
instructions for opening the barrier.
A. Both the owner of and the responsible party for a protected building shall be
responsible for installing and maintaining all key boxes that are required for such
building.
B. Both the owner of and the responsible party for a restricted property shall be
responsible for installing and maintaining all key boxes, key switches and/or
security padlocks that are required for such property.
C. Key boxes, key switches and security padlocks shall be installed and maintained in
a manner that makes them free from physical and visual obstruction.
D. Key boxes, key switches and security padlocks shall not be of a color which
obscures them from view.
E. Both the owner of and the responsible party for a protected building shall be
responsible for installing a decal in a form approved by the Fire Chief to each key
§ 91-3 EMERGENCY ACCESS TO BUILDINGS § 91-5
91:3
§ 91-6. Applicability.
§ 91-7. Enforcement Officers. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Summonses for the violation of any provision of this chapter can be issued by the
Building Inspector, the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, an Assistant Building Inspector, a Code Enforcement Officer or a Fire
Inspector.
§ 91-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
box and at such other location(s) as the Fire Chief may determine. Once affixed,
decals shall not be relocated without the express written consent of the Fire Chief.
F. Both the owner of and the responsible party for a protected building shall be
responsible for:
(1) Notifying the Fire Department whenever a key inside the key box for that
building no longer will open the item within the building it is supposed to
open;
(2) Providing the Fire Department with a key that opens such item;
(3) Notifying the Fire Department whenever the telephone numbers of the people
to be contacted in the case of an emergency and the name and telephone
number of an occupant changes;
(4) Providing the Fire Department with an up-to-date card that complies with
§ 91-3B;
(5) Notifying the Fire Department whenever floor plans of the building or the
location of any shutoff valve changes; and
(6) Providing the Fire Department with up-to-date floor plans showing the
location of all shutoff valves if the Fire Chief required a floor plan to be
provided for the key box.
G. The owner of a protected building or a restricted property shall be responsible for
notifying the Fire Department whenever there is a new person designated by the
owner to manage such building or property.
A. All protected buildings and restricted properties for which a certificate of
occupancy shall not have been issued on the effective date of this chapter must
comply with this chapter before a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
B. All protected buildings and restricted properties for which a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued on or before the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with this chapter by August 31, 2010.
C. The owner of a protected building or a restricted property shall bear all of the costs
incurred in order to comply with this chapter.
§ 91-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 91-8
91:4
which shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 15 days, or both, and also shall be liable for the civil penalty imposed
by § 106-55C of the Code. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 91-9. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to buildings or properties owned by the United States of
America, the State of New York, the County of Westchester or the Mamaroneck Union
Free School District.
§ 91-8 EMERGENCY ACCESS TO BUILDINGS § 91-9
91:5

Chapter 92
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 91-9 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 91-9
92:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 92-1. Authority, intent and purpose.
§ 92-2. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.2 shall be amended to add the following:
ACTION — Development projects in areas that abut, adjoin or are adjacent to the
Town of Mamaroneck that may result in substantial impacts to the street and areas that
surround them with the Town of Mamaroneck, including, but not limited to, impacts
upon natural resources, noise, traffic, cultural or aesthetic resources, existing patterns of
population concentration and community or neighborhood character.[Added 4-12-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICER — The Town Administrator or his designee who shall
assist the lead agencies in the Town by processing the paperwork for this law and
advising applicants for Town permits and approvals on compliance therewith. The
Environmental Officer shall also:
SEQRA — The State of New York Environmental Quality Review Act and regulations
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Mamaroneck Environmental Quality
Review Law."
B. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, Article 8
(SEQRA) of the New York Environmental Conservation Law (providing for
environmental quality review of actions which may have significant effect on the
environment) and Part 617, the rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to implement SEQRA and Part 617 and to incorporate
environmental factors in the existing planning and decisionmaking processes of the
Town. This purpose is to be accomplished through provisions for identifying
actions that may have a significant effect on the environment and by requiring that
any action found to have such an effect will be carried out in a manner that will
minimize the possible harmful effect.
D. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, the regulations contained
in 6 NYCRR 617 et seq. and any amendments thereto are hereby adopted as the
procedures, rules and regulations relative to Town environmental quality reviews
undertaken by any agency.
Receive a copy of all reports, statements, forms and notices as may be required by
this chapter.
A.
Effect or cause to be effected the posting and publication and notification
requirements of 6 NYCRR 617.8 and 617.10 and this chapter.
B.
Recommend to the Town such amendments to the chapter consistent with 6
NYCRR 617 et seq. as may from time to time be necessary or advisable.
C.
Recommend to the Town such local regulations consistent with 6 NYCRR 617 et
seq. as may from time to time be necessary or advisable.
D.
§ 92-1 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-2
92:3
promulgated thereunder.
SIGNIFICANT FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT — A state-designated fish and
wildlife habitat area as identified by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to 19 NYCRR 602.5.
TOWN — The unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 92-3. Individual agency procedures to implement SEQRA.
The procedures of 6 NYCRR 617.4 shall be amended in that the last sentence of
617.4(h) shall state: "Any unlisted action located partly or wholly inside or substantially
contiguous to a CEA must be treated as a Type I action by an involved agency."
§ 92-4. Initial review of actions.
The requirements of 6 NYCRR 617.5 shall be amended to add the following after
617.5(d): "All agencies must also comply with the Town of Mamaroneck Local
Consistency Law."
§ 92-5. Notice and filing requirements.
The requirements of 6 NYCRR 617.10 shall be amended in that the last paragraph of
(c)(3) shall state: "The notice of completion shall be filed as prescribed for negative
declarations in paragraph (a)(2) of this section and shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Town. A copy thereof shall be posted on a signboard and other
appropriate means shall be utilized to provide notice to the public. The department shall
publish all notices of its completion of all EIS's in the 'ENB'."
§ 92-6. Criteria for determining significance.
The criteria of 6 NYCRR 617.11 shall be amended to add the following:
§ 92-7. Type I actions. [Amended 9-4-1996 by L.L. No. 16-1996; 2-5-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997]
The list of Type I actions as set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.4 shall be adopted in whole
hereby with the following modifications and amendments:
A. Section 617.11(a)(2) shall include impacts on a Significant Fish and Wildlife
Habitat or a Critical Environmental Area (CEA).
B. Section 617.11(a)(4) shall include but not be limited to the Larchmont-
Mamaroneck Local Waterfront Revitalization Program or municipally adopted
Master Plans.
A. The following actions are Type I if they are to be directly undertaken, funded or
approved by an agency:
(1) The adoption of a municipality's land use plan, the adoption by any agency of
a comprehensive resource management plan or the adoption of a
municipality's comprehensive zoning regulations. Also, the adoption of
comprehensive building codes, comprehensive solid waste plans, state and
§ 92-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-7
92:4
regional transportation plans, water resource basin plans, comprehensive water
quality studies, area-wide water treatment plans, state and local environmental
plans, local flood control plans and the like.
(2) The adoption of changes in the allowable uses within any zoning district
affecting 15 or more acres of the district.
(3) The granting of a zoning change, at the request of an applicant, for an action
that meets or exceeds one or more of the thresholds given elsewhere on this
list.
(4) The acquisition, sale, lease, annexation or other transfer of by a public agency
of more than five contiguous acres of land.
(5) The construction of new residential units which meet or exceed the following
thresholds:
(a) Ten units not to be connected (at commencement of habitation) to
existing community or public water and sewerage systems, including
sewage treatment works.
(b) Forty units to be connected (at the commencement of habitation) to
existing community or public water and sewerage systems, including
sewage treatment works.
(6) Activities, other than the construction of residential facilities, which meet or
exceed any of the following thresholds, or the expansion of existing
nonresidential facilities by more than 50% of any of the following thresholds:
(a) A project or action which involves the physical alteration of 10 acres.
(b) A project or action which would use ground or surface water in excess of
5,000 gallons in any day.
(c) Parking for 75 vehicles or more.
(d) A facility with more than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(e) Incinerators operating at a refuse-charging rate exceeding 75 tons of
refuge per twenty-four-hour day.
(f) Storage facilities designed for or capable of storing 1,000 or more gallons
of liquid natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or other fuels.
(g) An independent combustion installation operating at a total heating input
exceeding 10,000,000 Btu per hour.
(h) Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems emitting air contaminants
assigned an environmental rating of A under 6 NYCRR 212 and whose
total emission rate of such a contaminant exceeds one pound per hour.
(i) Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems of which the total emission
rate of all air contaminants exceeds 25 tons per day.
(j) An industrial facility which has a yearly average discharge flow, based
§ 92-7 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-7
92:5
on days of discharge, of greater than 25,000 gallons per day.
(7) Any structure exceeding 100 feet above original ground level in a locality
without any zoning regulation pertaining to height.
(8) Any unlisted action that includes a nonagricultural use occurring wholly or
partially within an agricultural district certified pursuant to the Agriculture and
Markets Law, Article 25-AA, §§ 303 and 304, which exceeds 25% of any
threshold established in this section.
(9) Any unlisted action (unless the action is designed for the preservation of the
facility or site) occurring wholly or partially within or substantially contiguous
to any historic building, structure, site or district or prehistoric site listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or that has been proposed by the New
York State Board of Historic Preservation for a recommendation by the State
Historic Preservation Officer for nomination for inclusion in said national
register or that is listed on the State Register of Historic Places. [The National
Register of Historic Places is established by 36 CFR 60 and 63 (1994); see 6
NYCRR 617.17.]
(10) Any unlisted action which exceeds 25% of any threshold in this section,
occurring wholly or partially within or substantially contiguous to any publicly
owned or operated parkland, recreation area or designated open space,
including any site on the Register of National Natural Landmarks pursuant to
36 CFR 62 (1994). (See 6 NYCRR 617.17.)
(11) Any unlisted action which exceeds a Type I threshold established by an
involved agency pursuant to 6 NYCRR 617.14.
(12) The construction of new or expansion by more than 50% of the existing size,
square footage or usage of existing (or any funding, licensing or planning
activities in respect thereto):
(a) Heliports, including hovercraft and seaplanes.
(b) Facilities or institutions, including but not limited to hospitals, schools,
correction facilities and office centers.
(c) Sanitary landfills.
(d) Chemical pulp mills, portland cement plants, iron and steel plants,
primary aluminum ore reduction plants, sulfuric acid plants, petroleum
refineries, lime plants, sulfur recovery plants, fuel conversion plants, byproduct
coke manufacturing plants and cogeneration plants.
(13) Any unlisted action which will result in permanent change to the channel or
bed of lakes or streams with a water surface in excess of 1/4 acre.
(14) Any unlisted action which involves disturbance of soils covering more than
1/4 acre on an average slope of 40% or greater that impacts on adjacent areas
or downstream areas.
(15) Any proposed publicly or privately owned sewage treatment works.
§ 92-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-7
92:6
§ 92-8. Type II actions.
The list of Type II actions as set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.13(d) shall be adopted in whole
hereby and shall include the following actions:
(16) The clearcutting of one or more contiguous acres of forest.
(17) The discharge of radioactive material into the air, water or sanitary sewer
(except as provided for in 6 NYCRR 380.5) or burial of such materials.
A. The following actions are Type II actions:
(1) The replacement of a facility, in kind, on the same site unless such facility
meets or exceeds any of the thresholds in 6 NYCRR 617.12.
(2) The granting of individual setback and lot line variances.
(3) Agricultural farm management practices, including construction, maintenance
and repair of farm buildings and structures and land use changes consistent
with generally accepted principles of farming.
(4) The repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of new travel
lanes.
(5) Street openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance of existing utility
facilities.
(6) The installation of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and
highways, other than multiple fixtures on long stretches.
(7) Public or private forest management practices, other than the removal of trees
or the application of herbicides or pesticides.
(8) The construction or placement of minor structures accessory or appurtenant to
existing facilities, including garages, carports, patios, home swimming pools,
fences, barns or other buildings not changing land use or density, including the
upgrading of buildings to meet building or fire codes.
(9) The maintenance of existing landscaping or natural growth.
(10) The mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, uses and ownership patterns.
(11) Inspections and licensing activities relating to the qualifications of individuals
or businesses to engage in their business or profession.
(12) The purchase or sale of furnishings, equipment or supplies, including surplus
government property, other than land, radioactive material, pesticides,
herbicides or other hazardous materials.
(13) Collective bargaining activities.
(14) Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement systems or
refinancing existing debt.
(15) The routine or continuing agency administration and management, not
§ 92-7 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-8
92:7
including new programs or major reordering of priorities.
(16) License, lease and permit renewals or transfers of ownership thereof, where
there will be no material change in permit conditions or the scope of permitted
activities.
(17) Routine activities of educational institutions not involving capital
construction, including school closings, but not changes in use related to such
closings.
(18) Information collection, including basic data collection and research, water
quality and pollution studies, traffic counts, engineering studies, surveys,
subsurficial investigations and soils studies that do not commit the agency to
undertake, fund or approve any Type I or unlisted action.
(19) Minor temporary uses of land having negligible or no permanent effect on the
environment.
(20) The extension of utility distribution facilities to serve new or altered single- or
two-family residential structures or to render service in approved subdivisions.
(21) The promulgation of regulations, policies, procedures and legislative decisions
in connection with any Type II action in this chapter.
(22) The footprint of a residence.
(a) The construction of a single- or two-family residence or the alteration of
a single- or two-family residence which increases the footprint of the
residence by 20% or more, except if such construction or alteration:
[1] Is in conjunction with the construction or alteration of two or more
such residences;
[2] Is to be located in any of the critical areas as described in
§ 92-7A(12), (14) and (16); or
[3] Is in an unsewered area.
(b) The alteration of a single- or two-family residence which increases the
footprint by less than 20% shall be a Type II action wherever located.
(23) The alteration of a store, office or restaurant designed for an occupant load of
20 persons or fewer, except if such alteration:
(a) Is in conjunction with the alteration of two or more stores, offices or
restaurants; or
(b) Is to be located in any of the critical areas as described in § 92-7A(12),
(14) and (16).
(24) The operation, repair, maintenance or minor alteration of existing structures,
land uses and equipment.
(25) The restoration or reconstruction of a structure, in whole or in part, being
increased or expanded by less than 20% of its existing size, square footage or
§ 92-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-8
92:8
usage, except if in a critical area as set forth in § 92-7A(12), (14) and (16).
(26) Regulatory activities not involving construction or changed land use relating
to one individual business, institution or facility, such as inspections, testing,
operating certification or licensing.
§ 92-8 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-8
92:9

ARTICLE II
Designation of Critical Environmental Areas
§ 92-9. Designation.
§ 92-10. Premium River - Pine Brook Wetlands Complex.
A. The Town of Mamaroneck hereby designates the following areas as "critical
environmental areas" (CEA) because of their exceptional or unique character
pursuant to Section 617.4 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations:
(1) Premium River - Pine Brook Wetlands Complex.
(2) Hommocks - East Creek Wetlands Complex.
(3) Larchmont Reservoir - Sheldrake - Leatherstocking Freshwater Wetlands
Complex.
B. These areas were previously adopted by the Town of Mamaroneck under Local
Law No. 8 of 1986 and Local Law No. 4 of 1987. Each of these areas is more
specifically set forth in a map and descriptions as attached.15 The Premium River -
Pine Brook Wetland Complex is described under its former title of the Premium
Salt Marsh Complex, the Hommocks - East Creek Wetlands Complex includes
descriptions of the Hommocks Salt Marsh Complex and the East Creek Area, and
the Larchmont Reservoir - Sheldrake - Leatherstocking Freshwater Wetlands
Complex is described under the same.
C. In all places where the Sheldrake or Premium Rivers or any stream, pond or
tributary connecting thereto flow through or are located on private property, as
shown on the Town of Mamaroneck Assessment Map, the critical environmental
area is on the streambed of said river, tributary, pond or stream and all land within
10 feet of either side of the top of the streambanks.
A. General description. This area, totaling some 40 acres, consists of major parts of the
Premium River, Premium Marsh and Premium Mill Pond and associated lands and
waters nearby. Together with the smaller Pine Brook - Premium Border, an adjacent
critical environmental area in the neighboring Village of Larchmont and similar
marshlands and waters in the adjoining coastal section of New Rochelle, this
complex constitutes an important coastal fish and wildlife habitat area, offers major
aesthetic and recreational values and contributes to the mitigation of flooding
through the capacity of the marsh to absorb stormwater. Being located at the south
of the Pine Brook - Premium watershed, which drains highly developed residential
and commercial areas, this complex requires protection against the adverse impact
of flooding, siltation and pollution.
B. Detailed description. All block and lot numbers, rivers, ponds, riverbanks,
boundaries, etc., referred to in this description are as shown on the Tax Assessment
Maps of the Town of Mamaroneck.
(1) In Block 504: a strip of land, owned by the Town of Mamaroneck and forming
15. Editor's Note: Documents describing these areas are on file in the Town offices.
§ 92-9 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-10
92:11
part of the Premium River Construction Area dedicated by the Town, bounded
on the west by Lots 580, 588 and 471, on the east and southeast by Block 506,
on the south by Dillon Road and on the north by Block 505.
(2) In Block 505:
(a) All of Lots 229, 264 and 510, all of which are owned and dedicated by
Town of Mamaroneck as parts of the Premium River Conservation Area.
(b) Also, those parts of Lots 433 and 446 bounded by a line beginning at the
southeast corner of Lot 446 and coinciding with the eastern boundaries of
both lots, as far as the northeast corner of Lot 433; thence running west
along the north boundary of Lot 433 for 78.64 feet; thence southerly on a
line perpendicular to the preceding line, crossing both of said lots to the
south boundary of Lot 446; thence easterly along said south boundary to
the starting point.
(c) Also, the northeasterly portion of Lot 218 bounded on the north and east
by the north and east boundaries of said lot and on the southwest by two
lines projected respectively approximately 80 feet from the northwest
corner of the lot and approximately 90 feet from the southeast corner of
the lot, both lines terminating and meeting at a point within the lot 22 feet
distant from the nearest point on the north boundary of said lot.
(3) In Block 506:
(a) All of Lots 320, 325, 460 and 487 and so much of the streambed of the
Premium River within said block as lies within the Town of
Mamaroneck, all of which lands and waters are part of the Premium River
Conservation Area owned and dedicated by the Town of Mamaroneck.
(b) Also, so much of Lot 147 as lies north and east of a line described as
follows: Beginning at a point on the south boundary of Lot 320, 30 feet
from the extreme west end of said boundary, thence southeasterly
approximately 35 feet to the north end of the boundary line between Lot
147 and Lot 334; thence easterly and southerly along the boundary lines
between Lot 147 on the one hand and Lots 334 and 324 and the first
segment (78.82 feet) of the boundary line between Lot 147 and Lot 314;
thence southeasterly on a line ending at the southeasterly most point in
Lot 147.
(c) Also, so much of Lot 96 as lies to the north of a line described as follows:
Beginning at the northwestern extremity of Lot 304; thence to the
northeastern extremity of Lot 304; thence easterly 85 feet on a line drawn
between the northeastern extremity of Lot 304 and a point on the
southeastern boundary line of Lot 96 distant 179 feet from the south end
of said boundary line; thence turning and running northeasterly
approximately 110 feet on a line that meets said boundary line at a point
250 feet from its south end.
(4) In Block 507:
§ 92-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-10
92:12
§ 92-11. Hommocks Salt Marsh Complex.
(a) So much of Lot 1 as lies north of a line described as follows: Beginning
at the last point of meeting on the southeastern boundary line of Lot 96,
Block 506, as described above, and continuing on the same bearing as
that of the immediately preceding (approximately one-hundred-ten-foot)
described line for a distance of 60 feet within Lot 1; thence turning and
running due east approximately 45 feet to the northeastern lot boundary.
(b) Also, so much of the Premium River and its nearby banks as extends from
the Village of Larchmont boundary on the easterly side to the nearest
boundaries of Lots 1, 11, 22, 44, 66, 76 and 90 on the westerly side, and
eastward and southward of said lots from the Village of Larchmont
boundary to the New Rochelle boundary downstream to, and including,
the bridge over the Premium River at Pryer Manor Road; and all land not
otherwise here described in Block 507 lying within 10 feet of the
Premium River bank.
(5) Premium Mill Pond: Adjoining Block 508, so much of the Premium Mill Pond
(approximately 20 acres) as lies within the Town of Mamaroneck. Also, within
Block 508, all land within 10 feet of the seawall abutting the Premium Mill
Pond.
(6) Echo Bay: All Town of Mamaroneck waters in Echo Bay within or adjacent to
Blocks 509 and 510 between the New Rochelle boundary and the southeast
(Premium Point) shore of Echo Bay, and all land along the seawall on the Echo
Bay shore of Premium Point in Blocks 509 and 510 lying within 10 feet of
Echo Bay and northward of a line drawn across said bay from the western most
extremity of Lot 50 in Block 510 westerly to the nearest point on the New
Rochelle boundary, said line being the southern (seaward) boundary of this
critical environmental area.
A. General description. This area, totaling some 14 acres, includes all lands and
adjacent waters within, and certain land directly upstream from, the Hommocks
Conservation Area, of which approximately four acres are within the Town of
Mamaroneck and are owned by it and dedicated by it as parkland and open space.
Together with an adjacent critical environmental area in the Village of Larchmont
known as the "Hommocks Border" and with a portion of the Hommocks
Conservation Area lying across the boundary in the Village of Mamaroneck and
similarly dedicated by that village, this complex constitutes an important coastal
fish and wildlife habitat area, offers major aesthetic and recreational values and
therefore merits special protection from adverse impact of future action in the
highly developed residential and commercial areas immediately upstream.
B. Detailed description. All block and lot numbers, water bodies and other
geographical features referred to below are as shown on the Tax Assessment Maps
of the Town of Mamaroneck.
(1) Hampshire Area. In Block 414, all of Lot 20, comprising that part of the
Hampshire Country Club property (6.74 acres) lying within the unincorporated
area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 92-10 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-11
92:13
§ 92-12. Larchmont Reservoir - Sheldrake - Leatherstocking Freshwater
Wetlands Complex.
(2) Hommocks Marsh and Hommocks Peninsula Area. In Blocks 415, 416 and
417, connected lands and waters consisting of the Town of Mamaroneck
portion (approximately four acres) of the Hommocks Conservation Area and
waters extending from it southwestward and southward around part of the
Hommocks Peninsula into Larchmont Harbor, the whole being bounded as
follows: Beginning in Block 415 at a point on the southwest side of
Hommocks Road 271.69 feet northwest of the intersection between said
southwest side of Hommocks Road and the boundary of the Village of
Mamaroneck, and running thence southwesterly 70 feet on a line
perpendicular to Hommocks Road; thence turning and running southerly
approximately 415 feet to the eastward end of the retaining wall separating the
Hommocks athletic field from the Hommocks Marsh; thence turning and
running southwesterly 142.64 feet along the whole length of the retaining wall
to the boundary of the Village of Larchmont; thence turning and running
southerly along said boundary to the point on said boundary nearest to the
southernmost point of land in Block 417, Lot 41; thence turning 90° eastward
and running easterly to said point of land in Block 417, Lot 41; thence turning
and running irregularly northwest, north and east along the shoreline of the
Hommocks Peninsula, following the water grant line or, where none is shown,
the high-water mark, past Lots 41 and 1 in Block 417 and Lots 1, 36, 75, 86,
112 and 136 in Block 416; thence turning and running northerly along the
Village of Mamaroneck boundary to the intersection with the southwest side
of Hommocks Road; thence along said southwest side of Hommocks Road
271.69 feet to the point of beginning.
(3) East Creek Area. In Block 411, portions of Lots 249 and 280, so much of the
open portion of East Creek (flowing easterly then northeasterly, from the
Boston Post Road to the point of inflow into an underground pipe near the
Hommocks School parking area) as lies within the unincorporated area of the
Town of Mamaroneck and all land within the Town of Mamaroneck located
within 10 horizontal feet of the bank of East Creek at mean high tide.
A. General description of component parts and their value to the community.
(1) This complex consists of five areas of open space in the unincorporated area
of the Town, together with connecting water bodies (streams, ponds and
drainage ditches) and land margins immediately adjacent to such water bodies
as provided herein. All these parts of the complex are situated in the Sheldrake
River watershed. Together, they constitute an important fish and wildlife
habitat complex (see Policy 7/7A of the Town of Mamaroneck - Village of
Larchmont Local Waterfront Revitalization Program). The open spaces in the
complex provide water-retention capacity which contributes to the lessening
of flooding and erosion in downstream parts of the watershed; they also
provide visual relief and associated recreational values in this highly
developed area. The wetlands and water bodies in the complex, in view of their
ecological, drainage and related educational and recreational values, require
special protection from flooding, siltation, pollution and other types of adverse
§ 92-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-12
92:14
impact.
(2) The total area of the complex is approximately 529 acres.
B. Summary of component parts.
(1) The component parts of the complex can be summarized as follows:
(a) The Winged Foot Holding Corporation property, chiefly a golf course:
area of 280.07 acres.
(b) Open space in the Bonnie Briar Holding Corporation property, chiefly a
golf course: area of approximately 150 acres.
(c) The Town of Mamaroneck portion (12.76 acres) of the Larchmont
Reservoir - James G. Johnson Jr. Conservancy, dedicated open space
owned by the Village of Larchmont.
(d) The Sheldrake and Leatherstocking Conservation Area (dedicated
parkland of the Town of Mamaroneck): 55 acres.
(e) The Badger Sports Club property: 7.53 acres.
(f) All parts of the Sheldrake River located in the unincorporated area of the
Town outside the boundaries of the open space areas identified in
Subsections B(1)(a) through (e), including the West Branch, East Branch
and main stem of the river and all open streams and ponds tributary
thereto, together with all land within 10 feet of the nearest bank or edge
of such tributary stream or pond, and all drainage easements or Town of
Mamaroneck parklands, not otherwise identified herein, containing
natural or manmade watercourses or drainage ditches flowing into the
river or its tributaries: estimated total area of approximately 24 acres.
(2) All open space areas and all ponds, streams, drainage ditches and parklands in
this complex are described in Part C below on the basis of boundaries and
locations shown on the Tax Assessment Maps of the Town of Mamaroneck.
C. Detailed description.
(1) Winged Foot area, northeast of Fenimore Road.
(a) All of Block 347, consisting entirely of the Winged Foot Holding
Corporation property: 280.07 acres.
(b) In Block 344, the entire streambed intersecting Lots 112, 99 and 86, and
so much of said lots as lies within 10 feet of either streambank.
(c) In Block 346, all parts of a pond extending eastward from Block 347 into
Lots 65 and 94, and all land in said lots within 10 feet of the edge of said
pond; also, a pond intersected by the boundary between Lots 325 and 94
and all land in said lots within 10 feet of the edge of said pond.
(d) In Block 315, two ponds and connecting streams flowing southeasterly
through Lots 348, 235, 802, 144, 213 and 171 into the Leatherstocking
§ 92-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-12
92:15
Conservation Area, and all land in said lots within 10 feet of the edge of
either pond or either bank of said streams.
(e) In Block 312, two streams entering Lot 1 from Block 309 to the north and
east, joining within Lot 1 and flowing thence southwesterly to Fenimore
Road; and all land in said lot within 10 feet of either bank of either of said
streams.
(f) In Block 325, a pond intersected by the boundary between Lots 81 and
92, and all land in said lots within 10 feet of the edge of said pond.
(g) In Block 307, drainage easement 25 feet wide running southerly through
the east ends of Lots 88, 73, 63 and 51, then crossing Lot 51 in a
southwesterly direction, then following the west ends of Lots 40, 26, 13
and 1 and ending at Kolbert Drive.
(h) In Block 308, a continuation of the drainage easement from Block 307,
running parallel to Kolbert Drive across the west ends of Lots 146, 132,
118, 106, 93 and 89; and a stream flowing from said drainage easement
through a parcel owned by the Town of Mamaroneck known as "Parcel
A" to the south boundary of said block; and all land within 10 feet of said
stream, all watercourses described in this block being part of the East
Branch of the Sheldrake River.
(i) In Block 305, the streambed of the Sheldrake River (East Branch) as it
enters the Town from Scarsdale and flows southerly across Lot 903,
crosses the northeast corner of Lot 922 and reenters Lot 903, then crosses
Lots 5, 1057 and 15.
(j) In Block 301, a pond, together with a stream draining the pond, in Lot 73,
and another stream originating southwest of said pond in the northeast
corner of Lot 1 which then crosses the southernmost corner of Lot 73;
both streams then flowing into a tributary of the East Branch of the
Sheldrake River in the adjoining Block 302; and all land within 10 feet of
the edge of said pond or the bank of either of said streams.
(k) In Block 302, several streams tributary to the East Branch of the
Sheldrake River which enter Block 302 from Blocks 301 and 304 and
flow generally southward in Lots 500, 54 and 1, or along or near the
boundary between Lot 54 on the east and Lots 500 and 1 on the west; and
another stream flowing from Lot 70 into Lots 54 and 1; and all land
within 10 feet of the banks of said streams.
(2) Bonnie Briar area, southwest of Fenimore Road.
(a) In Block 225, all of Lot 1, property of the Bonnie Briar Holding
Corporation [one hundred forty-one and four-hundredths (141.4) acres].
(b) In Block 201, all of Lot 19, property of the Bonnie Briar Holding
Corporation (8.59 acres).
(c) In Block 309, a stream, part of the East Branch of the Sheldrake River,
flowing southwesterly through Lots 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 27, 28 and 29, and
§ 92-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-12
92:16
ponds and retention areas in or partly in Lots 10, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 28
and 30; and all land within 10 feet of said stream, ponds and retention
areas.
(d) In Block 226, a tributary of the East Branch of the Sheldrake River as it
flows southeasterly from Block 225, intersecting Lots 1 and 258, then
flowing along or near their boundaries with Fenimore Road, then
intersecting Lots 232, 55 and 98; and all land within 10 feet of the bank
of said stream.
(e) In Block 228, a drainage easement 25 feet wide intersecting Lots 360 and
375 east of York Road, such easement including the course of a portion
of the East Branch of the Sheldrake River; the East Branch of the
Sheldrake River as it flows through Lots 27, 46 and 75, and all land
within 10 feet of the river bank in said lots; and all of Lots 78 and 156,
which lots are parkland owned by the Town of Mamaroneck, through
which the East Branch of the Sheldrake River flows southward into the
Sheldrake River Conservation Area.
(f) In Block 222, the West Branch of the Sheldrake River as it flows
eastward out of Block 225 into Lot 627 where it changes course and flows
south, then west, then southerly along or near the boundary between Lots
627, 606 and 585 on the east bank and Lots 536 and 546 on the west bank,
then flows under a bridge at Bonnie Briar Lane and continues southerly
along or near the boundary between Lots 194 and 205 on the east bank
and Lots 235 and 246 on the west bank, from which point it enters the
Sheldrake River Conservation Area; and all land within 10 feet of the
bank of said West Branch as it follows the course in Block 222 herein
described.
(3) Larchmont Reservoir area.
(a) In Block 103, all of that portion (12.76 acres) of the Larchmont Reservoir
- James G. Johnson Jr. Conservancy lying within the Town of
Mamaroneck, being property of the Village of Larchmont dedicated by it
as permanent open space.
(b) In Block 104, all portions of tributaries of the West Branch of the
Sheldrake River in Lots 273 and 265 and on Bonnie Way parallel to the
east boundary of Lot 288; also, a tributary of the West Branch of the
Sheldrake River as it emerges on the surface and flows east, then north,
across Lots 44, 52, 68, 76, 84 and 92 then enters Lot 119 where it flows
into the West Branch west of Weaver Street; and all land within 10 feet
of the banks of said tributaries.
(4) Sheldrake and Leatherstocking Conservation Areas.
(a) The entirety of the Sheldrake and Leatherstocking Conservation Areas,
comprising approximately 55 acres of parkland, the property of and
dedicated by the Town of Mamaroneck, extending in an approximately
east-west direction through Blocks 105, 106, 222 and 224; thence
between Blocks 229 and 228 on the north and 210 on the south; thence
§ 92-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-12
92:17
through Block 209, thence northeasterly along the boundary between
Blocks 204 and 208, thence northeasterly through Block 205 to Fenimore
Road; thence east of Fenimore Road across Blocks 314 and 320 to the
Village of Mamaroneck boundary at Old White Plains Road.
(b) Also in Block 105 but outside the conservation areas described in the
preceding subsection, tributaries of the Sheldrake River flowing southerly
from Bonnie Way and passing through Lots 910, 511, 521 and 531; and
all land within 10 feet of the bank of any of said tributaries.
(5) Lower Sheldrake River area south of Sheldrake - Leatherstocking
Conservation Areas.
(a) West Branch:
[1] In Block 222, the West Branch of the Sheldrake River flowing
through Lots 279 and 286 parallel to Brookside Place and thence
under a bridge at Rockland Avenue; and all land within 10 feet of
the bank of said West Branch.
[2] In Block 221, the West Branch of the Sheldrake River flowing
southeasterly along or near the boundaries between Lots 92, 86, 78,
72, 62, 54, 46, 41, 33, 28 and 13 on the east (Sheldrake Avenue) side
and Lots 121, 127, 134, 141, 154, 159, 167, 177 and 7 on the west
(Weaver Street) side, and flowing thence under a bridge at Forest
Avenue; and all land within 10 feet of the bank of said West Branch.
[3] In Block 220, the West Branch of the Sheldrake River flowing
southeasterly along or near the boundaries between Lots 468, 481
and 487 on the west (Weaver Street) side and Lot 445 on the north
(Forest Avenue) side; thence crossing the north end of Lot 487 and
the west end of Lot 206; thence flowing easterly through Lot 212
and under a bridge at Briarcliff Road; all of Lot 212, being Town of
Mamaroneck property; and all land in other lots named in this
subsection that is within 10 feet of the bank of said West Branch.
[4] In Block 219, the continuation of the West Branch of the Sheldrake
River flowing easterly in and near the north boundary of Lot 206,
thence through Lot 227 and along the midline of Brookside Drive to
the confluence with the East Branch near the south end of Valley
Stream Road; all of Lot 227 which is Town of Mamaroneck
property; and all land in Block 219 within 10 feet of the bank of said
West Branch.
(b) East Branch:
[1] In Block 210, the East Branch of the Sheldrake River as it flows
southerly from Rockland Avenue along or near the boundary
dividing Lots 328 and 35 on the west from Lots 588 and 789 on the
north; all of Lot 789, being open space property of the Badger Sports
Club (7.53 acres); the East Branch of the Sheldrake River as it
continues southeasterly through the northern parts of Lots 45, 87 and
§ 92-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 92-12
92:18
240, enters the midline of Valley Stream Road and flows irregularly
southward to the confluence with the West Branch at Brookside
Drive; and all land within 10 feet of the bank of said East Branch.
(c) Main Stem:
[1] In Blocks 219, 218 and 217, the Sheldrake River as it flows
southeasterly between West Brookside Drive and East Brookside
Drive to the bridge at Hickory Grove Drive; and all land within 10
feet of the bank of said river.
[2] In Block 214, the Sheldrake River as it flows southeasterly into and
through Lot 1, widening out in that lot and flowing thence under a
bridge at Lakeside Drive; and all land within 10 feet of the bank of
said river.
[3] In Block 215, all of Lot 518, which is Town of Mamaroneck
property including the entirety of Gardens Lake (formerly known
and mapped as "Lake Sheldrake"); the Sheldrake River as it flows
northerly from Gardens Lake along or parallel to North Brook road;
and all land in said Block 215 not otherwise included in this
description that lies within 10 feet of the bank of said river.
[4] In Block 214, the Sheldrake River as it flows northerly along or
parallel to North Brook Road; all land within 10 feet of the bank of
said river in that location; a drainage easement in Lot 545 through
which said river flows and from which it flows under Interstate
Route 95 (the New England Thruway); and all of Lot 483, which is
Town of Mamaroneck property southeast of Route I-95 through
which said river flows across the boundary of the Village of
Mamaroneck.
§ 92-12 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-12
92:19

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 92-13. Applicability; when effective.
A. Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR, as revised, applies to actions for which a
determination of significance has not been made prior to June 1, 1987. Actions for
which a determination of significance has been made prior to June 1, 1987, shall
comply with Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR, adopted September 1, 1978.
B. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the Secretary
of State in accordance with § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 92-13 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 92-13
92:21

Chapter 95
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coastal Zone Management Commission — See Ch. 8.
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
Water — See Ch. 231.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 92-13 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 92-13
95:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 95-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Surface Water and Erosion Control Law of the Town
of Mamaroneck."
§ 95-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of municipalities to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of their citizenry under New York State Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10, New York Environmental Conservation Law Article 36, the
Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of the State of New York, Article
42 of the Executive Law, and other applicable provisions of state and federal law.
§ 95-3. Findings of fact; intent.
It is hereby determined that:
A. Findings.
(1) Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious cover
often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, or
sediment transport and deposition;
(2) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable
species;
(3) Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add
to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat;
(4) Improper design and construction of stormwater management practices can
increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream bank
erosion and sedimentation;
(5) Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow;
(6) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the
waters of the municipality;
(7) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
land development activities;
(8) The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will
minimize threats to public health and safety; and
§ 95-1 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-3
95:3
§ 95-4. Purpose.
The Town of Mamaroneck declares that the purpose of this chapter is to safeguard
persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public
welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil
or results in the movement of earth on land situated in the Town of Mamaroneck. This
chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 95-5. Applicability; Stormwater Management officer.
(9) Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards
governing stormwater management and site design will produce development
compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed
and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from
development.
B. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to control and regulate land-disturbing
activities to assure that best management practices are used which minimize water
pollution, retain valuable topsoil and vegetation and prevent flooding, erosion and
sedimentation.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) general permit for stormwater discharges from
municipal separate stormwater sewer systems (MS4s), Permit no. GP-0-10-002, or
as amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive requirements of
the NYSDEC SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities, GP-0-10-001;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development activities in order
to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank
erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any
specific site during and following development to the maximum extent practicable;
and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source
pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and to
ensure that these management practices are properly maintained and eliminate
threats to public safety.
A. Article II of this chapter shall apply to minor land development activities.
B. Article III of this chapter shall apply to major land development activities.
C. Articles I and IV shall apply to all land development activities.
§ 95-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-5
95:4
§ 95-6. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from review under this chapter:
§ 95-7. Definitions and word usage.
D. The municipality shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer who shall
accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and forward such plans
to the applicable municipal board. The Stormwater Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck, engage the
services of a registered professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule
established by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted use.
B. Home gardening, landscaping and routine lawn and landscaping maintenance
activities of existing cultivated areas.
C. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary by
the Stormwater Management Officer.
D. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the
Planning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck on or before the effective date of this
chapter.
E. Land development activities for which a building permit, erosion and sediment
control permit or wetlands and watercourses permit has been approved on or before
the effective date of this chapter.
F. Cemetery graves.
G. Installation of fences, signs, pilings, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of
posts or poles.
H. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or natural
resources.
I. Alteration of the interior of a building and alteration of the exterior of a building,
provided that such exterior alteration does not increase coverage by the building or
pavement or the alteration does not involve the demolition of a part or all of the
exterior of an existing building.
J. Any deck without an impervious cover above, on or below the surface of the deck.
K. Any land development activity which is neither a major land development activity
nor a minor land development activity, provided that the existing flow of surface
water at the property lines is not altered.
§ 95-5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-7
95:5
A. Use of words. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "lot" includes the
word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure."
B. Definitions. Certain words in this chapter are defined for the purpose thereof as
follows:
ADJOINING PROPERTY — Any property facing a work site across any street or
highway shall be deemed adjoining property, as well as any property contiguous on
any side.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a land development activity.
APPLICANT'S EXPERTS — A New York State licensed professional engineer or
a New York State licensed landscape architect engaged by the applicant to prepare
the surface water and erosion control plan or stormwater pollution prevention plan.
BASE FLOOD — The one-hundred-year-frequency storm.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a
roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying
more than 100 square feet of area.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION—The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general
public use.
DESIGN MANUALS — For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents
shall serve as the official guides and specifications for stormwater management.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance
with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed
by this chapter.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to construction of buildings or other structures and
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling or blasting.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DEVICES (ESCD) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical
means of preventing erosion and controlling sediment consistent with best
management practices identified in the design manuals, including but not limited
to silt fencing, hay bales, temporary seeding or mulching, check dams and inlet
protection.
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, most current version or its
successor, hereafter referred to as the "Design Manual").
(1)
New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control
(New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, 2005, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the "Erosion Control
Manual").
(2)
§ 95-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-7
95:6
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions
thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures greater
than 100 square feet in size, whether natural or man-made, that cannot effectively
infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (including but not limited to bedrock, stone,
building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios and terraces).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY—Any construction activity that 1)
results in land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre or 2) disturbs less than
one acre but is part of a larger common plan of development of one or more parcels,
even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take
place at different times on different schedules if the total land disturbance is equal to
or is greater than one acre. For the purpose of this definition, "construction activity"
includes but is not limited to clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or
placement of fill.
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any construction activity that
1) results in land disturbance of more than 100 square feet but less than one
acre or 2) creates impervious cover of more than 100 square feet but less than
one acre or 3) may alter the flow of surface water at the property line even if
such disturbance or fill covers less than 100 square feet. For the purpose of this
definition, "construction activity" includes but is not limited to clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances and shall include, but not
be limited to, pollutants from construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff
sources.
PERMIT — Any permits, grants or licenses issued by the Town of Mamaroneck,
including but not limited to building, grading, demolition, clearing and excavation
permits and subdivision and site plan approvals.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local governments
and agencies, authorities or other political subdivisions thereof.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
PLAN — Surface water and erosion control plan, stormwater pollution prevention
plan or site plan.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement that
addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any
other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body
that will receive a discharge from the land development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
§ 95-7 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-7
95:7
SOIL STABILIZATION — Measures which protect soil from the erosive forces
of raindrop impact, flowing water and high wind. Applicable practices include
vegetative establishment, mulching, covering and the early application of gravel
base on areas to be paved.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITIES (GP-0-10-001 AS AMENDED OR REVISED) — A permit under
the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of
land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS (GP-0-10-002
AS AMENDED OR REVISED) — A permit under the New York State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate
discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPAestablished
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STEEP SLOPES — Ground areas where the grade changes by one or more feet of
vertical rise for each four feet of horizontal distance.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt or drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its adverse
impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for a particular project.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's
designated representative[Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical
means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or
nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies, including
but not limited to drainage pipes, ditches, culverts, water-retention and detention
areas and structures, swales, slopes and other conduits and reservoirs.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PERMIT — A permit issued for a
major land development activity.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
submitted as part of the application for a stormwater pollution prevention permit
that shows how stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities will be controlled.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
SURFACE WATER AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT—A permit issued for
§ 95-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-7
95:8
a minor land development activity.
SURFACE WATER AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN — A drawing prepared
by a New York State licensed professional engineer, a registered architect or a
New York State licensed landscape architect submitted as a part of the application
for a surface water and erosion control permit showing the methods, techniques
and improvements, both during and after construction, that will be employed to
control surface water runoff and to control erosion and sedimentation. Such plan
shall utilize the design manuals, contain all surface water control calculations,
reduce erosion potential, assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges, increase water recharge into the ground, decrease nonpoint source
pollution and water quality degradation, maintain stream channels for their
biological functions as well as for drainage through reduced stream bank erosion
and maximize preservation and protection of stream corridors, floodplains and
wetlands.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries,
marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the State
of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or
coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do not
combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters), which
are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm
sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which
also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion
applies only to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created
in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
§ 95-7 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-7
95:9

ARTICLE II
Minor Land Development Activities
§ 95-8. Permit required.
No person shall commence or carry out any minor land development activity in the Town
of Mamaroneck without first obtaining a surface water and erosion control permit from
the Building Department and all other necessary municipal permits.
§ 95-9. Application for surface water and erosion control permit; waiver.
§ 95-10. Contents of surface water and erosion control plans.
The following information shall be shown on a surface water and erosion control plan
unless otherwise noted:
A. An application for a surface water and erosion control permit shall be made on
forms provided by the Stormwater Management Officer. If the application is
determined by the Stormwater Management Officer to be in accord with this
chapter and if the application is accompanied by the appropriate fees, the Building
Department shall issue the permit.
B. Each application shall include a surface water and erosion control plan and a
certification by the applicant's expert that the minor land development activity shall
be done in accordance with the approved plans.
C. Any modification of a plan shall be submitted to the Stormwater Management
Officer and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as
the original plan. Modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Stormwater Management Officer without the submission of modified plans.
D. The Stormwater Management Officer may waive the requirement for the issuance
of the surface water and erosion control permit when there is an application for a
floodplain development permit, a wetlands and watercourses permit, subdivision
approval, site plan approval or a building permit.
E. By accepting the permit, the applicant agrees to allow the Town to enter upon the
property to inspect the work and to perform remedial measures when authorized by
this chapter to do so.
A. The name of the development or identifying title. The name, address and telephone
number of the owner and/or developer of the site and the consulting firm retained
by the applicant for preparation of the plan. If the applicant is a corporation, it must
list the name, home address and telephone number of at least two officers of the
applicant. A phone number for an emergency contact must also be provided.
B. The plan shall show the date of its preparation and all revision dates, the
approximate true North point and the scale, which shall be no greater than one inch
equals 50 feet.
C. The proposed site layout shall include:
(1) The boundary line and acreage for the site.
§ 95-8 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-10
95:11
(2) Existing zoning.
(3) A vicinity map that includes state and local wetlands.
(4) The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water bodies,
floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas, watershed
divides and other significant natural or man-made features on the site and land
within 250 feet of the boundary.
(5) A schematic layout of the stormwater management practices proposed to
control surface water runoff both during and after construction.
(6) A schematic layout of the proposed erosion and sediment control devices.
(7) Existing and proposed contours of the site and adjacent land within
approximately 250 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two-foot
contour intervals with critical spot elevations.
(8) Surface water control calculations using methods defined in "Technical
Release-55," "Technical Release-20," the Rational Method, or other method
approved by the Stormwater Management Officer, unless superseded by a
comprehensive local watershed and/or stormwater model and plan.
(9) Base flood elevation data using the most current National Geodetic Vertical
Datum.
(10) Construction schedule showing the sequencing of the installation of the
required stormwater management practices, erosion and sediment control
devices and other site construction activities, which shall be supplemented as
directed by the Stormwater Management Officer to show required inspections.
(11) Signature block language, including the seal of a New York State licensed
professional engineer, registered architect, or a New York State licensed
landscape architect.
(12) The location of existing trees, including driplines, grassy areas and unique
vegetation and detailed methods of tree protection.
(13) Identification and boundaries of the different soil types existing on the site.
(14) The dividing lines and direction of flow for different drainage areas.
(15) Areas with potentially significant erosion problems.
(16) Areas which are to be cleared and graded or used for storage.
(17) Detailed drawings that explain and illustrate any structural practices used that
are not referenced to the design manuals.
D. In addition to complying with the requirements of Subsections A, B and C, a minor
land development activity meeting Condition One below (other than for the
construction of a one- or two-family house) shall also include water quality and
water quantity controls (post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth
in § 95-10E.
§ 95-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-10
95:12
§ 95-11. Approval of surface water and erosion control permit.
(1) Condition One: disturbance of an area greater than 5,000 square feet but less
than one acre or creating impervious surface area of 1,000 or more square feet,
but less than one acre.
E. Surface water and erosion control plan for Condition One:
(1) Description of each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s)
of each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(3) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the
stormwater management system for the applicable design storms;
(4) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions with predevelopment
conditions;
(5) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each postconstruction
stormwater management practice;
(6) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each
post-construction stormwater management practice;
(7) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair, and such
easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer
of title to the property; and
(8) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners
served by the on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with
§ 95-15.
A. The Stormwater Management Officer shall approve the issuance of a surface water
and erosion control permit or authorize the release of a performance bond or
authorize the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy only if the
following requirements are satisfied:
(1) Except in situations described in § 95-17B, there is a surface water and erosion
control plan which demonstrates that the rate of stormwater runoff will not
increase. Stormwater calculations certified by a New York State licensed
professional engineer, landscape architect or registered architect shall be
submitted demonstrating that stormwater management practices are designed
to detain a twenty-five-year storm using those methods contained in the
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) publication, "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release-55."
(2) Stormwater management practices shall be designed using a Type III, twentyfour-
hour rainfall distribution.
(3) Detention facility maximum discharge rates shall not exceed pre-construction
conditions for the twenty-five-, ten-, five- and two-year storms.
§ 95-10 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-11
95:13
(4) The natural drainage features of the site, including natural drainageways and
permanent and periodic ponding areas, shall be preserved, except for those
reasonable alterations deemed necessary by the Stormwater Management
Officer to allow for the development of the site in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction,
Chapter 110, Flood Damage Prevention, and Chapter 240, Zoning.
(5) Stormwater management practices shall be constructed so as not to discharge
waters onto adjoining property or public ways in such a manner as to impair
the permitted use or development of those properties or be detrimental to
public safety.
(6) Temporary erosion and sediment control devices and stormwater management
practices such as those identified in the design manuals, adequate to protect
adjacent property, shall be installed at the commencement of the minor land
development activity.
(7) Properties adjacent to the site of land disturbance shall be protected from
sediment deposition at all times.
(8) Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water shall be
trapped on site utilizing debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar
measures described in the design manuals.
(9) All storm drain inlets operable during construction shall be protected so that
sediment-laden water will not enter the conveyance system without first being
filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment.
(10) Natural vegetation and trees shall be retained and protected wherever possible.
The applicant shall be guided by the design manuals and the Town Tree
Preservation Commission.
(11) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed land
areas during construction. The applicant shall restore vegetative cover in
disturbed areas as directed by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(12) Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to denuded areas
within two days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site. Soil
stabilization must also be applied to denuded areas which may not be at final
grade but may remain dormant (undisturbed) for longer than two weeks.
(13) Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a ground cover
is achieved which, in the opinion of the Stormwater Management Officer, is
mature enough to survive severe weather conditions. Disturbed soils shall be
stabilized as soon as possible, and properties adjacent to the site of land
disturbance shall be protected from sediment deposition.
(14) Adequate barriers to prevent erosion and siltation shall be applied at the end of
each day.
(15) Sediment basins and traps, perimeter dikes, sediment barriers and other
measures intended to trap sediment on site must be constructed as a first step
in grading and must be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes
§ 95-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-11
95:14
place. Earthen structures such as dams, dikes and diversions must be seeded
and mulched within two days of installation and prior to any first step in the
disturbance of upslope land, whichever comes first.
(16) All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed
to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a ten-year-frequency storm
without erosion or failure. Outlets of all pipes and paved channels must be
stabilized to prevent erosion.
(17) Clearing or grading shall generally not occur on slopes in excess of 25%.
Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-and-fill
operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to
create the least potential for erosion.
(18) In the design of cut-and-fill slopes, consideration must be given to the length
and steepness of the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater
conditions and other applicable factors. Slopes which are found to be eroding
excessively must be provided with additional measures until the problem is
corrected.
(19) Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face
of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
(20) All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to prevent
undesirable settlement in accordance with the design manuals.
(21) Fills shall not encroach on watercourses, channels, areas designated as
wetlands or wetland buffers under Chapter 114, Wetlands and Watercourses,
state or federal freshwater or tidal wetlands, or areas designated as critical
environmental areas and/or significant fish and wildlife habitat under Ch. 92,
Environmental Quality Review, unless undertaken under an appropriate permit
issued under such regulations.
(22) Appropriate measures for dust control shall be exercised in accordance with
the design manuals.
(23) Where no acceptable paved access exists for construction vehicles to enter the
site, a stabilized construction entrance shall be created and shall be shown on
the plans filed with the Stormwater Management Officer.
(24) All temporary erosion and sediment control devices shall be disposed of within
30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the temporary measures
are no longer needed, unless otherwise authorized by the Stormwater
Management Officer. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas
resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be removed from
the site and disposed of in accordance with pertinent regulations or
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
(25) Road surfaces must be swept and kept free of sediment as needed. At the end
of the project, catch basins, storm sewers and road surfaces must be cleaned to
the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and the Stormwater Management
Officer.
§ 95-11 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-11
95:15
B. A copy of the approved surface water and erosion control plan shall be on file in
the Building and Engineering Department and shall be maintained on site at all
times for the duration of the project and shall be made available to the Stormwater
Management Officer.
§ 95-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-11
95:16
ARTICLE III
Major Land Development Activities
§ 95-12. Permit required.
No person shall commence or carry out any major land development activity in the Town
of Mamaroneck without first obtaining a stormwater pollution prevention permit from
the Building Department and all other necessary municipal permits.
§ 95-13. Application for stormwater pollution prevention permit.
§ 95-14. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
The following information shall be shown on a stormwater pollution prevention plan
unless otherwise noted:
A. An application for a stormwater pollution prevention permit shall be made on forms
provided by the Stormwater Management Officer.
B. Each application shall include a stormwater pollution prevention plan and a
certification by the applicant's expert that the major land development activity shall
be done in accordance with the approved plan. The Stormwater Management
Officer shall review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and forward such
plans to the applicable municipal board.
C. All major land development activities subject to review and approval by the Town
of Mamaroneck Planning Board, Board of Appeals or Town Board shall be
reviewed in accordance with the standards contained in this article.
D. All major land development activities not subject to review by either the Town of
Mamaroneck Planning Board, Board of Appeals or Town Board shall be reviewed
by the Stormwater Management Officer, who shall approve the application if it
complies with the requirements of this article.
E. Any modification of a plan shall be submitted to the Stormwater Management
Officer and shall be processed and approved or disapproved, in the same manner as
the original plan. Modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Stormwater Management Officer without the submission of modified plans.
F. By accepting the permit the applicant agrees to allow the Town to enter upon the
property to inspect the work and to perform remedial measures when authorized by
this chapter to do so.
A. All of the items listed in § 95-10 and all of the items required in order to obtain
coverage under the SPDES general permit for construction activities GP-0-10-001.
In addition, SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and
erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including location,
type and size of the project;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a general location
map. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all
§ 95-12 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-14
95:17
improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and
drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction activity; existing
and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment
storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s);
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction
activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and
infrastructure installation and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the Erosion Control Manual, not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved
SWPPP;
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control
litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from becoming a
pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on site
with updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce pollutants
from these materials, including storage practices to minimize exposure of the
materials to stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used for
soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control for each stage of the
project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project closeout;
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s), size(s) and
length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion and
sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins;
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control measures;
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment control
practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration that each
practice should remain in place;
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the
erosion and sediment control practice;
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of the
site;
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from
exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable; and
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
§ 95-14 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-14
95:18
B. A major land development activity meeting Condition A below shall also include
water quantity and water quality controls (post-construction stormwater runoff
controls) as set forth in § 95-14C:
Condition A: stormwater runoff discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load
(TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been
identified as a source of the impairment.
C. SWPPP requirements for Condition A:
(1) Description of each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s)
of each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(3) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the
stormwater management system for the applicable design storms;
(4) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions with predevelopment
conditions;
(5) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each postconstruction
stormwater management practice;
(6) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each
post-construction stormwater management practice;
(7) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair, and such
easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer
of title to the property; and
(8) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners
served by the on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with
§ 95-15.
D. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by the applicant's expert and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design
of all stormwater management practices meets the requirements in this article.
E. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable
environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the major land
development activity.
F. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor who will be involved in soil disturbance
and/or stormwater management practice installation shall sign and date a copy
of the following certification statement before undertaking any major land
development activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and
agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause
§ 95-14 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-14
95:19
§ 95-15. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.
or contribute to a violation of water quality standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the
signature, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address
(or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is
made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the major
land development activity.
G. Retention of SWPPP on site. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of
the major land development activity during construction and made available to the
Town and NYSDEC from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date
of final stabilization.
A. Maintenance during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the major land development activity shall at all
times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and
control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the
applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
article. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds
whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) The applicant shall have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. The professional's reports shall be delivered to the
Stormwater Management Officer, copied to the site log book and must be kept
on site and made available to NYSDEC and the Town.
B. As-built plans. All applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Maintenance easements. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater
management facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must
execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall
provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Town of Mamaroneck to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this
article. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the County
Clerk after approval by the counsel for the Town of Mamaroneck.
D. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater
management practices installed in accordance with this article shall operate and
maintain the stormwater management practices to achieve the goals of this article.
Proper operation and maintenance also includes, at a minimum, the following:
§ 95-14 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-15
95:20
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this article;
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel; and
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or
contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with § 95-16C.
E. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection programs
shall be established by the Stormwater Management Officer on any reasonable
basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or
other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type
associated with higher-than-usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with
discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause
violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to;
reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
§ 95-15 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-15
95:21

ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Minor and Major Land Development Activities
§ 95-16. Performance and design criteria.
§ 95-17. Additional stormwater control: no net increase in rate of runoff;
exceptions.
§ 95-18. Construction completion guarantee.
A. All land development activities shall be subject to the performance and design
criteria set forth in this section.
B. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following documents shall
serve as the official guides and specifications for stormwater management.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance
with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed
by this article:
(1) The Design Manual.
(2) The Erosion Control Manual.
C. Water quality standards. No land development activity shall cause an increase in
turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, any applicant for any demolition or building
permit shall be required to offset by on-site retention the increase in the rate of
surface water runoff from the proposed development. This shall be done to the
satisfaction of the Stormwater Management Officer.
B. Exceptions.
(1) When the Stormwater Management Officer finds that the increase cannot be
offset satisfactorily by on-site retention, he/she may permit the increment of
the increase which cannot be retained ("increment") to be carried away by the
land's natural drainage, provided that such increment will not impair the
permitted use or development of those lands over or onto which such water
will naturally flow.
(2) When the Stormwater Management Officer finds that the increase cannot be
offset satisfactorily by on-site retention, he/she may permit such increment to
be discharged into a Town stormwater facility, provided that the applicant has
established that the Town facility has sufficient capacity. Where he/she
determines it to be necessary, the Stormwater Management Officer shall
require the installation of water quality improvement measures prior to such
connection. The Stormwater Management Officer may waive or reduce any of
the requirements of this section if he/she determines that such existing Town
stormwater facility is of adequate size and will discharge surface water runoff
directly to a watercourse or the Long Island Sound without adversely affecting
drainage from any other area.
§ 95-16 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-18
95:23
§ 95-19. Maintenance guarantee.
Where stormwater management practices are to be operated and maintained after the
project is completed, the person or entity responsible for its operation or maintenance
shall be required to provide the Town of Mamaroneck with a performance bond, cash
escrow account or an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution
or surety which ensures the proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management practices after construction. If the stormwater management practice is
not properly operated or maintained, the Town of Mamaroneck may draw upon the
performance bond, cash escrow account or irrevocable letter of credit to cover the
costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering, inspection costs and
attorney's fees.
§ 95-20. Recordkeeping.
The Town of Mamaroneck may require entities subject to this chapter to maintain
records demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
§ 95-21. Penalties for offenses; other remedies.
A. In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development activities
the Town of Mamaroneck shall require the applicant or developer to provide, prior
to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit
from an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory
completion of the project and names the Town of Mamaroneck as the beneficiary.
The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the Stormwater
Management Officer based on submission of final design plans, with reference to
actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain
in force until the surety is released from liability by the Stormwater Management
Officer, provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the date of
final acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a
one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Stormwater Management Officer.
B. In cases where a wetlands and watercourses permit has been issued to the same
applicant, the Stormwater Management Officer may allow a single bond for both
permits if it is determined that such bond is sufficient for the purposes of this
chapter and Chapter 114, Wetlands and Watercourses.
C. By acceptance of the permit, the owners of the property, their heirs, successors and
assigns shall be responsible for the future maintenance, repair and replacement of
all required stormwater management facilities to the satisfaction of the Stormwater
Management Officer.
D. Slopes which are found to be eroding excessively within one year after completion
of all work must be provided with additional stabilizing measures until the problem
is corrected. If erosion continues, the Town will take such measures as necessary to
achieve stabilization and charge the owners of the property, their heirs, successors
and assigns for the costs incurred in achieving stabilization.
§ 95-18 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-21
95:24
§ 95-22. Restoration for violation.
A. Violations.
(1) If the Stormwater Management Officer determines that there exists a violation
of the terms and conditions of any surface water and erosion control permit or
stormwater pollution prevention permit issued pursuant to this chapter, written
notification of such violation shall be given to the applicant by posting a copy
at the site and by mailing a copy to the applicant's last known address.
(2) All such notifications of violations shall contain the time, place and nature of
the violation, the time within which the violation must be corrected and a
statement that the permit will be suspended or revoked if the applicant fails to
correct the violation.
(3) If the applicant fails to correct any violation of the terms and conditions of the
permit issued pursuant to this chapter within the time period specified, or
within 30 days if no time is specified, the Stormwater Management Officer
may cause the violation to be corrected. The cost thereof shall be assessed
against the property upon which the violation occurred. Such amount shall be
levied against the property in the same manner as Town taxes are levied, and
it shall constitute a lien upon the property. The Town can use the bond to
satisfy such an assessment or lien, and the applicant will remain liable for any
amount not satisfied by the bond.
(4) Failure of the applicant or its successors and assigns to maintain, repair or
replace a stormwater management practice in an appropriate manner shall be a
violation of this chapter. If the Stormwater Management Officer determines
that such a violation has occurred, written notification of such violation shall
be given to the applicant or its successor or assign by posting a copy at the site
and by mailing a copy to the address of the property. All such notifications of
violations shall contain the time, place and nature of the violation and the time
within which the violation must be corrected.
(5) If the applicant or its successors or assigns fails to correct the violation in the
maintenance, repair or replacement of a stormwater management practice
within the time period specified, or within 30 days if no time is specified, the
Stormwater Management Officer may cause the violation to be corrected. The
cost thereof shall be assessed against the property upon which the violation
occurred. Such amount shall be levied against the property in the same manner
as Town taxes are levied, and it shall constitute a lien upon the property. The
Town can use the bond to satisfy such an assessment or lien, and the applicant
will remain liable for any amount not satisfied by the bond.
A. Any person who violates this chapter may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the Town may take necessary corrective action. The
cost thereof shall be assessed against the property upon which the violation
occurred. Such amount shall be levied against the property in the same manner as
Town taxes are levied, and it shall constitute a lien upon the property.
§ 95-21 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-22
95:25
§ 95-23. Stop-work orders.
The Town may issue a stop-work order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving
a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order
shall be in effect until the Town confirms that the land development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
§ 95-24. Compliance required.
No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the terms and conditions of
this chapter have been complied with to the satisfaction of the Stormwater Management
Officer.
§ 95-25. Suspension, revocation or expiration of permits; civil penalty.
B. The Town may require any person undertaking land development activities
regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of
SWPPPs, inspections, or stormwater management practice maintenance performed
by the Town or performed by a third party for the Town.
A. If the Stormwater Management Officer determines by inspection that the nature of
the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the Stormwater
Management Officer may order that reasonable special precautions be taken to
avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include but shall not
be limited to a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials
for erosion control or recommendations of the applicant's experts.
B. The Stormwater Management Officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
a surface water and erosion control permit or stormwater pollution prevention
permit if:
(1) Activities at the site are not in accordance with the surface water and erosion
control plan or the SWPPP, as the case may be; or
(2) If, in the Stormwater Management Officer's opinion, continuation of
construction in accordance with the surface water and erosion control plan or
the SWPPP, as the case may be, is likely to imperil any property, public way,
watercourse or drainage structure.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not more than $2,500 for the first day and an additional penalty of
not more than $2,000 for each additional day during which such violation
continues.
D. The Town may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of
any provision of this chapter or the terms and conditions of any permit granted
§ 95-22 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-25
95:26
§ 95-26. Inspections.
hereunder.
E. Every surface water and erosion control permit shall expire and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit has not begun within six months of
issuance. If the applicant must obtain a building permit as well as a surface water
and erosion control permit, the surface water and erosion control permit shall be
valid so long as the building permit is valid. In all other cases, the surface water and
erosion control permit shall be valid for two years. If written application is made
before the expiration date of the permit, the Stormwater Management Officer may,
if the applicant presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have
prevented the start or completion of work within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time.
F. Every stormwater pollution prevention permit shall expire and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit has not begun within one year of
issuance or is not completed within five years of issuance, except that if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit, the Stormwater
Management Officer may, if the applicant presents satisfactory evidence that
unusual difficulties have prevented the start or completion of work within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time.
A. The applicant shall not commence the work authorized by a surface water and
erosion control permit or stormwater pollution prevention permit unless the
applicant has notified the Stormwater Management Officer at least two business
days before commencing work.
B. The Stormwater Management Officer may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the
work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the surface water and erosion control plan or the
stormwater pollution prevention plan as approved. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the Stormwater Management Officer at least 48 hours before
any of the following:
(1) Start of construction;
(2) Installation of erosion and sediment control devices;
(3) Installation of stormwater management practices;
(4) Completion of site clearing;
(5) Completion of rough grading;
(6) Completion of final grading;
(7) Close of the construction season;
(8) Completion of final landscaping; and
(9) Establishment of landscaping in public areas.
§ 95-25 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-27
95:27
§ 95-27. Right of entry.
The Town may enter upon the applicant's property for the purpose of making any
investigation, inspection, survey or other activity that may be necessary for any of the
purposes of this chapter. If the applicant does not consent to such entry, the appropriate
Town official is empowered to apply to the Town Court for an administrative search
warrant permitting such inspection.
§ 95-28. Greater restrictions to prevail.
Wherever this chapter is inconsistent with any other ordinance of the Town of
Mamaroneck, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 95-29. Severability.
If the provisions of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter.
§ 95-30. Fees or deposit.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a surface water and erosion control permit or a
stormwater pollution prevention permit, the fees denoted in Chapter A250 shall be
paid, except that no fee shall be required when the separate permit requirement has
been waived by the Stormwater Management Officer in accordance with § 95-9.
(1) Filing fees.
(a) For a surface water and erosion control permit for a parcel with an
existing one- or two-family dwelling: $200.
(b) For a surface water and erosion control permit for the construction of a
new one- or two-family dwelling on either a vacant parcel or on a parcel
where greater than 50% of an existing residence is demolished: $375.
(c) For a surface water and erosion control permit in all other cases: $375.
(d) For a stormwater pollution prevention permit: $500.
(2) Permit fees.
(a) For a surface water and erosion control permit for a parcel with an
existing one- or two-family dwelling: $150.
(b) For a surface water and erosion control permit for the construction of a
new one- or two-family dwelling on either a vacant parcel or on a parcel
where greater than 50% of an existing residence is demolished: $200.
(c) For a surface water and erosion control permit in all other cases: $300. If
the anticipated cost of the work covered by the permit exceeds $5,000,
there shall be, in addition to the minimum fee, an additional fee of 6% of
the anticipated cost that exceeds $5,000. This 6% is not part of the
engineering fee for site plan approval.
§ 95-27 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 95-30
95:28
(d) For a stormwater pollution prevention permit: $500.
(3) Fee for applicant-requested modification: $75 for each modification, provided
that no work has commenced. If work pursuant to the permit has commenced,
the modification fee will be $125 per modification.
(4) The minimum inspection fee for a parcel with a one- or two-family dwelling
will be $100; for all other residential parcels, $150, and for commercial
parcels, $250.
(5) If work is commenced prior to the permit being issued, all fees for the project
will be doubled.
B. If an application for the surface water and erosion control permit is not approved,
the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any filing or modification fee(s).
§ 95-30 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 95-30
95:29

Chapter 97
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee schedule — See Ch. A250.
§ 97-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fee Schedule for the Town of Mamaroneck."
§ 97-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth a uniform fee schedule for all fees to be paid
to the Town of Mamaroneck and to allow for such fees to be readily updated by having
a single fee schedule.
§ 97-3. Repealer.
Notwithstanding language relating to fees and charges to the contrary in any local law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the Town of Mamaroneck, such fees and
charges may be fixed by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck by resolution as
part of a comprehensive fee schedule established for the Town of Mamaroneck pursuant
to this chapter.
§ 97-4. Review and adoption of fee schedule.
The Town Board shall, at least once per year, review all fee schedules fixed in the Town
of Mamaroneck and, by resolution, adopt a comprehensive fee schedule for the Town of
Mamaroneck setting forth all fees and charges for the Town of Mamaroneck, a copy of
which shall be maintained in the Office of the Town Clerk at all times.16
16. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fee Schedule.
§ 95-30 FEES § 97-4
97:1

Chapter 99
FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING
§ 99-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the Town to facilitate, but not solicit, producers and others within
the mass communications industries, including filming, television, advertising and
commercial photography, to make use of the Town and its environs as a setting for
motion-picture films, television shows, commercials and photographs, but only insofar
as such use is at all times compatible, and does not unduly interfere, with the lifestyles
and day-to-day activities of the Town's citizens and merchants.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and their
derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
FILMING — The recording on film, videotape or other medium of movies,
commercials, documentaries, serials, shows, performances, or other similar events or
activities, including still photography, but not to include the coverage of news, political,
cultural, local sports or school events.
LICENSEE — Any person, firm, organization or business entity which has been
licensed under the provision of this chapter.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any realty or personal property or interest therein owned by
the Town of Mamaroneck, including all streets, parks and public places, lands, lands
underwater, waterfront property, and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable,
therein.
§ 99-3. License required.
No person, firm, corporation, organization or business entity shall commence filming
in the Town of Mamaroneck on public or private property, unless the filming to be
conducted, maintained or operated is licensed in the manner prescribed herein.
§ 99-4. Application for license; issuance, expiration.
The license prescribed by this chapter shall be issued by the Town Administrator or his
designated agent. Application shall be made on a form containing such information as
may be determined by the Town Board, and shall be accompanied by the production
schedule, schedule and description of all dangerous activities and use of explosives, and
list of all vehicles and their license plate numbers, to include both the applicant's vehicles
and vehicles of the applicant's personnel. Each license shall expire on the date set forth
on the license. Applications shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 99-5. Approval by Town Administrator.
No license shall be issued until the application has been approved by the Town
Administrator or his designated agent, subject to the following:
§ 97-4 FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING § 99-5
99:1
§ 99-6. License fee.
The fee to be paid shall be determined by the Town Administrator for each license,
including a license for a portion of a day, as follows:
A. In the approval of the application, the Town Administrator or his designated agent
shall specifically fix the filming location or locations.
B. In the approval of the application, the Town Administrator or his designated agent
shall specifically fix the days and hours of filming.
C. The Town Administrator or his designated agent may deny any application or limit
any license which, in his judgment, would conflict with other scheduled events in
the area of the filming location, would be detrimental to the community because of
anticipated excessive noise, illumination, traffic disruption or other effect caused
by the proposed filming, including but not limited to the use of explosives, or would
unduly interfere for an extended period of time with the day-to-day activities of
citizens, property owners or merchants or would interfere with the public health,
safety and welfare of the Town's citizens.
D. Any change in the license holder's planned activities shall be submitted to the Town
Administrator or his designated agent in advance of the change and approved or
denied in the same manner as the original license application.
A. License fee for use of public property. The minimum fee shall be $500 per day, and
the maximum fee shall not exceed $5,000 per day. The Town Administrator, in
determining the specific fee to be required, shall take into consideration the
following factors which would denote a greater use of public property and therefore
require higher fees:
(1) Use of public parking spaces.
(2) Use of vehicle travelways requiring the rerouting or directing of vehicular
traffic.
(3) Use of pedestrian travelways requiring the rerouting or directing of pedestrian
traffic.
(4) Use of public buildings.
(5) Use of other public areas during normal operating hours.
(6) The size of the filming location.
(7) The number of filming locations.
(8) The number of hours the filming location or locations will be used.
(9) Use or involvement of Town personnel.
(10) Use or involvement of Town equipment.
(11) Use of explosives.
(12) Dangerous activities.
§ 99-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 99-6
99:2
§ 99-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 99-8. Restrictions and requirements.
B. License fee for use of private property. The fee for filming on private property shall
be $150 per day.
C. The Town of Mamaroneck and the Mamaroneck School District and not-for-profit
community agencies operating within the Town shall be exempt from such license
fee.
D. In the event that a license issued pursuant to this chapter is suspended or revoked in
accordance with the provisions of § 99-7 of this chapter, the applicant shall not be
entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
A. The Town Administrator, on his own initiative or upon notice from any public
official of the Town, is empowered to suspend or revoke, upon written notice, a
license issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation by the licensee agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors of
any law or ordinance or any rule or regulation of any agency of the state,
county or Town.
(2) Licensee has permitted disorderly conduct or conduct detrimental to health and
safety of others or permitted or allowed conduct constituting a breach of the
public peace at the licensed location.
(3) Abrogation of any agreement, written or oral, between the licensee and the
Town Administrator or any other public official of the Town.
B. Revocation of license pursuant to the above conditions shall bar such offender from
applying for a new license within one year from the date of revocation.
A. The licensee must give notice to residents of the proposed filming location in
manner specified by the Town Administrator or his designated agent.
B. Noise shall be limited in accordance with the provisions of the Town Code.
C. Routing of traffic shall be subject to the same provisions as excavations in the Town
Code.
D. The filming shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire lanes and
fire hydrants. Equipment, materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15
feet of fire hydrants. Passageways leading to fire escapes, fire lanes and firefighting
equipment shall be kept free of equipment, materials or obstructions.
Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be kept free of equipment, materials or
obstructions.
E. A filming permit granted for private property shall confine such filming to that
property.
F. Applications for a filming permit must be submitted five days prior to the first date
of filming.
§ 99-6 FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING § 99-8
99:3
§ 99-9. Insurance and bond.
The license shall not be issued until the applicant shall furnish a policy of insurance in
such amount as shall be fixed by the Town Administrator or his designated agent and,
in any event, in an amount not less than $1,000,000 indemnifying and saving harmless
the Town of Mamaroneck, its officers, agents and employees from and against any
claim, loss or damage resulting from the filming operations permitted under this license
in the Town of Mamaroneck and for the payment of all damages for bodily injury or
property damage which may be caused to any person by reason of the filming operations
performed under the license and arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee,
his agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. In addition, the applicant must
produce certificates of insurance showing adequate liability insurance in the applicant's
name. Such certificates shall also be approved by the Town Attorney. Further, the Town
Administrator or his designated agent may require the posting of a bond in an appropriate
case to insure restoration of the filming location.
§ 99-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Administrator or his designated agent
in connection with the denial of an application for a filming license may take an appeal
therefrom to the Committee for review, consisting of the Town Supervisor and one Town
Board member. The Committee shall review such appeal and may reverse, modify or
affirm the action of the Town Administrator or his designated agent upon a finding that
the action of the Town Administrator or his designated agent was arbitrary, capricious
or not supported by substantial evidence.
§ 99-11. Penalties for offenses; additional remedies.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any rule or determination made thereunder, or who
shall undertake filming in the Town of Mamaroneck without a license issued hereunder,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $250, or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Said prosecution and/or
conviction shall not be a bar to a civil action to recover a civil penalty in like amount,
nor shall either be a bar to a civil action by the Town or an injured person for actual
damages.
§ 99-12. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
§ 99-13. Gender.
Whenever words of the masculine or feminine gender appear, they shall be deemed both
male and female persons. This construction shall apply to gender-indicative suffixes
or prefixes as well as to gender-indicative words. Whenever the reference is to a
G. Any additional costs that are incurred by the Town by reason of the filming shall be
borne by the licensee. Any requirement for the assignment of Town personnel shall
be determined by the Town Administrator prior to the filming.
§ 99-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 99-13
99:4
corporation, board, body, group, organization or other entity comprised of more than one
person or to an assemblage of persons or to an inanimate object, the reference shall be
construed to be neutral in gender.
§ 99-13 FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING § 99-13
99:5

Chapter 100
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77. Noise — See Ch. 141.
§ 99-13 FIREARMS § 99-13
100:1

ARTICLE I
Discharge of Firearms
[Adopted 2-17-1937 (Ch. 25, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 100-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 100-2. Definitions. [Added 5-3-1939]
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.
§ 100-3. Discharge prohibited; exceptions. [Amended 7-1-1953]
It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to fire, discharge or cause to be fired
or discharged any gun, cannon, rifle, air rifle, pistol or firearm of any kind or slingshot.
This section shall not apply to peace officers in the discharge of their official duties nor
to persons using firearms in necessary self-defense and in a careful manner nor to bona
fide gun clubs or shooting galleries nor to persons using firearms in a careful manner in
said shooting galleries.
§ 100-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, as the same may be
amended from time to time, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year or by a
fine of not more than $500, or both. [Amended 10-20-1954]
B. Additional penalties. [Amended 12-17-1953]
(1) Violation of § 100-3 of this article shall subject the offender, for each offense,
to a civil penalty not to exceed $100.
(2) The penalty for violation as above provided shall be in addition to any fine
provided for in § 100-4A.
(3) Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
be a separate and distinct violation of said several provisions of this article and
shall render every person liable for a separate penalty for each such violation.
§ 100-1 FIREARMS § 100-4
100:3

ARTICLE II
Sale and Use
[Adopted 9-1-1971 (Ch. 25, Art. II, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 100-5. Sale and use prohibited. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any retail establishment within the limits of the Town of
Mamaroneck, outside the incorporated Villages of Larchmont and Mamaroneck, to
store, possess or sell air guns, pellet guns, BB guns, spring guns, slingshots, instruments
or weapons which propel a missile or substance which is likely to cause injury to person
or property. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or discharge within said portion
of the Town of Mamaroneck any air gun, pellet gun, BB gun, spring gun, slingshot,
instrument, weapon or other appliance which propels a missile or substance likely to
cause injury to person or property.
§ 100-6. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and a person convicted of
said violation shall be deemed a disorderly person and subject to a fine of $25 for each
offense.17
17. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Pistol Permits, adopted 1-19-1977, which consisted of § 100-7, was repealed 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996.
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-6
100:5

ARTICLE III
Firearms Banned in Town Buildings
[Adopted 7-11-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
§ 100-7. Legislative intent.
The Town Board is aware of the country's current plague of shootings of, and other
types of attacks on, innocent persons in schools, in the workplace, in places of worship,
in other public places, and in homes. The Town Board recognizes that it cannot solve
this problem and is mindful of the right to bear arms given to the people by the Second
Amendment to the United States Constitution and by New York Civil Rights Law
§ 4. Balanced against these rights is the Town's objective of providing a safe work
environment for Town employees and a safe place for visitors to Town buildings.
Weighing these competing points, the Town Board finds that safety is paramount.
Therefore, this article bans possession of firearms within the Town buildings identified
in this article by persons other than those permitted to do so by this article.
In enacting this article, the Town Board is relying on the oft-quoted phrase from the
United States Supreme Court's decision in District of Columbia v Heller, 554 US 570,
626 (2008):
"Although we do not undertake an exhaustive historical analysis today of the full
scope of the Second Amendment, nothing in our opinion should be taken to cast
doubt on longstanding . . . laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive
places such as schools and government buildings. . . ."
and the Supreme Court's reiteration of that proposition in McDonald v City of Chicago,
Illinois, 561 US 742, 786 (2010) ("We made it clear in Heller that our holding did
not cast doubt on such longstanding regulatory measures as . . . 'laws forbidding the
carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings. . . .'
").
Preceding Heller and McDonald, the Attorney General of the State of New York,
in Informal Opinion No. 89-75, opined that a village, when acting in its proprietary
capacity, could ban possession of firearms within Village Hall. In reaching this
conclusion, the Attorney General relied upon Barrett v Kunzig, 331 F. Supp. 266,
272 (M.D. Tenn 1971), cert den, 409 US 914 (1972) which had observed: "[I]t would
seem clear that the United States Government and its custodian, General Services
Administration, could make use of its property as could any private citizen with his
home. Hence, it could prevent entry or make such conditions as it deemed proper as a
precedent to entry."
After Heller, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals faced a case where banning the
possession of firearms on government property was the issue. In Bonidy v United
States Postal Serv., 790 F3d 1121 (10th Cir. 2015), the Court of Appeals upheld
the constitutionality of the section of the Code of Federal Regulations that prohibits
carrying firearms while on property belonging to the United States Postal Service (39
CFR § 232.1 [1]) against a challenge from a person with a permit to carry a concealed
weapon.
Although the United States Postal Service (USPS) is an arm of the government and not
a private company, the Court noted:
§ 100-7 FIREARMS § 100-7
100:7
"As a government-owned business acting as a proprietor rather than as a
sovereign, the USPS has broad discretion to govern it business operations
according to the rules it deems appropriate. . . . [T]he bans [on possession of
firearms] struck down in Heller and McDonald . . . regulated wholly private
activity and applied to every citizen within the respective jurisdictions. By
contrast, the regulation challenged here applies only to discrete parcels of land
owned by the U.S. Postal Service, and affects private citizens only insofar as they
are doing business with the USPS on USPS property. And the regulation is
directly relevant to the USPS's business objectives, which include providing a safe
environment for its patrons and employees."
Bonidy, 790 F3d at 1126-27.
Finally, this article is compatible with the federal statute (18 U.S.C. § 930) that, with
certain exceptions, bans the possession of firearms within those buildings owned or
leased by the federal government where employees of the federal government are
regularly present for the purpose of performing their official duties.
The Town Board, acting in its proprietary capacity as owner of the Town buildings
defined below, enacts the following ban on the possession of firearms in those Town
buildings.
§ 100-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms have these meanings:
EXEMPT PERSON —
Means:
Police officers as that term is defined in Subdivision 34 of § 1.20 of the New
York Criminal Procedure Law;
(1)
Peace officers as that term is defined in § 2.10 of the New York Criminal
Procedure Law;
(2)
Individuals in the service of the United States who, whether in pursuit of
their official duty or when authorized by federal law, regulation or order, are
authorized to possess a firearm; and
(3)
Employees of banking institutions or armored transportation companies whose
jobs require them to transport cash, but only when they are performing their
duties for their employer.
(4)
A.
A person who is an exempt person pursuant to either Subsection A(1), (2) or (3)
of this section has that status under this article whether the person is on duty or off
duty. A retired police officer or a retired peace officer shall be an exempt person
under this article, if that officer possesses identification that meets the requirements
of the Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004 (Chapter 44 of Title 18 of
the United States Code) or any federal statute that replaces the Law Enforcement
Officers Safety Act of 2004 with respect to the requirements for a retired police
officer or a retired peace officer to carry a concealed firearm.
B.
§ 100-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 100-8
100:8
FIREARM —
TOWN BUILDING — The buildings and improvements known by these names and/or
postal addresses, but not the parking lots that are adjacent thereto:
§ 100-9. Illegal possession.
It is a violation of this article for any person, other than an exempt person, to possess a
firearm when in a Town Building.
§ 100-10. Resident custodians.
Notwithstanding § 100-9, the custodian who resides at the Senior Citizen Center and the
adult members of that custodian's family are allowed to possess within the Senior Citizen
Center the firearms which that person is licensed to possess, and the custodian who
An instrument meeting the description contained in any one of the following
paragraphs of § 265.00 of the New York Penal Law:
(1): Machine-gun
(3): Firearm
(11): Rifle
(12): Shotgun
(15-a): Electronic dart gun
(15-c): Electronic stun gun
(20): Disguised gun
(21): Semiautomatic
(22): Assault weapon
A.
B. "Firearm" also includes BB guns, pellet guns, paintball guns and air pistols or rifles.
A. The Town Center located at 740 West Boston Post Road, Mamaroneck, NY 10543.
The Hommocks Park Ice Rink located at 140 Hommocks Road, Larchmont, NY
10538.
B.
C. The Weaver Street Firehouse located at 205 Weaver Street, Larchmont, NY 10538.
The Ambulance District Building located at 155 Weaver Street, Larchmont, NY
10538.
D.
The Highway Garage Building located at 40 Maxwell Avenue, Larchmont, NY
10538.
E.
F. The Parks Building located within Memorial Park.
The Senior Citizen Center located at 1228 Boston Post Road, Larchmont, New
York 10538.
G.
The Sheldrake Environmental Center located at 685 Weaver Street, Larchmont NY
10538.
H.
§ 100-8 FIREARMS § 100-10
100:9
resides at the Sheldrake Environmental Center and the adult members of that custodian's
family are allowed to possess within the Sheldrake Environmental Center the firearms
which that person is licensed to possess.
§ 100-11. Required signage.
Notice of this article's ban on the possession of firearms in Town Buildings shall be
posted conspicuously at each public entrance to a Town building. No person shall be
convicted of violating this article if such notice is not so posted, unless such person had
actual notice of the ban.
§ 100-12. Penalties for offenses.
A person who violates this article shall be charged with a violation and, if convicted,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000.
§ 100-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 100-12
100:10
Chapter 102
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Fire safety zones — See Ch. 108.
§ 102-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Fire Hydrant Accessibility."
§ 102-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for accessibility to fire hydrants. The Town
Board finds that the placing of obstructions adjacent to fire hydrants creates a danger to
the public health, safety and welfare which needs to be remedied.
§ 102-3. Obstructions not permitted.
No shrubs, flowers, trees, mailboxes, decorative sculptures, fences or other permanent
obstruction shall be placed in front of (on the street side) nor within five feet to the sides
or rear of a fire hydrant. No other obstructions shall be placed so as to limit the visibility
of any fire hydrant from the roadway nor to in any way obstruct or limit the accessibility
to a fire hydrant for maintenance, testing, repair, operation and fire protection.
§ 102-4. Notice of violation. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Town Clerk or the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative shall provide notice
to a property owner of the existence of any planting, structure or other obstruction
which violates the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of notice of such violation, a
property owner shall, within 10 days of the date of such notice, remove the obstruction.
§ 102-5. Penalties for offenses; removal by Town. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Failure to remove an obstruction within 10 days of the date of notice of such obstruction
forwarded by the Town Clerk or the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative shall
be considered a violation punishable by a fine of up to $250. In addition to such other
civil relief or criminal penalty as may be permitted by law, the Town many remove any
obstruction after delivery of notice provided for in § 102-4 of this chapter and charge the
cost of such removal to the property owner.
§ 100-12 FIRE HYDRANTS § 102-5
102:1

Chapter 103
FIRE LIMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 102.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 103-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as "Town of Mamaroneck Local Law No. 1 of
1984, Fire Limits."
§ 103-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck, by this chapter, to
institute fire limits within the Town providing for limitations on construction materials
to be used within certain districts as provided for in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.18
§ 103-3. Designation of fire limits. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
All construction within the Unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck in areas designated as
Zoning Districts B (Business), LI (Light Industry), UR (Urban Renewal), SB (Service
Business), B-MUB (Business - Mixed Use Business), OB-1 (Office Building), OB-2
(Office Building), R-A (Attached Residence) and R-TA (Tower Apartment) shall be
in accordance with Fire Limits A as defined in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, and no construction can take place in Zoning Districts B
(Business), LI (Light Industry), UR (Urban Renewal), SB (Service Business), B-MUB
(Business - Mixed Use Business), OB-1 (Office Building), OB-2 (Office Building), R-A
(Attached Residence) and R-TA (Tower Apartment) unless and until a building permit
has been issued by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative and he/she has found
that the proposed construction will be in full compliance with Fire Limits A, as provided
by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
18. Editor's Note: See Title 9 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations (NYCRR).
§ 102-5 FIRE LIMITS § 103-3
103:1

Chapter 106
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 102.
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Signs — See Ch. 175.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 103-3 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 103-3
106:1

Part 1
[Adopted 2-2-1937 (Ch. 27 Of TheF 1ir9e7 P5 rCevoednet)i;o Anmended In Its Entirety 7-17-1996
By L.L. No. 14-1996]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 106-1. Title; purpose.
This Part 1 shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Ordinance" and is intended to provide
for fire prevention in the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated villages.
§ 106-2. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EXPLOSIVE or EXPLOSIVES — Include any chemical compound or mechanical
mixture that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such
proportion, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator, of any part of the compound or mixture, may cause such a
sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable
of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb but
shall not include the articles classed as "fireworks" in this section.
FIREWORKS — Any sparkler, squib, fire balloon, firecracker, rocket, torpedo, roman
candle, toy pistol, toy cannon, detonating cane, blank cartridge and any other device used
to obtain or intended to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic display.
PERMIT—The written authority of the Chief of the Fire Department, issued pursuant to
this Part 1, to have, keep, store, use, manufacture, sell, handle and transport explosives,
inflammable materials and rubbish, as hereinafter defined, and to operate or maintain
establishments hereinafter specified.
SMALL-ARMS AMMUNITION — Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver cartridges.
§ 106-3. Inspection of premises.
The Chief of the Fire Department may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or
premises within the unincorporated part of the Town of Mamaroneck for the purpose of
making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this Part 1, they
or either of them may deem necessary to be made.
§ 106-4. Dangerous conditions. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall find in any building or upon any
premises combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish
or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly
inflammable materials and which is so situated as to endanger property or shall find
obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, hallways, passageways, doors or windows
liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants
in case of fire, he shall report the same to the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
§ 106-1 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-4
106:3
§ 106-5. Investigation of fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department or designee or a representative of the Westchester
County Arson Squad shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstance of every
fire occurring in the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated villages by which
property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether
the fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall be begun by
the Chief of the Fire Department or designee immediately upon the occurrence of such
fire, and, if it appears to him that such fire was of suspicious origin, the Police Chief shall
be notified immediately of the facts; the Chief of the Fire Department or designee shall
take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the Council of the Fire
Department to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with
the Council of the Fire Department in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution
of the case. Every fire shall be reported by the Chief of the Fire Department or designee
within two days after the occurrence of the same. Such report shall be in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department or designee and shall contain
a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire,
the extent of the damage thereof, the insurance upon such property and such other
information as may be required by the Chief of the Fire Department or designee.
§ 106-6. Counsel to the Town to assist.
The Counsel to the Town, upon request of the Chief of the Fire Department, shall assist
the Chief of the Fire Department in the investigation of any fire which, in the Chief of
the Fire Department's opinion, is of suspicious origin.
§ 106-7. Fire drills in schools.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall require teachers of public, private and parochial
schools and educational institutions to have one fire drill each month.
§ 106-8. School doors.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall give instructions that all doors and exits in public,
private and parochial schools and other educational institutions be kept unlocked during
school hours and to require the janitor in charge of any such public, private or parochial
school or educational institution, while the same is being used for assemblages of any
kind, to keep all doors and exits unlocked.
B. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department or the Inspector shall find any building
or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes,
automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment or by reason
of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause is especially liable to fire or
is dangerous to the safety of such building or other structure or to the occupants
thereof or which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants of
other property, he or they shall report such dangerous conditions to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration.
§ 106-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-9
106:4
§ 106-9. Record of fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep in his office a record of all fires and of all
the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the
damage caused thereby and whether such losses were covered by insurance and, if so, in
what amount. Such record shall be made at least once each week from the reports made
by the Chief of the Fire Department under the provisions of this Part 1. All such records
shall be public.
§ 106-10. Annual report.
The annual report of the Chief of the Fire Department shall be made on or before the first
day of February and transmitted to the Supervisor; it shall contain all proceedings under
this Part 1, with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may desire to include
therein; the Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend any amendments to this
Part 1 which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 106-9 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-10
106:5

ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 106-11. When required.
The Town Board, upon recommendation of the Council of the Fire Department, may
from time to time specify any materials, processes or occupations and trades which shall
require permits. A list of such materials, processes or occupations and trades shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the
Chief of the Fire Department, and the Chief of the Fire Department shall maintain in his
office details and descriptive drawings showing approved and expert methods of sorting,
handling and protecting such materials as shall be deemed to require a permit.
§ 106-12. Applications.
All applications for permits required by this Part 1 shall be made to the Chief of the Fire
Department in such form and detail as the Town Board shall prescribe.
§ 106-13. Inspection before granting.
Before permits may be issued, an inspection shall be made of the receptacles, vehicles,
buildings or storage places to be used, and use thereof shall be approved by the Chief of
the Fire Department.
§ 106-14. Time limitation of permits.
Every permit granted by the Chief of the Fire Department under the provisions of this
Part 1 shall be for such period as the Chief of the Fire Department may determine, not
to exceed one year. Such permit shall at all times be kept on the premises designated
therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the Fire or Police
Departments.
§ 106-15. Purpose; advisory requirements.
The intent of this Part 1 is to safeguard and restrict the storage, handling and use of
dangerous and hazardous materials to a reasonable degree with respect to injury to
persons and destruction or damage to property. The Chief of the Fire Department shall
maintain a public file of the regulations of the NFPA, which shall be deemed as advisory
requirements to this Part 1, insofar as they can be applied to each particular installation
for which a permit is required.
§ 106-16. Appeal.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall reject or refuse to grant a permit
or whenever it is claimed that the provisions of this Part 1 do not apply or whenever
it is claimed that the intent and meaning of this Part 1 or any regulations have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted and the permit applied for has been refused by the
Chief of the Fire Department, any person interested may appeal from the decision of
the Chief of the Fire Department, in writing, to the Town Board within 10 days from
such refusal to grant such permit, and the Town Board shall, within 15 days, review such
order and file its decision thereon.
§ 106-11 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-17
106:7
§ 106-17. Number of permits.
One permit only shall be required by retail establishments dealing in or manufacturing
plants using two or more flammable, combustible or explosive materials to be kept in the
establishment at any one time.
§ 106-18. Permits required for explosives. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
It is prohibited for any person to manufacture, keep, have, use, store, sell, offer for sale or
give away for transport any explosives, excepting a person who has obtained a certificate
or license from the Industrial Commissioner of the State of New York, pursuant to
Article 16 of the Labor Law of the State of New York, and a permit to be granted by
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative for transporting explosives, which
permit may prescribe conditions under which explosives may be transported.
§ 106-19. Blasting permits. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
No person, firm or corporation shall blast or carry on any blasting operations without
having first obtained a permit from the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative
and without having first obtained from the Industrial Commissioner of the State of New
York a certificate or license for the possession, use or storage of explosives, pursuant
to Article 16 of the Labor Law of the State of New York. A valid certified copy of the
certificate of the blaster's competency issued by the State of New York Department of
Labor for each person who will detonate explosives must be supplied to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration
or either's designated representative.
§ 106-20. Blasting permit application; bond; fee. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Application for a blasting permit must be made, in duplicate, to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration in the manner and form prescribed by the Town Board. The
applicant shall, together with his application, present his certificate or license issued
to him by the Industrial Commissioner of the State of New York, pursuant to Article
16 of the Labor Law of the State of New York, and shall furnish any other
information required in the application prescribed by the Town Board, and the
application must recite the name, residence and place of business of the applicant.
No permit shall be issued to any applicant except upon the filing of a bond executed
by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of New York, the form
of which bond is to be approved by the Counsel to the Town, and in such amount
as shall be deemed adequate by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, but in no event less than set forth
by resolution of the Town Board from time to time.19 All permits, unless revoked,
19. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fee Schedule.
§ 106-17 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-20
106:8
§ 106-21. Revocation.
Any permit may be revoked at any time by the Board of Fire Commissioners for failure
to strictly comply with all requirements of the permit.
§ 106-22. Nontransferability.
The transfer to or the use of a permit issued hereunder by any person other than the one
to whom the permit has been issued will be sufficient cause for immediate revocation
thereof.
§ 106-23. Bonds.
All bonds herein required shall be conditioned for the payment to the Town of
shall be for a term not exceeding one year from the date of issue, but the permit
issued upon filing the bond and the application shall not entitle the person receiving
such permit to conduct any blasting operations, except upon filing a further
application indicating the nature and site where the work is to be performed and
the intended location of the magazine and the quantity and kind of explosives or
detonators to be kept therein, used therefrom or to be transported to and from said
sites. Such supplemental or additional application or applications, as the case may
be, shall be accompanied by a fee for each application as set forth by resolution of
the Town Board from time to time, which fee shall be paid to the Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, and
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration may, in his/her discretion, require a bond for an additional amount
if he/she considers the bond originally filed to be inadequate.
B. No permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration unless the applicant submits with
the application a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business in the State of New York and in a form acceptable to the Counsel to
the Town certifying that the applicant has in full force and effect a policy of public
liability insurance, including a specific endorsement covering all liabilities that
might arise from blasting and providing bodily injury and wrongful death coverage
of not less than $500,000 for each person injured and $2,000,000 for each accident,
as well as $2,000,000 for all property damage. In addition, the applicant shall
furnish the Town with a copy of a public liability and property damage policy
insuring the property of the owner of the site where the blasting is to take place or
the developer of such property for not less than the limits set forth above. The
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration may, in his/her discretion, require insurance for additional amounts
if he/she, in his/her sole judgment, deems the originally filed insurance to be
inadequate. Additionally, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration may require the applicant to furnish the
Town with a certified list of properties and/or structures inspected by the insurance
company which could possibly be exposed to damage due to blasting operations in
the area. This requirement must be met before the blasting operation permit is
issued.
§ 106-20 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-23
106:9
Mamaroneck, in full or in part, or to any person entitled thereto of any loss, damage
or injury resulting to persons or property by reason of the use, storage, sale, giving
away or transportation of said explosives and for the strict and full compliance with
the provisions hereof and with such other regulations pertaining to explosives as may
hereafter be lawfully made and enacted.
§ 106-24. Supervision.
The transportation, maintenance and guarding of any explosives or magazines under any
license granted by the Chief of the Fire Department shall be subject to his orders and
directions. Any person operating under a permit must be qualified in the care, handling
and use of explosives.
§ 106-23 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-24
106:10
ARTICLE III
Fire Hazards and Safety Measures
§ 106-25. Fireworks.
§ 106-26. Small-arms ammunition.
§ 106-27. Inspection of large underground propane tanks. [Added 1-21-2009 by
L.L. No. 1-200920]
A. The manufacture of fireworks and the possession or display of fireworks for sale is
prohibited.
B. The use or discharge of fireworks is prohibited, except that the Chief of the Fire
Department may issue a permit for a pyrotechnic display of fireworks when under
the control of qualified individuals and when the time, place and manner of such
display is approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.
A. No person shall manufacture within the limits of the Town outside of incorporated
villages of Mamaroneck any small-arms ammunition.
B. No person shall store for sale, sell or offer for sale or give away any small-arms
ammunition without a permit.
A. For the purpose of this section, the term "tank" shall mean containers located within
the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck which are installed
underground and are used to store propane gas.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term "inspector" shall mean a person who:
(1) Has graduated from and passed the propane industry course for underground
storage tanks given by the Certified Employee Test Program ("CETP");
(2) Holds a CETP certification for the installation and maintenance of
underground storage tanks; and
(3) Has attended the course offered by the Propane Education and Resource
Council entitled "Cathodic Protection."
C. By no later than June 1, 2009, the owner of the property on which a tank was
installed prior to the effective date of this section shall submit to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration a certification by an inspector that: [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
(1) Such inspector has personally inspected the tank; and
(2) On the date of the inspection, the tank satisfied the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association Code for the installation and protection
of propane tanks.
20. Editor's Note: Former §§ 106-27 through 106-32, which dealt with the storage of combustible or flammable materials,
obstructions in hallways, doors, aisles and passageways and first-aid appliances, were deleted 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996.
§ 106-25 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-27
106:11
§ 106-28. (Reserved)
§ 106-29. (Reserved)
§ 106-30. (Reserved)
D. By no later than the first anniversary of its installation, the owner of the property on
which a tank is installed on or after the effective date of this section shall submit to
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration a certification by an inspector that: [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
(1) Such inspector has personally inspected the tank; and
(2) On the date of the inspection, the tank satisfied the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association Code for the installation and protection
of propane tanks.
E. By no later than each anniversary of the date when this section required the first
certification by an inspector to be submitted to the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, the owner
of the property on which a tank is installed shall submit to the Building Inspector or
the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration a
certification by an inspector that: [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Such inspector has personally inspected the tank;
(2) The inspection occurred no earlier than nine months after the most recent
inspection occurred; and
(3) On the date of the inspection, the tank satisfied the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association Code for the installation and protection
of propane tanks.
F. Notwithstanding any provision of the National Fire Protection Association Code to
the contrary, each inspection of a tank shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) A visual inspection of the interior of the tank's dome, risers and valve fittings
which inspection shall include a soap-based test for leaks;
(2) Four bar hole tests, one on each side of the tank and one at each end of the
tank, taken no more than three feet from the exterior walls of the tank; and
(3) A leakage test, done after the bar hole tests are completed, with tank pressure
at or above 60 pounds per square inch.
G. An owner of property on which a tank is installed who fails to submit a certification
which complies with this section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine
of not more than $250 per day for each day starting with the day after the day on
which such certification was required to be filed with the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration and ending on the day on which a
certification which complies with this section is submitted to the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
§ 106-27 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-31
106:12
§ 106-31. (Reserved)
§ 106-32. (Reserved)
§ 106-33. Bonfires.
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or knowingly furnish the materials for
any such fire or authorize or permit any such fire to be kindled or maintained or burn or
cause to be burned, any wastepaper, hay, grass, weeds, litter, excelsior, shavings, trash,
lumber, leaves, straw or any other combustible material in any street, alley or vacant lot
or within 20 feet of any building without a permit from the Chief of the Fire Department,
unless such burning shall be done in metallic or other noncombustible receptacles and
under such proper safeguards as the Chief of the Fire Department may direct.
§ 106-34. Accumulations.
No person shall permit to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or
open space any accumulation of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, excelsior,
shavings, trash, lumber, leaves, straw or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of
any kind. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when the same endangers property
or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property it is on.
§ 106-31 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-34
106:13

ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 106-35. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of this Part 1 is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
B. Additional penalties.
(1) All persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part 1 or fail to
comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or
regulation made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder shall severally, for each and every such
violation and noncompliance, respectively, forfeit and pay a penalty not to
exceed the sum of $100. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of
this Part 1 shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within
a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days or part
thereof that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(2) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
(3) The penalties for violations as above provided shall be in addition to any fine
provided for in the preceding Subsection A.
§ 106-35 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-35
106:15

Part 2
[Adopted 2-27-1985 ByBLu.iLld. iNngo .C 3o-1n9st8r5u(cCtihon. 14 Of The 1975 Code)]
ARTICLE V
Purpose; Officials; Records
§ 106-36. Purpose.
This Part 2 is adopted for the purposes of implementing the administration and
enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 106-37. Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
§ 106-38. Fire Inspector. [Added 5-1-1985 by L.L. No. 8-1985]
A. The Town Board may appoint a Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, who shall be either an architect, engineer or person who has
qualified according to the rules and regulations for civil service in the County of
Westchester for the position of Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, and who shall serve and hold office at the pleasure of the Town
Board. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. The Town Board may appoint from time to time subordinates to the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration such as building
inspectors, assistant building inspectors and such others as may be deemed
appropriate. Such persons shall: [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Report to the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration;
(2) Serve at the pleasure of the Town Board; and
(3) In the absence of the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, act in his or her place and stead.
C. The Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall
have all powers, duties and authority provided for in Town Law § 138 and the other
provisions of state law and any other laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the
Town of Mamaroneck.
D. If the office of the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration is vacant, the Building Inspector shall have all of the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration's powers, duties and
responsibilities. [Added 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. The Town Board shall appoint as an Assistant Building Inspector a Fire Inspector,
who shall be primarily responsible for matters pertaining to building maintenance,
life and fire safety and storage of flammable and hazardous materials and shall be
responsible for the enforcement of but not limited to Chapters A, C, F and G of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as well as any local
codes relating to the same subject.
§ 106-36 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-38
106:17
§ 106-39. Records and reports. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. The Fire Inspector shall be a member of the Building Department and shall be
directly responsible to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration, who shall have the authority for
enforcement of all sections of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as well as such other codes, rules, laws and regulations as the Town
of Mamaroneck may from time to time adopt. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. The Fire Inspector shall receive applications and issue permits for explosive,
flammable and hazardous liquids and materials and blasting and shall further be
responsible for inspection of and compliance with all such permits.
D. All records of permits and inspections by the Fire Inspector shall be maintained in
the office of the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
E. The Fire Inspector shall have all the authority within his areas of responsibility that
an Assistant Building Inspector would have.
A. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and
activities conducted by him/her, including all applications received, plans
approved, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and collected, inspection
reports, all rules and regulations promulgated by him/her with the consent of the
Town Board and notices and orders issued. All such records shall be public records
open to public inspection during normal business hours. All plans and records
pertaining to buildings or structures or appurtenances thereto shall be retained as
long as the building or structure referred to in such plans and records is in existence.
B. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration shall annually submit to the Town Board a written report and
summary of all business conducted by the Building Department, including
approvals, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, orders and notices
promulgated, inspections and tests made and appeals or litigation pending or
concluded.
§ 106-38 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-39
106:18
ARTICLE VI
Permits and Certificates
§ 106-40. Application for building permit.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, improvement, conversion or change in the nature of the
occupancy of any building or structure or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate building permit from the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration for each such building
or structure, except that no building permit shall be required for the performance of
ordinary repairs which are not structural in nature. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Ordinary repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof; the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support; the
removal or change of any means of ingress or egress; or the rearrangement of parts
of a structure affecting exit requirements.
C. Applications for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration on forms
provided by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration and shall contain the following information:
[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) A survey showing the map reference, the dimensions, the locations with
reference to any streets adjoining said property on which the proposed work is
to be done and the location thereon of all existing and proposed structures
included in the application.
(2) A statement of the use and occupancy of all parts of the land and of the
building or structure.
(3) The estimated total cost of the entire proposed work.
(4) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant and the names and
addresses of their responsible officers, if either of them is a corporation, and
the name and address of the owner's authorized agent, if any.
(5) A brief description of the work proposed to be done.
(6) Plans and specifications, in triplicate, as set forth in Subsection E of this
section.
(7) Such other information as may be required by the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration to
establish and determine whether the proposed work complies with the
requirements of the applicable building laws, ordinances and regulations.
D. Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee or the agent of either or by the
architect, engineer, builder or contractor employed in connection with the proposed
work. Where the application for a building permit is made by a person other than
the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the proposed
§ 106-40 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-40
106:19
§ 106-40.1. Adoption of NYStretch Energy Code 2020. [Added 6-16-2021 by L.L.
No. 10-2021; amended 8-17-2021 by L.L. No. 11-2021]
Except for section R403.6.2 thereof, the NYStretch Energy Code 2020 supplement to the
2020 ECCCNYS, published by the New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority, shall be enforced in full in the unincorporated area of the Town of
Mamaroneck. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the NYStretch Energy Code 2020
supplement shall not apply to persons who either have or will have obtained building
permits or have or will have submitted complete applications for building permits prior
to the effective date of this section.
§ 106-41. Issuance of building permit. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
work is authorized by the owner and the applicant is authorized to make such
application.
E. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by three sets of plans
and specifications (except that in all cases involving buildings and structures to be
occupied as one-family residences, only two copies will be required), including a
survey drawn to scale showing the location and size of all proposed construction;
all existing structures on the site; the nature and character of the work to be
performed and the materials to be used; the distance from lot lines; the relationship
of structures to structures on adjoining property; the widths and grades of adjoining
streets, walks or alleys; and, where required by the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, details of
computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical data. The seal of a
licensed architect or a licensed professional engineer shall be affixed to said plans.
The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration may waive the requirements for filing plans and specifications
for minor alterations and issue a building permit so stating. The Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may
waive the requirement for filing plans in case the cost of construction is less than
$2,000. Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications
accompanying the same may be filed at any time prior to the commencement of any
work which varies from the plans and specifications approved by the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration. Any such amendment or change in the plans must be approved by
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, in writing, prior to the commencement of said work. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. The Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits
and the plans, specifications or other documents filed therewith. All applications
shall either be approved or disapproved within a reasonable time.
B. Upon approval of the application and payment of the appropriate fees, all sets of
plans and specifications shall be endorsed with the word "approved" and the date of
§ 106-40 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-41
106:20
§ 106-42. Term of building permit; conformance with other regulations.
§ 106-43. Revocation of building permit. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration may revoke a building permit theretofore issued and approved in the
following instances:
approval affixed. One set of approved plans and specifications shall be retained
in the files of the Building Department, and one set shall be returned to the
applicant, together with the building permit, and shall be kept at the building site,
open to inspection by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative at
all reasonable times. The third set, if any, of plans and specifications shall remain
with the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or for the use of any other department of the Town.
C. If the application, together with plans, specifications and other documents filed
therewith, describes proposed work which does not conform to all of the
requirements of the applicable building and zoning regulations, the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall disapprove the same in
writing. The applicant may then appeal any such decision in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 240, Zoning, and the provisions of this code.
A. A building permit shall be effective to authorize the commencement of work in
accordance with the application, plans and specifications on which it is issued for a
period of one year after the date of its issuance. The Building Inspector or Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may, for good cause
shown, allow a maximum of two extensions of the building permit for a period not
exceeding six months for each extension. However, any application for an
extension of a building permit must be made prior to the expiration of the original
permit or any extension thereof. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. The issuance of the building permit shall constitute the authority to the applicant to
proceed with the work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and in accordance with the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations. All
work shall conform to the approved application, plans and specifications, except
that no building permit shall be valid insofar as it authorizes the performance of
work or the use of materials which are not in accordance with the requirements of
the applicable building regulations and zoning ordinances.
A. Where he/she finds that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as
to a material fact in the application, plans or specifications on which the building
permit was based.
B. Where he/she finds that the building permit was issued in error and should not have
been issued in accordance with applicable provisions of law.
§ 106-41 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-43
106:21
§ 106-44. Stop-work orders. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Whenever the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration or either's designated representative has reasonable grounds
to believe that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted in violation of
the provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this Part 2 or other
applicable ordinances, rules or regulations or not in conformity with the provisions of an
application, plan or specification on the basis of which a building permit was issued or
in an unsafe and dangerous manner, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative
shall notify the owner of the property or the owner's agent to suspend all building
activities until the stop order has been rescinded or modified. Such order and notice shall
be in writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed and may
be served upon the person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to
that person or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the building where the
work is being performed and sending a copy of the same to him by certified mail at the
address set forth in the application for permission for the construction of such building.
§ 106-45. Right of entry. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
Upon showing the proper credentials and in the discharge of their duties, the Building
Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or
either's designated representative and the persons appointed by the Town Board pursuant
to § 106-37B shall be permitted to enter upon any building, structure or premises without
interference during reasonable working hours.
§ 106-46. Certificate of occupancy required. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Where he/she finds that the work performed under the permit is not being
prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application, plans or
specifications.
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or refuses to
comply with a stop order issued by the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated
representative.
E. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or refuses to
allow the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration or either's designated representative entry onto the
building or property for the purpose of inspecting the work during reasonable
working hours.
A. No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector or
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
B. No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered or upon which other work has
§ 106-43 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-46
106:22
§ 106-47. Application for certificate of occupancy; inspection. [Amended
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
been performed which required the issuance of a building permit and which has
been occupied during such enlargement, extension, alteration or other work shall
be occupied or used for more than 30 days after the completion of the alteration or
other work, unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
C. No building hereinafter enlarged, extended or altered or upon which other work has
been performed pursuant to a building permit may be occupied, unless occupied
during the work being performed as provided in Subsection B above, until such
time as a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector
or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
D. No change shall be made in the use of an existing building unless a certificate of
occupancy authorizing such new use shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
A. The owner or his/her agent shall make application for a certificate of occupancy.
Accompanying this application and before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building Inspector or Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration an affidavit of the registered
architect or licensed professional engineer who filed the original plans or of the
registered architect or licensed professional engineer who supervised the
construction of the work or of the superintendent of construction who supervised
the work and who, by reason of his/her experience, is qualified to superintend the
work for which the certificate of occupancy is sought. This affidavit shall state that
the deponent has examined the approved plans of the structure for which a
certificate of occupancy is sought and that the structure has been erected in
accordance with approved plans and, as erected, complies with all laws, rules and
regulations governing building construction or as varied by a variance which has
been legally authorized. Such variances and qualifying conditions imposed
therewith, if any, shall be specified in the affidavit.
B. In instances where the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration has determined (pursuant to § 106-40E
of this Part 2) that a requirement for filing of plans shall be waived, then the owner
or contractor performing the work for the owner to whom the permit has been
issued shall submit an affidavit as is set forth in Subsection A hereinabove.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new construction where, as part
of the permit, it is required that the building or other structure be located on the
property for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with such setback
requirements of the Chapter 240, Zoning, unless and until an as-built survey is
submitted, signed and sealed by a surveyor licensed in the State of New York
showing the location of the building or other structure on the property and the
distances of the building or other structure from property lines or other structures as
may be required by Chapter 240, Zoning, to demonstrate compliance with setback
requirements in Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Town of Mamaroneck. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued until such survey has been reviewed by the Building
§ 106-46 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-47
106:23
§ 106-48. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
§ 106-49. Discharge compliance certificate required. [Added 5-4-2005 by L.L. No.
6-200521; amended 10-19-2005 by L.L. No. 17-2005; 3-1-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016; 6-21-2017 by L.L. No. 8-2017]
Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration,
and the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration has determined that, according to such certified survey, the building
or other structure complies with all requirements for setbacks set forth in Chapter
240, Zoning, of the Town of Mamaroneck.
D. Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Building Inspector or Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall examine or cause
to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been
filed for a building permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair or change the use or
nature of occupancy and may conduct such inspections as are deemed appropriate
from time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a building
permit has been issued. There shall be maintained in the Building Department a
record of all such examinations and inspections, together with a record of findings
of violations of the law.
A. When and after final inspection it is found that the proposed work has been
completed in accordance with the applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
and also in accordance with the application, plans and specifications filed in
connection with the issuance of the building permit, the Building Inspector or
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall issue a
certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by him. If it is found that the
proposed work has not been properly completed, the Building Inspector or Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall not issue a
certificate of occupancy and shall order the work completed in conformity with the
building permit and in conformity with the applicable building regulations.
[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, where appropriate, within 30 days after
written application therefor is made.
C. The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been completed and that
the proposed use and occupancy is in conformity with the provisions of the
applicable building laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall specify the use
or uses and the extent thereof to which the building or structure or its several parts
may be put.
A. As used in this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE —
A certificate issued by the Issuing Officer with respect to real property not
meeting the definition of a multiple housing unit, stating:
(1)
21. Editor's Note: This local law redesignated former §§ 106-49 and 106-50 as §§ 106-50 and 106-51.
§ 106-47 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-49
106:24
EXEMPT MULTIPLE HOUSING UNIT — A multiple housing unit which does
not touch the ground. This section does not apply to exempt multiple housing units.
ISSUING OFFICER — The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
MULTIPLE HOUSING UNIT —
NONEXEMPT MULTIPLE HOUSING UNIT — A multiple housing unit which
touches the ground.
REAL PROPERTY — A lot or a nonexempt housing unit.
RENEWAL EVENT — The transfer of title in connection with the sale of real
property located in the unincorporated portion of the Town that occurs after January
1, 2006.
SATISFACTORY INSPECTION —
That all of the connections leading from the real property to the public
stormwater sewer lines and to the sanitary sewer lines comply with the
requirements of the New York State Building Codes and the Town Code;
and
(a)
That there are no culverts, drains, hoses, leaders, lines, pipes or pumps
that discharge liquids directly onto or directly toward a street, sidewalk
or right-of-way; or
(b)
A certificate issued by the Issuing Officer with respect to a nonexempt
multiple housing unit stating:
Either that all of the connections leading directly from that unit to the
public stormwater sewer lines or to the public sanitary sewer lines and not
to sewer lines located outside such unit but within the building in which
that unit is situated comply with the requirements of the New York State
Building Codes and the Town Code or that there are no such connections;
and
(a)
That there are no culverts, drains, hoses, leaders, lines, pipes or pumps
that discharge liquids from such unit directly onto or directly toward a
street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
(b)
(2)
An apartment whose owner:
Holds an interest in an entity formed for the cooperative ownership of real
property; and
(a)
(b) Is the tenant of the proprietary lease for such apartment; or
(1)
A unit as that term is defined in § 339-e of the New York Real Property Law
and used in Article 9-B ("Condominium Act") of the New York Real Property
Law.
(2)
For real property not meeting the definition of a multiple housing unit, a
determination made by the Issuing Officer or such Officer's designee:
(1)
§ 106-49 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-49
106:25
§ 106-50. Temporary certificate of occupancy. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Upon request, the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and
That all of the connections leading from the real property to the public
stormwater sewer lines or to the public sanitary sewer lines comply with
the requirements of the New York State Building Codes and the Town
Code; and
(a)
That there are no culverts, drains, hoses, leaders, lines, pipes or pumps
that discharge liquids directly onto or directly toward a street, sidewalk
or right-of-way.
(b)
For a nonexempt multiple housing unit, a determination made by the Issuing
Officer or such Officer's designee:
That those connections leading directly from that unit to the public
stormwater sewer lines or to the public sanitary sewer lines, and not to
sewer lines located outside such unit but within the building in which
that unit is situated, comply with the requirements of the New York State
Building Codes and the Town Code; and
(a)
That there are no culverts, drains, hoses, leaders, lines, pipes or pumps
that discharge liquids from such unit directly onto or directly toward a
street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
(b)
(2)
B. No building on real property shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, after a
renewal event has occurred unless a discharge compliance certificate is issued
therefor. To apply for a discharge compliance certificate, the owner of the real
property or such owner's representative shall submit to the Issuing Officer an
application therefor on a form approved by the Issuing Officer, together with
whatever documentation the Issuing Officer may require, and payment of the fee
for a discharge compliance certificate. If there is a satisfactory inspection of the real
property, the Issuing Officer shall issue a discharge compliance certificate for that
real property. By applying for a discharge compliance certificate, the owner of the
real property authorizes the Issuing Officer or such Officer's designee to enter upon
the real property for the purpose of conducting such inspection.
C. A discharge compliance certificate can be issued at any time after a renewal event
has occurred. A discharge compliance certificate also can be issued prior to a
renewal event; however, such certificate shall expire on the 60th day after it is
issued unless the renewal event shall have occurred before its expiration date.
D. A discharge compliance certificate issued after a renewal event has occurred shall
expire when the next renewal event with respect to that real property occurs. If a
discharge compliance certificate is issued prior to a renewal event and a renewal
event occurs before that discharge compliance certificate expires pursuant to
§ 106-49C, such certificate shall expire when the next renewal event with respect
to the real property occurs. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing the Issuing Officer from revoking a discharge compliance certificate if
there are grounds to do so.
§ 106-49 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-50
106:26
Land Use Administration may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building
or structure or part thereof before the entire work covered by the building permit shall
have been completed, provided that such portion or portions as have been completed
may be occupied safely without endangering life or the public health or welfare. A
temporary certificate of occupancy shall remain effective for a period not exceeding
three months from its date of issuance. For good cause, the Building Inspector or
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may allow a
maximum of two extensions for periods not exceeding three months each.
§ 106-51. Tests. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material, construction,
equipment or assembly does not conform to the requirements of the applicable building
laws, ordinances or regulations, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative may
require the same to be subjected to tests in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
Any such tests required by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative shall be
performed at the expense of the applicant.
§ 106-52. Revocation of certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and like
documents. [Added 5-4-2005 by L.L. No. 6-200522; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration may revoke a certificate of completion, a certificate of occupancy
(permanent or temporary), a discharge compliance certificate, a letter of compliance,
or a letter indicating that the structures (as that term is defined in § 240-4) on the real
property were constructed prior to either the enactment of the zoning ordinance or the
adoption of one or more of its provisions in the following instances:
§ 106-53. Town employees not liable. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
No member of the Town Board or any representative, board or commission appointed by
the Town Board or the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration or their subordinates, acting in good faith and without malice,
shall be liable for damages by reason of anything done in any action or proceeding
instituted under any provision of this Part 2 or by reason of any act of omission in the
performance of his/her or its official duties.
A. Where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact
in the application, the plans or the specifications on which the Building Inspector
or Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration relied
when issuing such certificate or letter; or
B. Where such certificate or letter was issued in error and should not have been issued
in accordance with applicable provisions of law.
22. Editor's Note: This local law redesignated former §§ 106-51 through 106-56 as §§ 106-53 through 106-58 and 106-58.1.
§ 106-50 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-54
106:27
§ 106-54. Existing violations preventing the issuance of other permits, certificates
or letters. [Added 11-5-2003 by L.L. No. 21-2003; amended 3-17-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004]
§ 106-55. Penalties for offenses.
A. When a notice of violation or a summons has been issued with respect to a
particular property for a violation of any provision of the New York State Building
Codes or the Town Code and such violation has not been corrected, the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall not issue any plumbing
permits, building permits, certificates of completion, letters of compliance or
certificates of occupancy (permanent or temporary) with respect to that property or
any letters indicating that the structures (as that term is defined in § 240-4) on that
property were constructed prior to either the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance or
the adoption of one or more of its provisions. This section shall not apply when a
summons described in the preceding sentence has been dismissed by the Justice
Court of the Town of Mamaroneck (or in the case of a summons heard by some
other court, the court that adjudicated that summons). [Amended 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. When a notice of violation or a summons has been issued with respect to a
particular property for a violation of any provision of the New York State Building
Codes or the Town Code and such violation has not been corrected, the
Superintendent of Highways shall not issue any street opening permits with respect
to that property. This section shall not apply when a summons described in the
preceding sentence has been dismissed by the Justice Court of the Town of
Mamaroneck (or in the case of a summons heard by some other court, the court that
adjudicated that summons).
C. Notwithstanding Subsections A and B of this section, the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's
designated representative and the Superintendent of Highways may issue the
permits that are required for work to be done to correct a violation of the New York
State Building Codes or the Town Code. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, alter, repair,
move, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion
thereof in violation of any provision of this Part 2; or to fail in any manner to
comply with a notice, directive or order of the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated
representative; or to construct, alter or use and occupy any building or structure or
part thereof in a manner not permitted by an approved building permit or certificate
of occupancy. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
B. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or
either's designated representative within the time fixed for compliance therewith
and any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
§ 106-54 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-55
106:28
superintendent or their agents or any other person taking part or assisting in the
construction or use of any building who shall violate any of the applicable
provisions of this Part 2 or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit or certificate
of the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative made thereunder shall be
guilty of a violation which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or 15
days in jail, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
violation. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Any violation of this Part 2 shall also subject any person violating the same to a
civil penalty in the sum of $100, recoverable in a civil action brought by or on
behalf of the Town of Mamaroneck. When a violation of any part of the provisions
of this Part 2 is continuous, each 24 hours thereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
D. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent
unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to prevent illegal acts, conduct or
business in or about any premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the
penalties prescribed in the preceding subsection.
§ 106-55 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-55
106:29

ARTICLE VII
Fees; Encroachments
§ 106-56. Fees. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]23
The fee for a service provided or a license or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is
as set forth in § A250-1.24
§ 106-57. Existing encroachments. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Parts of buildings which already project beyond the building line may be maintained
as constructed, provided that the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration of the Town of Mamaroneck has certified
that the maintenance of such encroachment shall not in any way endanger the public or
adjoining properties.
23. Editor's Note: Former §§ 106-56 through 106-58, which dealt with adjoining property owners and temporary supports,
were deleted 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996.
24. Editor's Note: Former § 14-20, Wood shingles, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 7-17-1996 by L.L.
No. 14-1996.
§ 106-56 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-57
106:31

ARTICLE VIII
Excavations
§ 106-58. Permits required.
No excavation may take place unless all permits required by law are obtained.
§ 106-58.1. Duration and hours for pulverizing and removing rock. [Added
2-11-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2004; amended 9-5-2007 by L.L. No. 10-2007; 9-7-2016 by
L.L. No. 10-2016; 12-2-2020 by L.L. No. 10-2020]
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MECHANICAL MEANS — The use of any tools that are not operated solely by
human muscular power. Explosives and the tools used in connection with blasting
shall not be considered mechanical means.
MONITOR — A person, unaffiliated with either the owner of the subject property
or the person pulverizing rock and/or removing it from the subject property, with
experience in residential construction, especially the pulverizing and removal of
rock, and acceptable to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration, who will be present at a subject
property whenever rock is pulverized or removed therefrom. The monitor's
responsibility is to assure compliance with the P&R Permit and § 106-58.1 of the
Code. The person to whom the P&R Permit is issued shall be responsible for paying
the monitor's fee.
ORIGINAL INFRASTRUCTURE — Streets and curbs, and the lines, pipes,
culverts and conduits used for transporting potable water, stormwater, sewage and
utilities, such as gas, telephone, electricity, cable television and internet service,
that are built on land subdivided after February 1, 2004, if the subdivision plat
creating the lots in that subdivision also created one or more new private or public
streets or created extensions to any existing private or public street.
PERMITTED HOURS AND DAYS FOR PULVERIZING ROCK ON A
SUBJECT PROPERTY — The seven hours between 9:00 a.m. (prevailing time)
and 4:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on days other than Saturdays, Sundays and the
public holidays listed in § 24 of the New York General Construction Law.
PERMITTED HOURS AND DAYS FOR REMOVING ROCK FROM A
SUBJECT PROPERTY—The eight hours between 9:00 a.m. (prevailing time) and
5:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on days other than Saturdays, Sundays and the public
holidays listed in § 24 of the New York General Construction Law.
PERMITTED NUMBER OF DAYS —
P&R PERMIT — A permit issued for pulverizing rock on, and/or removing
For creating trenches for utility lines on a subject property having an area less
than 6,000 square feet: 10 days.
(1)
For a subject property having an area greater than 6,000 square feet but less
than 7,500 square feet: 10 days.
(2)
(3) For a subject property having an area greater than 7,500 square feet: 15 days.
§ 106-58 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-58.1
106:33
pulverized rock from, a subject property.
PULVERIZING ROCK — The drilling and/or the reduction in size of rock by
mechanical means in any residence district or in the Recreation District of the
Town.
REMOVAL — The carting away of rock that has been pulverized from a subject
property.
RESTRICTED AREA — The area encompassed by the 600 linear feet from each
of the lot lines and corners of a property for which a P&R Permit is issued.
RESTRICTED PERIOD — The 60 calendar days from the last day on which
pulverizing rock was permitted on a property lying within the restricted area.
ROCK — Naturally occurring stone. "Rock" does not include impervious
concretions created by humans, such as macadam, concrete and bricks, or stone
installed by humans, such as slate used to create a walkway.
SUBJECT PROPERTY—A lot for which a P&R Permit is required or land where
the construction of original infrastructure is to occur if such land lies outside a lot.
B. A P&R Permit is required for pulverizing and/or removing any quantity of rock
from a subject property.
C. Except for pulverizing and/or removing rock for the purpose of creating trenches
for utility lines, no P&R Permit shall be issued with respect to a subject property
having an area less than 6,000 square feet.
D. No P&R Permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration approves the dust
mitigation plan submitted by the applicant. Such plan must incorporate the best dust
control practices, including but not limited to a water spray system (air suppression
or surface wetting) or other practices that are considered best dust practices at the
time the application for a P&R Permit is made. The dust mitigation plan also must
present the measures the applicant intends to use to control water runoff as a result
of water spraying. In the sole discretion of the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, air quality sampling
may be required during the course of rock removal.
E. Reducing the size of rock after it has been pulverized while such rock remains on
the subject property is not permitted at any time.
F. There shall be no more than two machines on the subject property having drills or
hammers operating at the same time.
G. No more than one P&R Permit shall be issued for a subject property within any
twelve-month period.
H. During the restricted period, no P&R Permit shall be issued for a property that lies
within the restricted area.
I. Before work pursuant to a P&R Permit can begin, the applicant shall have a survey
done of the condition of all improvements existing on each lot (including lots lying
outside the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck) that either shares all
§ 106-58.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-58.1
106:34
or a section of a lot line with the subject property or touches the subject property at
a corner. Such survey must be done by an entity regularly engaged in conducting
tests or furnishing inspection services that is approved by the Building Inspector or
the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration. If the
occupant of a lot to be surveyed refuses to allow a survey to be done, the applicant
shall submit an affidavit stating that he/she had attempted to gain access but was
denied. Submission of such an affidavit will obviate the requirement for a survey of
that lot. Prior to the issuance of the P&R Permit, a copy of the survey shall be given,
free of charge, to the occupant of the applicable surveyed lot and to the Building
Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a survey shall not be required if all
of the rock removal will be done using mechanical means that are designed to be
handheld while operating. [Amended 5-19-2021 by L.L. No. 8-2021]
J. Notice to neighbors; affidavit of mailing.
(1) No later than 10 days before work pursuant to a P&R Permit commences, the
following notice shall be mailed to the owners of each lot that has a lot line
lying within 150 feet of any lot line of the subject property:
(a) For work that is not the construction of original infrastructure:
"Dear Neighbor,
Rock from the property known as [INSERT THE STREET ADDRESS
OR THE LOCATION OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY IF IT HAS NO
STREET ADDRESS] will be pulverized by mechanical means, such as
drills, jackhammers and other types of gas, diesel or electric powered
equipment and removed from this property by dump trucks or similar
vehicles. Work is scheduled to begin on [INSERT THE STARTING
DATE FOR WORK TO BE DONE PURSUANT TO A P&R PERMIT].
The last day on which rock can be pulverized by mechanical means or
removed from this site is [INSERT THE LAST DATE ON WHICH
WORK DONE PURSUANT TO THE P&R PERMIT CAN OCCUR].
Upon a showing of undue hardship by the permit holder, rock may be
pulverized or removed from the site, or both, for up to five additional
days. The person performing the work is responsible for having an
independent monitor on site to assure compliance with the law.
If your property abuts the subject property, you should have been
contacted by now about having a survey done of the physical condition
of the structures on your property. The purpose of the survey is to
establish the physical condition of the structures on your property before
work begins so that you may be able to determine whether and to
what extent, the work may damage your property. If you were not
contacted about having a survey done, please contact the Town Building
Department at 914-381-7830 immediately.
The law does not allow rock to be drilled or pulverized by mechanical
means on Saturdays, Sundays or public holidays, or before 9:00 a.m.
(prevailing time) and after 4:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on those days
when such work is permitted.
§ 106-58.1 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-58.1
106:35
The law also does not allow the rock that has been pulverized to be
removed from the site on Saturdays, Sundays or public holidays or
before 9:00 a.m. (prevailing time) and after 5:00 p.m. (prevailing time)
on those days when removal of pulverized rock is permitted.
For further information, please contact [INSERT THE NAME OF THE
OWNER OR THE PERSON IN CHARGE OF THE PROJECT] at
the following telephone number: [INSERT CURRENT TELEPHONE
NUMBER OF THE PERSON WHOSE NAME APPEARS ABOVE].
Very truly yours,
[SIGNATURE OF THE OWNER OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY]
[PRINT OR TYPE THE NAME OF THE OWNER OF THE SUBJECT
PROPERTY]"
(b) For the construction of original infrastructure:
"Dear Neighbor,
Rock from the property known as [INSERT THE STREET ADDRESS
OR THE LOCATION OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY IF IT HAS NO
STREET ADDRESS] will be pulverized by mechanical means, such as
drills, jackhammers and other types of gas, diesel or electric powered
equipment and removed from this property by dump trucks or similar
vehicles. Work is scheduled to begin on [INSERT THE STARTING
DATE FOR WORK TO BE DONE PURSUANT TO THE P&R
PERMIT]. The last day on which rock can be pulverized by mechanical
means or removed from this site is [INSERT THE LAST DATE ON
WHICH WORK DONE PURSUANT TO THE P&R PERMIT CAN
OCCUR]. The person performing the work is responsible for having an
independent monitor on site to assure compliance with the law.
If your property abuts the subject property, you should have been
contacted by now about having a survey done of the physical condition
of the structures on your property. The purpose of the survey is to
establish the physical condition of the structures on your property before
rock removal begins so that you may be able to determine whether and
to what extent, the work may damage your property. If you were not
contacted about having a survey done, please contact the Town Building
Department at 914-381-7830 immediately.
The law does not allow rock to be drilled or pulverized by mechanical
means on Saturdays, Sundays or public holidays, or before 9:00 a.m.
(prevailing time) and after 4:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on those days
when such work is permitted.
The law also does not allow the rock that has been pulverized to be
removed from the site on Saturdays, Sundays or public holidays, or
before 9:00 a.m. (prevailing time) and after 5:00 p.m. (prevailing time)
on those days when removal of pulverized rock is permitted.
§ 106-58.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-58.1
106:36
For further information, please contact [INSERT THE NAME OF THE
OWNER OR THE PERSON IN CHARGE OF THE PROJECT] at
the following telephone number: [INSERT CURRENT TELEPHONE
NUMBER OF THE PERSON WHOSE NAME APPEARS ABOVE].
Very truly yours,
[SIGNATURE OF THE OWNER OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY]
[PRINT OR TYPE THE NAME OF THE OWNER OF THE SUBJECT
PROPERTY]"
(2) A certificate of mailing issued by the United States Postal Service showing
that the mailing was done in time to comply with this section must be filed
with the Building Department before a P&R Permit can be issued for the
subject property.
K. While on the subject property, particulate matter must be sufficiently soaked or
stored to prevent the particulate matter from becoming airborne. The Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration may require secured tarps or coverings made of plastic or other
material to further reduce dust emissions.
L. Motor vehicles used to transport particulate matter must be covered.
M. Other than for the construction of original infrastructure, pulverizing and removing
rock from a subject property shall be allowed only during permitted hours and only
for the permitted number of days, starting on the date specified for the
commencement of such work contained in the notice to neighbors described in
§ 106-58.1J(1)(a). Rock shall not be pulverized or removed from the subject
property unless the monitor is present. The P&R Permit shall contain the date after
which pulverizing and removing rock no longer will be allowed to be done. Upon a
showing of undue hardship, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration may allow rock to be pulverized and
removed from a subject property for up to five additional days. If the number of
additional days includes a day or days on which such work is prohibited by this
section, the extension period will bypass such days and resume on the first day
thereafter when pulverizing and removing rock is permitted by this section.
N. For the construction of original infrastructure, pulverizing and removing rock from
a subject property shall be allowed only during permitted hours and only for the
first 180 days starting on the date specified for the commencement of such work
contained in the notice to neighbors described in § 106-58.1J(1)(b). Rock shall not
be pulverized or removed from the subject property unless the monitor is present.
The P&R Permit shall contain the date after which pulverizing and removing rock
no longer will be allowed to be done. Under no circumstances may work pursuant
to a P&R Permit in connection with the construction of original infrastructure
extend beyond the 180th day specified for the commencement of such work in the
notice to neighbors described in § 106-58.1J(1)(b).
O. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation which shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and also shall be liable for the civil
penalty imposed by § 106-55C of the Code. Each use of mechanical means to
§ 106-58.1 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-58.1
106:37
§ 106-59. Notice to Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
If the person who causes an excavation to be made or an existing structure to be
demolished has reason to believe that an adjoining structure is unsafe, that person shall
forthwith report to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative shall
inspect such premises, and, if the structure is found unsafe, the Building Inspector or
the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's
designated representative shall order it repaired as provided in Chapter 71, Buildings,
Unsafe.
§ 106-60. Excavation for purposes other than construction. [Amended 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Excavations made for the purpose of removing soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other
materials shall be performed in such a manner as will prevent injury to neighboring
properties or to the streets which adjoin the lot where such materials are excavated and
to safeguard the general public health and welfare. Regrading of unimproved lots or
removal of soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other materials is prohibited unless part of a
project for which the required permits, licenses or approvals have been issued.
pulverize rock or each time rock is removed from a subject property on a day or at
an hour when such activity is prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
P. If there is a violation of this section by someone other than the owner of the subject
property, the owner of the subject property also shall be guilty of a violation which
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and also shall be liable for the
civil penalty imposed by § 106-55C of the Code.
Q. This section shall not apply to public utility companies, the United States of
America, the State of New York, the County of Westchester, the Town of
Mamaroneck, the Mamaroneck Union Free School District, or the Villages of
Larchmont or Mamaroneck or any independent contractors engaged by any of the
entities listed in this subsection.
§ 106-58.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 106-60
106:38
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 106-61. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in § 106-54, any person violating any of the provisions of
this Part 2, as the same may be from time to time amended, for which no other penalty
is provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than one year or by a fine of not more than $500, or both. Any abatement hereinbefore
provided for shall be in addition to any penalties prescribed in this section.
§ 106-62. Appeals. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any order, ruling, direction or
determination of the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration, or upon any failure of the Building Inspector or Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration to approve within 60
days after a completed application for permission for the construction of a building
or structure pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or plans and specifications submitted with any such application, may apply to the
State Building Construction Board of Review thereof, pursuant to the provisions of the
Executive Law and the rules and regulations adopted hereafter by such Board of Review
or the State Fire Prevention and Building Code Council. An application shall not be
considered a completed application until all necessary forms, documents and fees25 have
been submitted to the Building Inspector or Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration and after the application has been submitted for review
to the Zoning Board, Planning Board, Architectural Review Board or any other board
or commission which the laws and ordinances of the Town of Mamaroneck require to
review said application prior to the issuance of a building permit.26
25. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fee Schedule.
26. Editor's Note: Former Part 3, Smoke and Heat Detectors, Article X, Multiple-Family Dwellings, adopted 2-5-1986 by
L.L. No. 1-1986, which consisted of §§ 106-63 through 106-73 and immediately followed this section, was deleted
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996.
§ 106-61 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 106-62
106:39

Chapter 108
FIRE SAFETY ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 108-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish fire safety zones within the Town of
Mamaroneck pursuant to authority under the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 108-2. Safety zones designated.
The following locations shall be designated as fire safety zones based upon the
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department. Markings and signage shall be
installed by the property owner in accordance with New York State regulations within
60 days' notice of designation from the Town Building Department or Fire Department.
A. Boston Post Road (presently Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company):
commencing at the New York State right-of-way at the front entrance of the
building for a distance of 50 feet from the right-of-way northeast into the property,
20 feet wide.
B. Boston Post Road (presently Eastchester Savings Bank): at the north entrance to the
building 20 feet wide and a distance of 50 feet along the east face of the building.
C. Boston Post Road (presently Finast): the entire Weaver Street side of the building
face, 20 feet wide.
D. Boston Post Road (presently Village Square Shopping Center): 268 feet along the
entire length of the east frontage of the buildings, 20 feet wide; and for 10 feet on
either side of the Siamese connection located at the southeast retaining wall fronting
Boston Post Road.
E. Murray Avenue (presently Murray Avenue School): 400 feet of Daymon Terrace
along the rear of the building; and 400 feet of Murray Avenue along the front of the
building.
F. Saxon Woods Country School, 2 Fairway Drive: the length from the southwest
entry 100 feet into the circular drive and along the front of the building. [Amended
5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
G. Madison Avenue (presently Clocktower Building): on Myrtle Boulevard for 10 feet
on each side of the Siamese connection.
H. Boston Post Road (presently High Tech Car Wash): commencing at the New York
§ 106-62 FIRE SAFETY ZONES § 108-2
108:1
State right-of-way at the north entrance of the property for a distance of 50 feet from
the right-of-way on Boston Post Road northeast into the property, 20 feet wide.
I. Boston Post Road (presently Augie's Restaurant): commencing at the New York
State right-of-way at the entrance along the northeast side of the building for a
distance of 30 feet from the right-of-way southeast into the property, 20 feet wide.
J. Palmer Avenue apartments: entrance driveway on the southwest side of the building
and the entire circle at the southwest entrance of the building.
K. Winged Foot Country Club, Fenimore Road: the entire circular driveway at the
north, main entrance to the clubhouse and the circular driveway in front of the east,
grill door of the clubhouse. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
L. Bonnie Briar Country Club, Weaver Street: the entire circular driveway located at
the front entrance of the clubhouse. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
M. Larchmont Acres West No. 1 to No. 4 Richbell Road: commencing at the Richbell
Road Town right-of-way at the north side of the access road, 150 feet west to and
including the circular driveway between buildings 1, 2 and 3 and then along the
south side of the same access road, 190 feet east, ending again at the Town rightof-
way. [Added 12-4-1991 by L.L. No. 20-1991]
N. Larchmont Acres East No. 5 to No. 7: commencing at the Town of Mamaroneck
line at the west side of the access road 180 feet south to and including the circular
driveway between buildings 6, 7 and 8 and then along the east side of the access
road 130 feet north ending at the Town of Mamaroneck line. [Added 12-4-1991 by
L.L. No. 20-1991; amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
O. Hommocks Ice Rink, Hommocks Road: [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
(1) Commencing at the front entry of the ice rink along the emergency service
road at the side and rear of the building 400 feet to the southwesterly corner of
the building, then to the parking lot edge, then; northwesterly 160 feet by 24
feet wide, along the paved area at the rear of the service building, then;
beginning at a point 40 feet from the northeasterly corner of the service
building, northwesterly 100 feet along the rear fenced area, between the rink
and the school to the northeasterly corner of the rink building and, then;
westerly 200 feet along the front of the rink building ending at the front entry.
(2) The driving lane of the parking area behind the rink shall be included, with a
striped entry path, 24 feet wide and 130 feet long from the current road
entrance ending at the rear of the service building.
(3) The access area at the Town parking lot along the pool fence shall have the
"No Parking Between Signs" changed to a fire lane prohibition with the paved
area in front striped to maintain emergency equipment access.
P. Larchmont Diner, 2399 Boston Post Road: commencing at the northwesterly corner
100 feet east along the retaining wall ending at the customer parking area. [Added
5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
Q. Ferndale Shopping Center, 1330 Boston Post Road: commencing at a point 75 feet
§ 108-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 108-2
108:2
§ 108-3. Exemptions. [Amended 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
Emergency vehicles, in the performance of emergency services, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.28
east of the easterly corner of the building, 230 feet west to the northwesterly corner
of the property, then westerly 300 feet along the rear property line and then south
140 feet along the interior lot line, then; along the south wall of the building 320
feet ending at the corner of the building. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
R. Gap/Gap Kids, 1340 Boston Post Road: commencing at the northeast corner of the
building northwest along the building, 80 feet ending at the northwest corner of the
building; also, commencing at the southwest corner of the building northeast 35 feet
along the side of the building, ending at the loading zone. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L.
No. 8-1995]
S. Hommocks Park Apartments, 2-116 Hommocks Road: commencing at the
northwesterly driveway at Hommocks Road southwest 200 feet between the line of
garages, then; 100 feet southeast along the rear wall of Building No. 4, then;
northeast 200 feet between the line of garages ending at the southeasterly driveway
at Hommocks Road. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
T. Giant Carpet, 1329 Boston Post Road: commencing at the southwest corner of the
building 15 feet southeast along Old Hommocks Road to access the Siamese
Connection for the building's fire sprinklers. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
U. Beginnings Early Learning Center, 685 Weaver Street: commencing at the
driveway intersection with Weaver Street, 100 feet northwest along the driveway
and around the small turnaround area. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
V. CVS/Staples Shopping Center, 2440-2444 Boston Post Road: commencing at the
northwest corner of the building south along the building line 275 feet ending at the
southwest corner of the building nearest Boston Post Road. [Added 5-3-1995 by
L.L. No. 8-1995]
W. Badger Day Camp, 119 Rockland Avenue: commencing at the edge of Rockland
Road at the service entry road 750 feet along the length of the road south and east
into the property. [Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
X. Mamaroneck Town Center, 740 West Boston Post Road: commencing at the
northwest corner of the parking lot at the front entry area 150 feet northwest along
the south side of the roadway ending adjacent to the police vehicle parking area.27
[Added 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
27. Editor's Note: Former § 108-3, Parking in fire safety zones prohibited, and § 108-4, Towing, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018. Said local law also renumbered former § 108-5,
Exemptions, as § 108-3.
28. Editor's Note: Former § 108-6, Penalties for offenses, as amended 5-3-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995, 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002, and 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-19-2018 by L.L.
No. 9-2018.
§ 108-2 FIRE SAFETY ZONES § 108-3
108:3

Chapter 110
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 95.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 110-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Town
of Mamaroneck and that such damages may include: destruction or loss of private and
public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and
injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to
achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 110-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare,
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
§ 110-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights
or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 108-3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-3
110:1
§ 110-4. Definitions.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development
of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
APPEALS — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to three feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOODING HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V,
VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or
"l00-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard
area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood
hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT—That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
§ 110-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-4
110:2
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard extending
from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources.
The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18 inches
or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated
floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel,
concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior
grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES — Any of the following:
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the improvement or repair
when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor,
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as
not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable,
explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants who may
not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, and
emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response activities
before, during and after a flood; or
(3)
Public and private facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal
services to flooded areas before, during and after a flood.
(4)
§ 110-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-4
110:3
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V,
"elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway
walls that meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a
regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance
Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and determination
of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of floodrelated erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A but
no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING—Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(b)
(1)
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection (1)
above.
(2)
§ 110-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-4
110:4
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and
their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include longterm
storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building Inspector, Code
Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement
area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not
include a recreational vehicle.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 110-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-4
110:5
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL—For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of l929, the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base flood elevations shown
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound or
ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately
landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from
high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary
frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively
steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — A structure with at least 5l% of its actual
cash value, excluding land value, above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood
Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 110-13B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided that
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The
"actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent construction
of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 110-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-4
110:6
§ 110-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the unincorporated
area of the Town of Mamaroneck, Westchester County.
§ 110-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation,
grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or
the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT—Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
Substantial improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." The
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not include, however, either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Mamaroneck, Community
Number 360917, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36119C0332F, 36119C0334F,
36119C0342F, 36119C0351F, 36119C0353F, 36119C0361F, whose effective
§ 110-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-6
110:7
§ 110-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 110-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
§ 110-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15
days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Mamaroneck from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not
compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner
has not applied for and received an approved variance under § 110-25 will be declared
noncompliant and notification shall be sent to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 110-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
date will be September 28, 2007, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions," whose effective date will
be September 28, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the Building Department of
the Town of Mamaroneck, Town Center, 740 West Boston Post Road,
Mamaroneck, New York 10543.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through
March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of
flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or local
laws, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 110-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-10
110:8
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Mamaroneck,
any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 110-11. Designation of local administrator. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
The Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, or if that
position is vacant, the Building Inspector, is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 110-12. Floodplain development permit.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this
community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards
and ensuring that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
§ 110-6, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but
not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by
an application fee of $100. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for
reimbursing the Town of Mamaroneck for any additional costs necessary for
review, inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may require
a deposit of no more than $1,500 to cover these additional costs.
C. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following information as
appropriate. Additional information may be required on the permit application
form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure
to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns)
of any new or substantially improved structure to be located in Zone V1-V30
§ 110-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-12
110:9
or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the asbuilt
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
(3) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon
completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permittee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified
by a professional engineer or surveyor.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility
floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 110-18C, utilities.
(5) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential flood proofed structure will meet the flood proofing criteria in
§ 110-21, Standards for nonresidential structures outside coastal high-hazard
areas.
(6) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a licensed
professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or
relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original
stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to
revise the documents enumerated in § 110-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this
purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance
capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(7) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the
local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to be located
in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property.
(8) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources,
base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that
are greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
(9) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in a proposed structure with
design strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square foot.
(10) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, for all new and substantial improvements to structures, floodplain
development permit applications shall be accompanied by design plans and
specifications, prepared in sufficient detail to enable independent review of the
foundation support and connection components. Said plans and specifications
shall be developed or reviewed by a licensed professional engineer or
architect, and shall be accompanied by a statement, bearing the signature of
§ 110-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-12
110:10
§ 110-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
the architect or engineer, certifying that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
and with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following
permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements
of § 110-12C, Application for a permit, and for compliance with the provisions
and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks, to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an
area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the applicable standards of §§ 110-14 through
110-24, inclusive, and, in particular, § 110-16, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream bank
erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may require
the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may result in
physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the applicable
requirements of §§ 110-14 through 110-24, inclusive, no permit shall be
issued. The applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or federal
law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of
special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate map (FIRM)
but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas are
designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source,
including data developed pursuant to § 110-12C(7), as criteria for requiring
that new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may
use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as historical
data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for
the purposes of this chapter.
§ 110-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-13
110:11
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) The local administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) The local administrator shall determine whether the permit holder has
provided for maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the local
administrator shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also
be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway
use).
(2) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new or substantially
improved structure, the permit holder shall submit to the local administrator a
certificate of elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns).
For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of
elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. An elevation certificate
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site 180
consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway
use).
(3) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall
review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stop
work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect
shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in compliance with the
requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order for
§ 110-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-13
110:12
§ 110-14. General construction standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially
improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map designated in § 110-6.
§ 110-15. Coastal high-hazard areas.
The following requirements apply within Zones V1-V30, VE and V:
any floodplain development found ongoing without a development permit.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in § 110-9.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work order for
any floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this
chapter and/or the conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 110-9.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in
§ 110-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local
administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon
satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as
prescribed in § 110-13E, Inspections, and/or any certified elevations,
hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment
analyses which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and make available
for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures, required
pursuant to § 110-13D(1) and (2), and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 110-13D(1), and whether or
not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 110-25, Appeals board; and § 110-26,
conditions for variances; and
(5) Notices required under § 110-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 110-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-15
110:13
§ 110-16. Subdivision proposals.
The following standards apply to all new subdivision proposals and other proposed
development in areas of special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured
home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
§ 110-17. Encroachments.
A. All new construction, including manufactured homes and recreational vehicles on
site 180 days or longer and not fully licensed for highway use, shall be located
landward of the reach of high tide.
B. The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured homes or
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is prohibited.
C. Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is
prohibited.
A. Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
B. Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, shall
be located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage; and
C. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
A. Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall
be permitted unless:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any location; or
(2) The Town of Mamaroneck agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA
approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses
and mapping and reimburses the Town of Mamaroneck for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data,
analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of Mamaroneck for all costs
related to the final map revision.
B. On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 110-6, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development in the floodway
(including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(1) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows that such an
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence
of the base flood; or
(2) The Town of Mamaroneck agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision,
§ 110-15 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-17
110:14
§ 110-18. Standards for all structures.
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Town of Mamaroneck for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of Mamaroneck for all
costs related to the final map revisions.
C. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for development, volume of
space occupied by the authorized fill structure below the base flood elevation shall
be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood elevation at or adjacent to the
development site. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely to the
watercourse. No area below the waterline of a pond or other body of water can be
credited as a compensating excavation.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of
special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zone A1-A30,
AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding,
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: (i) a minimum of
two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and (ii) the bottom of all such
openings no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or
devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood elevation
are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free from obstruction or constructed with
nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse,
§ 110-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-18
110:15
§ 110-19. Standards for residential structures outside coastal high-hazard areas.
displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting foundation system. The enclosed space below the lowest floor
shall be used only for parking vehicles, building access or storage. Use of
this space for human habitation is expressly prohibited. The construction of
stairs, stairwells and elevator shafts are subject to the design requirements for
breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall be
located at or above the base flood elevation. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above the base
flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the
electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code
of New York State for location of such items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage
systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall
be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's
exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 110-16,
Subdivision proposals, § 110-17, Encroachments, and § 110-18, Standards for all
structures, apply to structures located in areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above two feet above the
base flood level.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 110-6 (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
§ 110-18 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-19
110:16
§ 110-20. Standards for residential structures within coastal high-hazard areas.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 110-15, Coastal high-hazard
areas, and § 110-16, Subdivision proposals, § 110-17, Encroachments, and § 110-18,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special flood hazard
shown as Zone V1-V30, VE or V on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 110-6:
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
A. Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on
pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member supporting the lowest elevated floor (excluding columns, piles,
diagonal bracing attached to the piles or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other
members designed to either withstand storm action or break away without
imparting damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above two feet above
base flood level so as not to impede the flow of water.
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously during the base flood on all building
components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that would occur
during the base flood. Horizontal water loads considered shall include inertial
and drag forces of waves, current drag forces, and impact forces from
waterborne storm debris. Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if
bulkheads, walls, or other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause
wave run-up beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due to wind
pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include windward and leeward
forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof, internal forces when openings allow
wind to enter the house, and upward force on the underside of the house when
it is exposed. In the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially
from any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the building code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto shall be
adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to the
effects of wind and water pressures acting simultaneously on all building
components. Foundations must be designed to transfer safely to the underlying
soil all loads due to wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including
uplift due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural support of a
new building or substantial improvement of an existing structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less than 8:1 for
§ 110-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-20
110:17
individual piles (this shall not apply to pile clusters located below the design
grade). The maximum center-to-center spacing of wood piles shall not be more
than 12 feet on center under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to resist the
combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift) associated with the base
flood acting simultaneously with typical structure (live and dead) loads, and
shall include consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion
of soil strata surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum if the
BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if the BFE is greater
than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in column
action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil elevation of the site.
Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally braced to withstand wind and water
forces.
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of eight
inches for round timber piles and eight inches by eight inches for square timber
piles. All wood piles must be treated in accordance with requirements of
EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and damage from fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twenty-eight-day
ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000 pounds per square inch,
and shall be reinforced with a minimum of four longitudinal steel bars having
a combined area of not less than 1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete
area. Reinforcing for precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than
1 1/4 inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for No. 6
through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field shall have a
concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer, jetted, or
augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include lateral or
diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both directions by
a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced concrete grade beam. These at-grade
supports should be securely attached to the piles to provide support even if
scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch by eight-inch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in location to below
the lowest supporting structural member and above the stable soil elevation,
and aligned in the vertical plane along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline.
Galvanized steel rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable-type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the beam-topile
connection, may be used along pile rows perpendicular and parallel to the
§ 110-20 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-20
110:18
shoreline. Knee braces shall be two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the
pile/beam, or four-by-four or larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting
shall consist of two 5/8-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for two-by-eight
members, or one 5/8-inch lag bolt (each end) for square members. Knee braces
shall not extend more than three feet below the elevation of the base flood.
E. Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete piers shall
be internally reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads, and be connected with a
movement-resisting connection to a pile cap or pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood connectors, or bolts
of size and number adequate for the calculated loads must be used to connect
adjoining components of a structure. Toe nailing as a principal method of
connection is not permitted. All metal connectors and fasteners used in exposed
locations shall be steel, hot-dipped galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in
protected interior locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam to pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall span the
supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential floodwater and wave action
and shall be fastened to the columns or pilings by bolting, with or without cover
plates. Concrete members shall be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or
(of precast) shall be securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams, or
girders are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two 5/8-inch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/16 inch by four inches
by 18 inches, each bolted with two 1/2-inch lag bolts per beam member, shall be
used. Notching of pile tops shall be the minimum sufficient to provide ledge support
for beam members without unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall not be
notched so that the cross-section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-inch by four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist anchors
shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders. These should be installed
on alternate floor joists, at a minimum. Cross bridging of all floor joists shall
be provided. Such cross-bridging may be one-inch by three-inch members,
placed eight feet on-center maximum, or solid bridging of the same depth as
joist at same spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide good
torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure. The plywood
should not be less than 3/4-inch total thickness, and should be exterior grade
and fastened to beams or joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized
nails. Such fastening shall be supplemented by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required breaks under a
wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be used to secure rafters or joists
and top and bottom plates to studs in exterior and bearing walls to form a
continuous tie. Continuous 15/32-inch or thicker plywood sheathing, overlapping
the top wall plate and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder, may be used to
provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically continuous,
then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all horizontal joints. In lieu of
§ 110-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-20
110:19
the plywood, galvanized steel rods of 1/2-inch diameter or galvanized steel straps
not less than one inch wide by 1/16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top
wall plate to the sill, beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum diameter of three
inches shall be used at each end of the 1/2-inch round rods. These anchors shall be
installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more than four feet on
center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(1) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner that the joists
provide a continuous tie across the rafters. Ceiling joists and rafters shall be
securely fastened at their intersections. A metal or wood connector shall be
used at alternate ceiling joist/rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(2) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four blocking
on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end. Blocking shall be
installed a minimum of eight feet toward the house interior from each gable
end.
K. Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members must be
adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and water uplift forces. Roof
eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two feet and joist overhangs to a
maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs and porches will be permitted if designed
or reviewed by a registered professional engineer or architect and certified in
accordance with this chapter.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing, shall not be
less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of exterior sheathing grade or
equivalent. All attaching devices for sheathing and roof coverings shall be
galvanized or be of other suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six inches shall be
reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial adhesive applied to all
bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used in the sheathing of such corner,
gable end, or roof overhang.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to reduce uplift
pressures, and special care should be used in securing ridges, hips, valleys,
eaves, vents, chimneys, and other points of discontinuity in the roofing
surface.
M. Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and doors shall be
designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand loads due to the design wind speed
of 75 miles per hour. Connections for these elements must be designed to transfer
safely the design loads to the supporting structure. Panel widths of multiple-panel
sliding glass doors shall not exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than
10 pounds per square foot and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, with
§ 110-20 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-20
110:20
§ 110-21. Standards for nonresidential structures outside coastal high-hazard
areas.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial, industrial
and other nonresidential structures, in addition to the requirements in § 110-16,
Subdivision proposals, § 110-17, Encroachments, and § 110-18, Standards for all
structures.
the criterion that the safety of the overall structure at the point of wall failure
be confirmed using established procedures. Grade beams shall be installed in
both directions for all piles considered to carry the breakaway wall load. Knee
braces are required for front row piles that support breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square foot shall
not be permitted unless a registered professional engineer or architect has
developed or reviewed the structural design and specifications for the building
foundation and breakaway wall components, and certifies that (1) the
breakaway walls will fail under water loads less than those that would occur
during the base flood; and (2) the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse, displacement, or
other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural).
Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind
loading values shall be those required by the building code.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two
feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet above the
base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
All structural components located below the base flood level must be capable
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number specified in
feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in this
chapter.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for
construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall be provided to
§ 110-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-21
110:21
§ 110-22. Standards for nonresidential structures within coastal high-hazard
areas.
In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available, new
construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall have the bottom of the lowest member of the
lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of structures is
not an allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor to the base flood elevation in
Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
§ 110-23. Critical facilities.
In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain facilities that would result in serious
danger to life and health, or widespread social or economic dislocation, no new critical
facility shall be located within any area of special flood hazard, or within any fivehundred-
year flood zone shown as a B Zone or a Shaded X Zone on the Community's
Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
§ 110-24. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 110-14, General construction
standards, and § 110-18, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of
special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are
located in areas of special flood hazard:
the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
chapter, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest floor
(including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30,
V, and VE shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections B, C and
D of § 110-21.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
§ 110-21 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-24
110:22
§ 110-25. Appeals board.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones A1-A30,
AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
C. Within Zone A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the
manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height
above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers
consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 110-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). Elevation
on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
A. The Planning Board as established by the Town of Mamaroneck shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error
in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board may appeal such decision to
the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter
and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
§ 110-24 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-25
110:23
§ 110-26. Conditions for variances.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting
search and rescue operations during periods of flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including search and rescue operations, maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of this chapter,
the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level, provided items in Subsection D(4) in § 110-25 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F are met;
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public
safety.
§ 110-25 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 110-26
110:24
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor
below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature of a
community official that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
§ 110-26 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-26
110:25

Chapter 114
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coastal Zone Management Commission — See Ch. 8.
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Local impact review — See Ch. 130.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Waterfowl — See Ch. 233.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 114-1. Title and purpose; authority; findings; intent.
A. Purpose.
(1) This chapter shall be known as the "Wetlands and Watercourses Protection
Law of the Town of Mamaroneck." The Town Board of the Town of
Mamaroneck finds and declares it to be public policy of the Town to preserve,
protect and conserve its tidal and freshwater wetlands, and watercourses; to
prevent despoliation and destruction; to regulate their use and development;
and to secure the natural benefits of wetlands and watercourses that are
consistent with the general welfare and beneficial economic and social
development of the Town.
(2) It is therefore the policy of the Town of Mamaroneck to ensure maximum
protection for wetlands and watercourses by discouraging degradation within
them and within their buffers that may adversely affect these natural resources.
It is the policy of the Town to encourage restoration of already degraded or
destroyed wetlands, watercourses and buffers, and to ensure "no net loss" of
wetlands and watercourse areas.
B. Enabling authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law and any and all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the State of New
York. This chapter establishes a wetlands regulatory system separate from, and in
addition to, any applicable requirements under state or federal law. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to conflict with any such laws, rules and
regulations.
C. Findings of fact.
(1) The Town of Mamaroneck lands and waters are entirely tributary to Long
Island Sound, a federally recognized estuary of national significance. As such,
the protection of wetlands and watercourse areas within the Town, particularly
for their water quality and habitat functions, is essential to the long-term health
§ 110-26 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-1
114:1
and viability of the Sound.
(2) A significant amount of the original complement of freshwater and tidal
wetlands and their associated buffers within the Town have been lost or
impaired by draining, filling, excavating, building, polluting and other acts
inconsistent with the natural uses of such areas. Buffers to existing
watercourses have been built upon with a resultant loss of water quality. Four
miles of the Sheldrake River, 19 acres of the East Creek estuary, and the
twenty-six-acre Sheldrake Lake have been placed on the State Priority
Waterbodies List due to stressed or impaired water quality. Remaining
wetlands, watercourses and their buffers are in jeopardy of being lost,
despoiled or impaired, directly or cumulatively, by such acts contrary to the
public safety and welfare.
(3) The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck has determined that tidal and
freshwater wetlands and watercourses are indispensable and fragile natural
resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion
and soil limitations. Wetlands and watercourses serve a myriad of important
ecological functions which serve to benefit the residents of the Town. These
functions include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Protecting water resources by providing sources of surface water,
recharging groundwater and aquifers, serving as chemical and biological
oxidation basins and/or functioning as settling basins for naturally
occurring sedimentation;
(b) Controlling flooding and stormwater runoff by storing and releasing
floodwaters and stormwater runoff;
(c) Providing nesting, migratory and wintering habitats for diverse wildlife
species, including many on the New York State and federal threatened
and endangered species lists;
(d) Providing areas of unusually high plant productivity which support
wildlife diversity and abundance;
(e) Supporting plant communities specifically adapted for survival in lowoxygen
environments and/or brackish or salt water;
(f) Stabilizing shorelines by protecting against erosion caused by stream
currents and the forces of wave actions;
(g) Serving as nutrient traps for nitrogen and phosphorus and as filters for
surface water pollutants;
(h) Providing breeding and spawning grounds, nursery habitat and food for
various species of aquatic life;
(i) Providing recreation areas for swimming, fishing, boating, hiking, bird
watching, photography and other passive recreational uses; and
(j) Providing open space and visual relief from residential and commercial
development.
§ 114-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-1
114:2
§ 114-2. Definitions.
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall carry their
customary meanings:
APPLICANT — A person or entity who files an application for a permit under this
chapter or a person to whom a wetlands permit has been given.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or its designee.
COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION — The duly appointed Coastal
Zone Management Commission of the Town of Mamaroneck and the Village of
Larchmont.
DEPOSIT — To fill, grade, place, disturb, or dump any material.
DISCHARGE — The emission of any water, substance, or material into a wetland or
wetland buffer whether or not such substance causes pollution.
DREDGE — To dig out and remove any material.
HYDRIC SOIL — Soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the
growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part, and as further defined
by the technical publication, Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands (1989), which manual shall be available for inspection in the
Town Conservation and Building Departments.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION — Macrophytic plant life growing in water, on soils,
or substrate that is at least periodically anaerobic as a result of excessive water content,
and as further defined by the technical publication, Federal Manual for Identifying
and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (1989), which manual shall be available for
inspection in the Town Conservation and Building Departments.
MATERIAL — Substances including, but not limited to, soil, silt, gravel, rock, sand,
clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse; any organic or inorganic compound, chemical agent
or matter; sewage sludge or effluent, including stormwater runoff; or industrial or
municipal solid waste.
MITIGATION PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant pursuant to § 114-7 when
the applicant has demonstrated that either the losses or impacts to the wetland,
watercourse, or wetland/watercourse buffer are necessary and unavoidable as defined in
§ 114-2 and have been minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck.
POLLUTION — Any harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean
or impure of any wetland or waters by reason of erosion or by any waste or other
materials discharged or deposited therein.
STRUCTURE—Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including but not
limited to signs, tennis courts and swimming pools.
D. Legislative intent. It is the intent of the Town of Mamaroneck that activities in and
around wetlands and watercourses or their buffers conform with all applicable
building codes and other regulations. Such activities shall not threaten public safety
or welfare, or the natural environment, or cause any nuisances.
§ 114-1 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-2
114:3
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial, permanent or intermittent, coastal or
inland, public or private water body or water segment, such as ponds, lakes, reservoirs,
rivers, streams, brooks or waterways, which is contained within, flows through, or
borders on the Town of Mamaroneck but shall not include structures as defined by law.
WETLAND HYDROLOGY — The sum total of wetness characteristics in areas that
are inundated or have saturated soils for a sufficient duration to support hydrophytic
vegetation.
WETLANDS — Any area which meets one or more of the following criteria:
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES MAP—The Town of Mamaroneck Freshwater
Wetlands Map, dated December 1986, or the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation Tidal Wetlands Map or such map as has been amended
or adjusted and on which are indicated the approximate boundaries of the known
wetlands, watercourses and wetland/watercourse buffers as defined pursuant to this
chapter. The map shall be available for inspection in the Town Conservation and
Building Departments.
WETLAND/WATERCOURSE BUFFER — The area surrounding a wetland or
watercourse extending 100 feet horizontally away from the outermost boundary of a
wetland or watercourse and/or point of mean high water of a wetland or watercourse.
WETLAND/WATERCOURSE PERMIT OR PERMIT — The permit required under
this chapter to conduct regulated activities, which permit is in addition to and separate
from any other permits required under local, state or federal law.
§ 114-3. Applicability; new and grandfathered projects.
Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition provided in § 25-0103.1 of the
New York State Tidal Wetlands Act (Article 25 of the Environmental Conservation
Law). The approximate boundaries of such lands and waters are indicated on the
official tidal wetlands inventory promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to
§ 25-0201 of the Act or such an inventory that has been amended or adjusted
pursuant to § 25-0201.6 of said Act.
A.
All other areas, 2,500 square feet or larger, that comprise hydric soils or are
inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
hydrophytic vegetation, as defined by the technical publication, Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (1989), which manual shall be
available for inspection in the Town Conservation and Building Departments.
B.
All areas designated as wetlands or watercourses on the Wetlands and Watercourses
Map.
C.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all regulated activities conducted
within wetlands, watercourses, and their buffers, except for activities for which
Town final approval was obtained or that were physically completed or commenced
prior to the effective date of this chapter ("grandfathered projects").
B. Grandfathered projects may be continued without a permit subject to the following:
(1) That the activity not be expanded or altered in any way that increases its
§ 114-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-3
114:4
§ 114-4. Permitted activities.
The following activities may be conducted within any wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer without a wetlands permit to the extent that they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance:
§ 114-5. Regulated activities.
Except as provided in § 114-4 hereof, it shall be unlawful to conduct, directly or
indirectly, any of the following activities within any wetland/watercourse or within
the wetland/watercourse buffer unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to § 114-6
hereof:
nonconformity;
(2) That if destroyed, damaged or removed by any cause, grandfathered projects
may be replaced, restored or reestablished without a permit, provided that the
replaced, restored or reestablished use is no closer to any wetland or
watercourse or buffer, will result in no greater land coverage, and will result in
no increased activity than before damage or destruction.
A. Repair of existing structures, including interior renovations, walkways, walls, and
docks, where the work does not involve use of any machinery directly within the
wetland or watercourse;
B. Normal grounds maintenance, including selective trimming and pruning of
vegetation, and removal of dead or diseased vegetation, except through the
application or use of herbicides, within the wetland/watercourse buffer only;
C. Operation and maintenance of existing dams, retaining walls, terraces, culverts or
other water-control structures, and piers or docks as legally existed on the effective
date of this chapter and subject to conditions that apply to nonconforming uses;
D. The depositing or removal of the natural products of the wetland by recreational or
commercial fishing, and shellfishing, where otherwise legally permitted; and
E. Public health activities of the Westchester County Department of Health or the New
York State Department of Health for emergencies only.
A. Placement or construction of any structure, including dams, docks, water-control
devices, groins, bulkheads, berms, floating docks, pilings, bridges, storage tanks,
and other stabilization structures;
B. Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of material either directly
or indirectly;
C. Any form of dumping, filling, discharging, or depositing of material either directly
or indirectly;
D. With the exception of pet containment systems and irrigation systems, the
installation of any service lines, cable conduits or utilities which are either greater
than three feet wide or four feet deep or 20 feet long;
§ 114-3 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-5
114:5
§ 114-6. Exempt activities.
§ 114-7. Wetland permits.
E. Introduction of any form of pollution, by such means including, but not limited to,
the installation of a septic system, running of a sewer or stormwater outfall or
discharge of sewage treatment effluent, or other solid or liquid waste into or so as
to drain into a wetland or watercourse;
F. Activities altering or modifying natural drainage patterns, natural features or
contours of wetlands or watercourses;
G. Installation of any drainage or water supply pipes or wells;
H. Installation of an impervious surface larger than 100 square feet;
I. Operation of construction vehicles and equipment and all-terrain vehicles;
J. Installation of dry wells, retention basins, filters, open swales or ponds; and
K. Any other activity that may impair the natural function(s) of a wetland as found in
§ 114-1 of this chapter.
A. Municipal action. The Town of Mamaroneck shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Wetland and watercourse buffer. A person may conduct regulated activities within
a wetlands buffer without having to obtain a wetlands permit if the person
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration that the proposed
regulated activity cannot be done in an area outside the wetlands buffer. This
exemption shall apply only where the area of land within the wetlands buffer that
will be disturbed by the regulated activity is no greater than 10% of the area of the
portion of the wetlands buffer located on the property of the person wishing to
conduct such regulated activity. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Permit applications.
(1) Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity
as defined in § 114-5 shall file an application for a permit in duplicate with the
Building Department and pay the filing fee set forth in § A250-1. All permit
applications must include the following information: [Amended 8-17-2011 by
L.L. No. 8-2011]
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the property owner and
applicant, if different;
(b) The street address and Tax Map designation of the property;
(c) A statement of authority from the owner for any agent making application
for a permit;
(d) A statement of the proposed work and purpose thereof;
§ 114-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-7
114:6
(e) A completed environmental assessment form as required by Chapter 92
of the Town of Mamaroneck's Environmental Quality Review Law, and
the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act; and
(f) A statement that the property owner and applicant will indemnify and
hold the Town or its representatives harmless against any damage or
injury in connection with the activities for which a permit is being sought.
(2) Additional information may be requested by the approving authority,
including any of the following:
(a) Complete plans for the proposed site improvements, which shall be
certified by an engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect
licensed in the State of New York, drawn to a scale no less detailed than
one inch equals 20 feet, and showing the following:
[1] The location of all wetlands/watercourse and wetland/watercourse
buffer areas, which shall be determined no earlier that 12 months
prior to the date of filing the application. The finite boundaries of a
wetlands/watercourse shall be determined by field investigation and
as defined under § 114-2;
[2] A description of the vegetative cover of the regulated area, including
dominant species;
[3] A description of the on-site soil types;
[4] The location of the construction area or area proposed to be
disturbed, and its relation to property lines, roads, buildings and
watercourses within 250 feet of the proposed activity;
[5] The exact locations, specifications and amount of all proposed
draining, fill, grading, dredging and vegetation removal or
displacement, and the procedures to be used to do the work;
[6] The location of any well(s) and depth(s) thereof, and any disposal
system within 100 feet of the area(s) to be disturbed;
[7] The existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals in the
proposed disturbed area and to a distance of 50 feet beyond; and
elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the
proposed activity.
[8] Details of any temporary or permanent drainage system proposed
both for the conduct of work, and after completion thereof, including
locations at any point discharges, artificial inlets, or other humanmade
conveyances which would discharge into the wetland or
wetland buffer, and measures proposed to control erosion, both
during and after work;
[9] Where creation of a lake or pond is proposed, details of the
construction of any dams, embankments, outlets or other watercontrol
devices, and analysis of the wetland hydrologic system,
§ 114-7 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-7
114:7
including seasonal water fluctuation, inflow/outflow calculations
and subsurface soil, geology and groundwater conditions;
[10] Where creation of a detention basin is proposed, with or without
excavation, details of the construction of any dams, berms,
embankments, outlets or other water-control devices, and an
analysis of the wetland hydrologic system, including seasonal water
fluctuation, inflow/outflow calculations and subsurface soil, geology
and groundwater conditions;
[11] Details of erosion and sediment control practices, including a
diagram showing what and where erosion and sediment control
practices will be implemented and a schedule for their installation
and maintenance and any other information as specified in Chapter
95, Erosion and Sediment Control;
[12] Functional analysis of the wetlands to be affected showing existing
wetlands formation and impacts to those functions from the
proposed activity;
[13] A completed long-form environmental assessment form when
required by the State Environmental Quality Review Act; and
[14] All information relating to a permit application, including, but not
limited to, the application itself; additional required materials or
information; notices; record of hearings; and written comments.
(b) Copies of all applicable county, state or federal permits or permit
applications that are required for such work.
(c) An application fee, engineering, and inspection fee in amounts set forth
in the fee schedule approved by the Town Board.29
(3) In the event that an application requires the Town of Mamaroneck to incur
additional expenses for technical assistance in the review of the application,
the applicant shall pay the expenses incurred by the Town. The applicant shall
be notified of the expenses and shall deposit said necessary funds with the
Town.
B. Procedures for permits.
(1) No regulated activity shall be conducted without an issuance of a written
permit from the approving authority. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the approving authority on forms furnished by the Building
Department.
(2) An application shall not be deemed complete unless the approving authority
has fully complied with the procedures of the Mamaroneck Environmental
Quality Review Act (Chapter 92) and the State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQR) (Article 8 of the State Environmental Conservation Law).
29. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fee Schedule.
§ 114-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-7
114:8
(3) All information relating to a permit application, including but not limited to
the application itself, additional required materials or information, notices,
records of hearings, written comments and findings, shall be maintained on
file in the office of the Town Building Department.
(4) The approving authority, its agents or employees, may enter upon any lands or
waters for the purpose of undertaking any investigations, inspections,
examination, survey or other activity for the purpose of this chapter.
(a) The Building Department shall provide the applicant with a notice of
public hearing which shall be in a form prescribed by the approving
authority and shall specify that the application, including all documents
and maps therewith, is available for public inspection at the Town
Building Department and that anyone interested in speaking either in
favor or against the application for a permit may write to the approving
authority or speak at the public hearing or have representatives do so on
their behalf.
(b) The Building Department shall also notify the applicant of the names and
addresses of all property owners of record within 100 feet of the boundary
of the property on which the proposed regulated activity will be located,
as shown in the Town Tax Assessor's office, of the filing of the wetland
permit application. The applicant shall be responsible for mailing a copy
of the notice of public hearing to all of the property owners so identified
by the Building Department no less than 10 days prior to the date
scheduled for the public hearing on the application.
(c) The Building Department shall be responsible for notifying federal, state,
and local agencies having jurisdiction over or an interest in the subject
matter of the application, and to provide such agencies with an
opportunity to comment.
(5) Should an agency of the Town having jurisdiction over that application deem
it necessary to hire consultants for technical review and/or on-site inspection,
the applicant shall be required to pay the actual cost to the Town for such
services. [Added 4-24-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
C. Public hearings. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application
at such time it deems appropriate. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper of the Town at the same time that notice is published for
other public hearings appearing on the same agenda. The applicant must comply
with the notification procedures contained in Chapter 144. When deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board, any public hearing on the application shall be
integrated with any public hearing required or otherwise held pursuant to any other
law, including, but not limited to, the Town's Environmental Quality Review Law
(Chapter 92) and the State Environmental Quality Review Act (Article 8).30
[Amended 4-21-2021 by L.L. No. 7-2021]
D. Standards for permit decisions; factors to be considered. In making its
determination to grant, deny or grant with conditions a permit under this chapter,
30. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 114-7 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-7
114:9
the approving authority shall consider the following:
(1) Any reports from other commissions (Coastal Zone Management
Commission), Town, county, state and/or federal agencies;
(2) All relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) The environmental impact of the proposed action;
(b) The alternatives to the proposed action;
(c) The impact of the proposed activity on wetland functions and the benefits
as set forth in § 114-1 of this chapter.
(3) The availability of preferable alternative locations on the subject parcel;
(4) The availability of further technical improvements or safeguards that could
feasibly be added to the plan or action;
(5) The possibility of further avoiding reduction of the wetland's or watercourse's
natural capacity to support desirable biological life, prevent flooding, control
sedimentation and/or prevent erosion, facilitate drainage, and provide
recreation and open space; and
(6) The extent to which the public or private benefit derived from such use may or
may not outweigh or justify the possible degradation of the wetland or
watercourse, the interference with the exercise of other property rights, and the
impairment or endangerment of public health, safety or welfare.
E. Required findings. No permit shall be issued by the approving authority pursuant to
this chapter unless the approving authority shall find that the proposed regulated
activity is consistent with the purpose of this chapter, as set forth under § 114-1.
F. Permit conditions.
(1) Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with conditions as
deemed necessary by the approving authority.
(2) Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in written form and shall
contain the following conditions:
(a) Work conducted under a permit shall be open to inspection at any time,
including weekends and holidays, by the approving authority, or its
designated representative(s).
(b) The permit shall expire on a specified date that is one year from its
issuance.
(c) The permit holder shall notify the Building Department of the date on
which the work is to begin, at least five days in advance of such date.
(d) The approving authority's permit shall be maintained and prominently
displayed at the project site during the undertaking of the activities
authorized by the permit.
§ 114-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-7
114:10
(3) The approving authority shall set forth in writing findings and reasons for all
conditions attached to any permit.
G. Bond. The approving authority may require that, prior to commencement of work
under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall post a bond in
an amount and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the
conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The bond shall remain in effect
until the approving authority certifies that the conditions of the permit have been
satisfied.
H. Other laws and regulations. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove
an applicant's obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of
any other federal, state or local law.
I. Mitigation plan requirements.
(1) The approving authority may require the preparation and implementation of a
mitigation plan by the applicant when the applicant has demonstrated that
either losses or significant impacts to the wetland or wetland buffer are
necessary and unavoidable. In determining whether and to what degree such
requirement will be imposed, the approving authority will consider the
following:
(a) Whether there is no feasible on-site alternative to the proposed activity,
including reduction in density, change in use, revision of road and lot
layout and related site planning considerations that could accomplish the
applicant's objectives; and
(b) Whether there is a feasible alternative to the proposed activity on another
site available to the applicant that is not a wetland or wetland buffer area.
(2) Adequate mitigation for intrusion into wetlands shall ensure no overall net loss
of wetlands in terms of ecological characteristics and function, geographic
location and setting and size. To ensure no net loss, mitigation measures must
provide for replacement wetland at a ratio of at least 2.0 to 1.0.
(3) The approving authority may require additional information if the plan does
not provide sufficient detail to evaluate the effectiveness of the plan.
(4) On-site mitigation shall be the preferred approach. Off-site mitigation shall be
permitted only in cases where on-site alternatives are not possible; in these
instances, emphasis should be placed on mitigation within the same general
watershed as the original wetland.
(5) The approving authority may recommend a fee payable to an established Town
Wetlands Improvement Fund in lieu of direct action on behalf of the applicant
or violator to initiate restoration projects, where it determines that the public
interest is better served through such a fee.
(6) The approving authority shall monitor or shall cause to have monitored
projects in accordance with the specifications set forth in the permit to
determine whether the elements of the mitigation plan have been met. The
approving authority may retain qualified professionals to discharge its
§ 114-7 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-7
114:11
§ 114-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall be the enforcement officer
for this chapter. No work or activity subject to review under this chapter shall be
commenced or undertaken until a wetlands permit has been approved by the Planning
Board. The Town of Mamaroneck is specifically empowered to seek injunctive relief
restraining any violation or threatened violation of any provisions of this chapter and/
or compel the restoration of the affected wetland, watercourse or wetland/watercourse
buffer to its condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
obligations hereunder at the expense of the applicant. The requirements for
monitoring shall be specified in the permit and/or mitigation plan and may
include, but not be limited to:
(a) The time period for all monitoring activities, which shall be a minimum
of three years or more, as the approving authority deems necessary;
(b) Field measurements to verify the size and location of the impacted
wetland area and the restored/replacement wetland area;
(c) The date of completion of the work or restoration/replacement; and
(d) Field verification of the structural details, best management practices,
mitigation measures, and vegetative, hydrologic and soils criteria
specified in the permit and/or mitigation plan.
A. Civil sanctions. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter,
including any requirement with regard to a wetlands permit, shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not more than $3,000 for every such violation. Each consecutive
day of violation will be considered a separate offense. Such civil penalty may be
released or compromised by the approving authority.
B. Injunctive relief. The approving authority shall have power, following a hearing, to
direct the violator to restore the affected wetland to its condition prior to the
violation.
C. Criminal sanctions. Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly, or willfully,
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits issued thereunder, upon
conviction thereof of the first offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 and for a second offense and
each subsequent offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not
less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of not more than
15 days, or both. In addition to these punishments, any offender may be ordered by
the court to restore the affected wetland to its condition prior to the offense. Each
consecutive day of violation will be considered a separate offense.
D. Stop-work order. The Building Department may suspend or revoke a permit in the
form of a stop-work order if it finds that the applicant or permittee has not complied
with any or all of the terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in
the permit, or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the
approved application.
§ 114-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 114-8
114:12
§ 114-9. Completion of permitted regulated activities. [Amended 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) If a stop-work order is issued it shall be set forth in writing, a copy of which
shall be filed with the Town Building Department, and shall contain the
findings and reasons for issuing the stop-work order pursuant to this section.
(2) The stop-work order shall have the effect of suspending all authorizations and
permits granted by the Town or any agency thereof.
(3) The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the approving authority is
satisfied that the permittee has complied with all terms of the subject permit or
until a final determination is made by the approving authority.
A. Within 30 days after completion of all work authorized under a permit issued in
accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall notify the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration of such
completion. For all work undertaken pursuant to permits approved by the Planning
Board, the applicant shall, if required, submit as-built drawings as to the variation
from the permit. Within 30 days of such notification and submission, the Building
Department shall inspect the work for compliance with all conditions of the permit.
B. When all work authorized under a permit is deemed acceptable, the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration shall issue a certificate of completion.
C. When work authorized under a permit is deemed not acceptable, the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall so notify the applicant.
The notification of noncompliance shall include a list of all conditions in violation
of the terms of the permit and shall specify a time limit for the correction of all
items so listed.
§ 114-8 WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES § 114-9
114:13

Chapter 117
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 175.
Solid waste — See Ch. 183.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 117-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to control, regulate and license the conduct of sales commonly
referred to as "garage sales" and "yard sales" within residential areas of the
unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck and to distinguish such sales, as herein
defined, from those business uses which are prohibited in residential districts by Ch. 240,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck on the ground that such sales are not
business uses.
§ 117-2. Type of sales; where permitted.
Garage sales, yard sales and tag sales permitted hereunder are those sales of household
and personal articles owned by the resident of the premises where sold or by not more
than two additional residents of the Town of Mamaroneck or an immediate relative of
such resident and not acquired for the purposes of sale, said sales being confined to the
area within the lot lines and back from the sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk, at least
10 feet back from the street line.
§ 117-3. License required; application.
A. No person shall establish, operate, maintain or conduct a yard sale or garage sale,
or both, within the boundaries of the unincorporated area of the Town of
Mamaroneck unless he shall first obtain a license for such garage sale or yard sale
from the Town Clerk. Every applicant for a license for such sale shall apply for said
license to the Town Clerk and shall provide the Town Clerk with the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, the names and addresses of other
residents whose property will also be offered for sale (who shall also sign the
application) and the name and address of the real party in interest, if he is other
than the applicant.
(2) The date, time and place of the proposed garage or yard sale.
(3) A statement that he has read and understood § 117-2 hereof and that the
proposed sale falls within the definition therein.
B. Any such license, if issued by the Town Clerk, shall permit such sale for a period
of time not exceeding three consecutive days in any calendar year at any one
§ 114-9 GARAGE SALES § 117-3
117:1
§ 117-4. Signs. [Amended 11-16-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988]
§ 117-5. Inspections.
All licensed premises shall at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be
made from time to time by the Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck and shall
be subject to inspection at all times by the Police Chief or any other duly authorized
representative of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 117-6. License fee. [Amended 11-16-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988; 8-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 8-2011]
The fee for a license or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is as set forth in
§ A250-1.
§ 117-7. Penalties for offenses.
residence (provided, however, that in the event of rain or similar inclement weather,
one or more of such days can be postponed to a later date specified in the
application) and shall limit the hours of such sale on those days from 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. No such license shall be granted for a sale in an apartment building
without the written permission of the landlord or his designated agent.
A. No more than four temporary signs of no more than one square foot each in area
may be placed off premises. Said signs shall be provided by the Town Clerk upon
approval of the permit application and shall contain the following information only:
(1) The name and address of the license holder.
(2) A legend stating the type of sale being conducted.
(3) The location and days of business of the sale.
B. One sign not to exceed six square feet in area may be displayed behind the street
line at the premises at which the sale is to be conducted.
C. No sign shall be displayed more than 48 hours in advance of the sale and must be
removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale.
A. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be an
offense, and any person violating the same shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction before a Town Justice, be punished by a fine not exceeding $100
or, in default of payment of such fine, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. In addition to the penalties prescribed herein, any sale of articles other than those
described in § 117-2 hereof in a residential district, whether or not a license for a
yard sale or garage sale has been granted, shall be deemed a violation of Ch. 240,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck and subject to the penalties
therein prescribed.
§ 117-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 117-7
117:2
Chapter 122
HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT
§ 122-1. Applicability.
The following chapter shall apply to the unincorporated area of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 122-2. Unauthorized takeoffs and landings prohibited.
All takeoffs and landings of helicopters or other aircraft from other than approved areas
are prohibited within the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 122-3. Hovering prohibited. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 10-1998]
The hovering of helicopters so as to discharge or accept passengers or cargo is prohibited
within the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 122-4. Discharge or acceptance of passengers prohibited. [Amended 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 10-1998]
The discharging or acceptance of a passenger or cargo from or into a hovering helicopter
within the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck is prohibited except for an
emergency.
§ 122-5. Emergency landings. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Emergency landings are exempt from this chapter. However, in the event of an
emergency landing, no movement of the helicopter or other aircraft may be made or
permitted until such time as an administrative authority designated by the Chief of Police
has approved the movement of the helicopter or other aircraft, except for helicopters
landing for medical and/or public safety emergencies.
§ 122-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
B. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as follows:
(1) A person found guilty may be sentenced to 30 days in jail or a fine of $500, or
both, for a first offense.
(2) A person found guilty of violating this chapter a second time may be sentenced
to up to 60 days in jail or fined up to $1,000, or both.
(3) A person found guilty of a third or subsequent violation of this chapter may be
sentenced to up to 120 days in jail or fined up to $2,000, or both.
(4) As provided in §§ 80.00 and 80.05 of the Penal Law of the State of New York,
in lieu of the foregoing schedule of fines, a fine equal to two times the profit
made as a result of such prohibited landing, takeoff or hovering may be
§ 117-7 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 122-6
122:1
§ 122-7. Hardship.
§ 122-8. Remotely controlled aircraft temporarily prohibited within certain
airspace. [Added 3-4-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020; amended 9-9-2020 by L.L. No.
8-2020]
imposed.
A. Should any person(s) affected by this chapter suffer an unnecessary hardship in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the person(s) may apply to the
Town Board in writing for a variation from the strict compliance with this chapter,
upon proof of such unnecessary hardship.
B. Procedure. Upon submission of a written application to the Town Clerk by the
person(s) seeking a variation of this chapter, the Town Board shall, within 30 days
of receipt of such application, schedule a public hearing on said application upon
five days written notice in the official newspaper of the Town. At said public
hearing, the person(s) and any other parties wishing to present evidence with regard
to the application for a variation from the strict compliance of this chapter shall do
so. If the Town Board determines that a person(s) will suffer unnecessary hardship
due to the strict compliance with this chapter, to the minimum extent necessary to
provide the person(s) relief from strict compliance with this chapter, it shall grant
such relief. The Town Board may impose such requirements that ensure the public
health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Any party aggrieved by the determination of the Town Board on an application for
a variation from the strict compliance with this chapter may appeal said decision to
the Supreme Court, State of New York, Westchester County, pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Laws and Rules within 30 days of the filing said decision in
the Office of the Town Clerk.
A. From September 12, 2020, to September 21, 2020, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate an unmanned aircraft, or cause an unmanned aircraft to take off,
land or fly, within two miles of the perimeter of the property owned by the Winged
Foot Holding Corp. or the Winged Foot Golf Club, Inc., and designated on the Tax
Assessment Map of the Town of Mamaroneck as Section/Blocks/Lots
(1) 3-40-204.1;
(2) 3-44-99;
(3) 3-45-1.4;
(4) 3-45-1.5;
(5) 3-45-1.7;
(6) 3-46-1.1;
(7) 3-46-1.2;
(8) 3-47-1../1;
§ 122-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 122-8
122:2
(9) 3-47-1 .. /2; and
(10) 3-47-1.2.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term “unmanned aircraft” means a device,
commonly referred to as a "drone," that is designed to navigate in the air without a
pilot on board or an aircraft that is operated without intervention by a human within
the aircraft.
C. This section shall not apply to those enterprises with whom either the Winged Foot
Golf Club or the United States Golf Association will or have contracted to perform
services in connection with the 2020 US Open golf championship and whose names
appear on a certification given to the Town by either the Winged Foot Golf Club or
the United States Golf Association that is received by the Town Administrator on
or before September 11, 2020.
§ 122-8 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 122-8
122:3

Chapter 130
LOCAL IMPACT REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 130-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Article 9, § 2 of the New
York State Constitution and the statutes that implement the powers of local governments
provided for therein, including, but not limited to, § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law
and §§ 64 and 130 of the Town Law.
§ 130-2. Purpose and intent.
Major development projects in areas that abut, adjoin or are adjacent to the Town of
Mamaroneck can result in substantial impacts to the streets and areas that surround them
within the Town of Mamaroneck, including, but not limited to, impacts upon natural
resources, noise, traffic, cultural or aesthetic resources, existing patterns of population
concentration and community or neighborhood character. The purpose of this chapter is
to address those impacts and thereby provide for the proper care, management and use of
the streets and highways of the Town of Mamaroneck, and the protection, safety, health
and well-being of persons and property therein. This chapter is intended to supersede
any provision of the Town Law that is inconsistent herewith.
§ 130-3. Permit required.
No project that involves the construction of 250 or more residential units, or the physical
alteration of 10 acres or more, or the construction of a facility with more than 100,000
square feet of gross floor area, or involves parking for more than 1,000 vehicles and
abuts, adjoins or is adjacent to a Town street within or upon the border of the Town
of Mamaroneck shall be undertaken except upon the issuance of a permit by the Town
Board.
§ 130-4. Application process.
A. Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be made to the Town
Administrator on such forms as the Town Administrator shall establish and shall
include:
(1) A detailed development plan showing the proposed use, location, height and
design of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site,
prepared by a licensed architect or professional engineer under his or her
§ 122-8 LOCAL IMPACT REVIEW § 130-4
130:1
§ 130-5. Permit standards.
In reviewing an application for a permit under this chapter, the Town Board shall
consider the potential impacts of the project on the streets and the areas around the
project, including, but not limited to, impacts upon natural resources, noise, traffic,
cultural or aesthetic resources, existing patterns of population concentration and
community or neighborhood character, and shall review the means available to mitigate
such impacts, including those regulatory measures that are within the authority of the
Town to undertake. The Town Board shall grant a permit upon finding that the impacts
associated with the project can be mitigated and that all such mitigation measures have
been incorporated into the plan for the project.
§ 130-6. Certain projects excluded.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any project for which site plan
approval has been granted pursuant to Chapter 177 of the Code of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 130-7. Enforcement.
The requirements of this chapter may be enforced by legal, or equitable proceedings and
by such other means as the Town Board shall determine.
professional seal, provided on a certified survey of the site, which shall be
prepared by a licensed surveyor; and
(2) A map showing the applicant's property and all other properties, including all
improvements thereon and streets, within a radius of 500 feet from the
perimeter of the site, at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch.
B. In reviewing the application, the Town Board may require that the applicant provide
such additional information and/or studies as the Town Board determines are
relevant to the issues before it.
C. A permit pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of 24 months from the
date it is granted.
D. Every application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a
fee as set forth by resolution of the Town Board from time to time to help defray
the costs of processing the application. Additionally, should the approving agency
deem it necessary to hire consultants for technical review, the applicant shall be
required to bear the expense thereof, not to exceed the total cost to the Town.
§ 130-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 130-7
130:2
Chapter 137
MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 58.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Noise — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 137-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MOTEL — A series of attached, semiattached or detached dwelling units with separate
entrances, operated as a single business, containing individual sleeping or living units
with bathrooms and closet space, with or without kitchens, designed for or used by
automobile tourists and transients, and includes tourist courts, auto courts and motor
lodges, with convenient access to a parking space for the use of the units' occupants, and
direct and convenient access to a traveled road, and maintained and held out to the public
as accommodations for auto tourists and transients by the day, week or month, whether
a charge is made or not.
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.[Added 5-3-1939]
§ 137-3. Office required; regulations to be posted; register. [Amended 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996]; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
In every motel, there shall be an office of the person in charge of said motel. A copy of
this chapter shall be posted therein, and the motel register shall at all times be kept in
said office and made available to the Town Police Department and Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's
designated representative upon request.
§ 137-4. Management duties.
It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or persons in charge of the motel to:
A. Keep at all times a register of all guests as provided in § 204 of the General
§ 130-7 MOTELS § 137-4
137:1
§ 137-5. Liability of responsible parties.
The owner, lessee, licensee or occupant of any premises upon which a motel is located
who commits any act in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall each be
liable for any such violation and for the penalty therefor. Each day such violation shall
continue or be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 137-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 or to
imprisonment for a period of not less than one day nor more than six months, or both
such fine and imprisonment, and, in addition, any and all persons who violate any of
the provisions of this chapter or who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act required
by this chapter shall, severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, forfeit and pay a penalty of $500, recoverable in a civil action brought by or
on behalf of the Town of Mamaroneck. The imposition of all penalties for any violation
of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. The application of
Business Law of the State of New York, which shall be open at all times to
inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the Town of Mamaroneck,
showing for all guests:
(1) The name and home address of each guest for whom accommodations are
afforded.
(2) The dates of arrival and departure.
(3) The license number as shown on the automobile registration produced by the
guest, make and type of all automobiles.
(4) The name of the state issuing such automobile licenses.
B. Maintain the motel in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
C. See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and report
promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this chapter or any other
violation of law which may come to his attention.
D. Report to the Department of Health of the County of Westchester all cases of
persons or animals infected or suspected of being infected with any communicable
disease.
E. Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets.
F. Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department of the Town of
Mamaroneck, hand fire extinguishers in good operating condition in the ratio of one
to each motel unit.
G. Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
H. Prohibit the use of any motel unit by a greater number of occupants than that which
it is designed to accommodate.
§ 137-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 137-6
137:2
any of the above penalty or penalties or the prosecution of the violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of conditions prohibited
by this chapter.31
31. Editor's Note: Former § 48-6, Additional violations and penalties, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996.
§ 137-6 MOTELS § 137-6
137:3

Chapter 141
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 50.
Animals — See Ch. 58.
Firearms — See Ch. 100, Art. I.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
§ 137-6 NOISE § 137-6
141:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-17-1937 (Ch. 51 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 141-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
32PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.[Added 5-3-1939]
SIDEWALK — That paved portion of a street intended for pedestrian use and lying
between the curbline of the street and the adjacent property line.[Amended 12-6-1989
by L.L. No. 8-1989]
STREET — Any street, road or other public way dedicated to and accepted by the
Town, including all the area thereof lying within the bounds of the dedicated right-ofway.[
Amended 12-6-1989 by L.L. No. 8-1989]
VEHICLE —Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon the street.
§ 141-3. Amplifying devices. [Amended 4-21-1954]
No person shall locate radios or similar devices or amplifiers thereof so as to or that
may project sound into highways or neighborhoods for advertising or business purposes;
and no person owning, occupying or having charge of any building or premises or any
part thereof in the Town of Mamaroneck shall cause, suffer or allow any loud, excessive
or unusual noise in the operation or use of any radio, phonograph or other mechanical
or electrical or reproducing device, instrument or machine, which loud, excessive and
unusual noise shall disturb the comfort, peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity. The
playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio,
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, which is cast upon the
public streets from any sound truck or vehicle, for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public, shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited.
§ 141-4. Whistles and other noise instruments.
No steam whistle or other whistle or horn or other instrument for making a noise which
is operated by steam or any other power shall be blown or operated within the limits
of the Town of Mamaroneck at any hour of the day or night, except only the alarm of
vehicles of the Fire and Police Departments, all fire and burglar alarms and the alarm
32. Editor's Note: The definition of "park, parking or parked" was repealed 12-6-1989 by L.L. No. 8-1989.
§ 141-1 NOISE § 141-4
141:3
of automobiles, bicycles or motorcycles while actually traveling through the Town and
except also church and school bells. The alarm of automobiles, bicycles and motorcycles
shall not be operated continuously but only with sufficient frequency to warn persons
of their approach. The use of sirens on motor vehicles and bicycles within the Town
limits is hereby prohibited. No motor vehicle shall be operated in the Town unless it is
provided with a proper and suitable muffler, and such muffler shall not be opened at any
time while said motor vehicle is in operation.
§ 141-5. Domestic power tools and equipment. [Added 12-6-1989 by L.L. No.
8-1989]
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any power tool or equipment, including
but not limited to saws, sanders, drills, grinders, tractors, chain saws, lawn or garden
tools, mowers, leaf blowers or gatherers or similar devices or wood chippers of any kind,
when used outdoors in a residentially zoned district as provided in § 141-7 below.
§ 141-6. Unnecessary noise.
All noises that menace the health or disturb the peace and quiet of the Town are
prohibited at any time of the day or night.
§ 141-7. Time limitations. [Added 9-17-1986 by L.L. No. 10-1986]
Except under emergency circumstances and with the exception of the operations of
the Town government, no person, firm or corporation may operate any machine,
construction equipment or other similar device that makes noise which carries beyond
the boundaries of the property on which it is located or being used or, if a part of a
multifamily dwelling, the confines of the dwelling unit, between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, not before 9:00 a.m. and not after 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays and not before 9:00 a.m. and not after 5:00 p.m. on Sundays, nor may any
such device be operated on a public road except for the purposes of transporting the same
from one place to another.
§ 141-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-17-1953; 10-20-1954; 12-6-1989 by
L.L. No. 8-1989]
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 141-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 141-8
141:4
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Power Tools and Gasoline-Powered Blowers
[Adopted 4-19-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 141-9. Title.
This article shall be known as "Restrictions on Outdoor Power Tools and Gasoline-
Powered Blowers."
§ 141-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce noise which is disturbing to individuals in their
homes, on their property and in their workplaces. Noise from certain equipment, used out
of doors, causes inconvenience to occupants of nearby property when such equipment
is used during certain hours. Further, gasoline-powered blowers originally designed for
leaf pickup for limited portions of the year are now utilized all year. Repeated statements
by residents over a six-year period demonstrate the year-round use of gasoline-powered
blowers has expanded to the extent that the blowers cause a nearly constant intrusion on
the peace and quiet of the community, diminishing the quality of life in our community.
The unacceptable noise levels produced by the year-round use of gasoline-powered
blowers is particularly disturbing during the warmer weather, when residents spend
longer periods out of doors and windows and doors are open. This Town Board finds the
noise from gasoline-powered blowers impacts adversely upon the health and welfare of
the community.
§ 141-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GASOLINE-POWERED LEAF BLOWER — Any device powered by an internal
combustion engine which discharges a stream of forced air and which is used or designed
to move grass, leaves, clippings, dust, dirt or other matter by blowing them with air
emitted by such device.
§ 141-12. Restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any power tool or equipment powered
by an internal combustion engine before the hour of 8:00 a.m. and after the hour of
9:00 p.m. on any weekday and before 10:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays; except for emergency repairs by municipalities, school
districts and/or utility companies and for a period of up to five days following
storms for purposes of removing snow and debris resulting from such storms.
B. The use of gasoline-powered leaf blowers shall be unlawful in the Town during the
period from June 1 through September 30 of each year. This section shall not apply
to utility companies, municipal and/or school district emergency operations and for
a period of up to five days following storms for purposes of removing debris
resulting from such storms. [Amended 2-7-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
§ 141-9 NOISE § 141-13
141:5
§ 141-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-7-2017 by L.L. No. 7-2017]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates any provision of this article
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as follows:
A. For the first offense during a calendar year, with a fine of not less than $125 and
not more than $250;
B. For a second offense during the same calendar year, with a fine of not less than
$250 and not more than $500; and
C. For additional offenses during the same calendar year, with a fine of $500.
§ 141-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 141-13
141:6
Chapter 144
NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions, authorities and committees — See Ch.
5.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 141-13 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES § 141-13
144:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 144-1. Purpose.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of the subject property or the person requesting an
interpretation of Chapter 240 of the Code. The applicant may authorize another person
to act in the applicant's behalf.
APPLICATION — A request for the approval of a wetlands/watercourse permit
pursuant to Chapter 114 of the Code, the approval of a site plan pursuant to Chapter
177 of the Code, the approval of a site plan pursuant to Chapter 178 of the Code, the
approval of a subdivision pursuant to Chapter 190 of the Code, the issuance of a special
use permit pursuant to Chapter 240 of the Code, the interpretation of, or a variance from,
any provision of Chapter 240 of the Code, or the amendment of any provision of Chapter
240 of the Code if requested through a petition by the owner of the subject property
or any combination of the foregoing. Neither a request for the extension of a special
use permit nor an amendment of a provision of Chapter 240 of the Code initiated by
the Town Board shall be considered an application.[Amended 4-21-2021 by L.L. No.
7-2021]
BOARD — The Board of Appeals, the Planning Board or the Town Board of the Town
of Mamaroneck.
DEMOLITION — The razing of all or a portion of the exterior of the main building (as
defined in § 240-4 of the Code) on a subject property.
MAILING AREA —
A. It is important for neighbors to know when the Board of Appeals, the Planning
Board or the Town Board will hear and discuss certain applications regarding the
use or improvement of real property. Prior to the enactment of this chapter, notice
of such requests was given by mail, by publication in the newspaper and/or by
posting on the Town's website. While these means of notification are more than
what New York State law requires, the Town Board has determined that additional
notice in the form of a sign posted upon the subject property will make the Town's
notification procedures more effective and comprehensive. This additional means
of notification will increase awareness and will afford more people in the
community an opportunity to participate in the decisionmaking process.
B. It also is important for certain neighbors of properties where substantial demolition
is about to occur to be notified by mail of the impending demolition and for the
general public to be notified through the posting of an appropriate sign.
Fifteen hundred linear feet from each of the lot lines and corners of the subject
property If the subject property lies within the R-15, R-20, R-30 or R-50 Zoning
District.
A.
B. Three hundred linear feet from each of the lot lines and corners of the subject
§ 144-1 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES § 144-2
144:3
SUBJECT PROPERTY — The lot which is either the subject of an application or the
site of future demolition.
WEB SITE — www.townofmamaroneck.org or whatever other Web site address may
become the Town's official Web site.
property if the subject property lies within a zoning district other than the R-15,
R-20, R-30 or R-50 Zoning Districts.
§ 144-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 144-2
144:4
ARTICLE II
Notification of Certain Proceedings Pending Before Boards
§ 144-3. Property owners to be notified.
§ 144-4. Signs.
A. With an application, the applicant shall submit a list of the names of all the owners
and the postal addresses of all of the lots which lie within the mailing area, as well
as the tax block and lot designations of all such lots as they appear on the Town's
Tax Assessment Map. On this list, the applicant shall certify that the Town's Tax
Assessment Map (including its scale) was used to determine which lots lie within
the mailing area, and that the Town's tax assessment roll was used to determine the
postal addresses of the lots lying within the mailing area and the names of the
owners of all those lots.
B. No later than 14 calendar days before the first date on which the application appears
on the agenda of the Board, the applicant shall mail notice thereof (as well as such
other material as the Town Board may require from time to time) to the owners of
all of the lots lying within the mailing area. The form of that notice and the other
material to be included in such mailing, if any, shall be prescribed by, and from
time to time may be changed by, resolution of the Town Board. The Planning Board
or the Board of Appeals from time to time may resolve that additional materials be
included among the materials to be included in such mailing.
C. No later than five business days before the date on which the application appears
on the agenda of the Board, the applicant shall file with the Town's Building
Department a certificate of mailing issued by the United States Postal Service
indicating that on or before the last date permitted for mailing under this chapter,
the required materials were mailed by first class mail to the owners of all of the lots
lying within the mailing area at the postal addresses shown for such lots on the
Town's assessment roll. In the case of a petition requesting an amendment to a
provision of Chapter 240 of the Code, the certificate of mailing shall be filed with
the Town Clerk instead of the Building Department.
A. No later than 14 calendar days before the first date on which the application appears
on the agenda of the Board, the applicant shall post a sign on the subject property
announcing the date, time and place when the application will appear on the agenda
of the Board for the first time. The color, material, size, content and wording of the
sign shall be prescribed by, and from time to time may be changed by, resolution of
the Town Board. The specifications for the sign shall be kept on file in the Town's
Building Department. The posting of a sign shall not be required when an
interpretation of a provision of Chapter 240 of the Code is being requested
regarding a subject property not owned by the applicant.
B. The sign shall be placed on the subject property in a location where it will be clearly
visible to a person standing in front of the subject property. It shall be no more than
10 feet back from the edge of the paved portion of the street abutting the subject
property's front lot line.
C. If final action is not taken upon an application on the date shown on the sign, the
§ 144-3 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES § 144-4
144:5
§ 144-5. Placement or removal of application from Board agenda.
§ 144-6. Agendas posted on Web site.
The agendas of each meeting of each of the Boards shall be posted on the Web site. The
failure of an agenda to be posted on the Web site shall not be considered a failure to
comply with the notification procedures of this chapter.
§ 144-7. Conformity with state law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as altering the notice requirements mandated
by New York State law.
sign shall be updated to show the next date, time and place when the application
will appear on the agenda of the Board. The sign shall be updated no later than 14
calendar days before the date of the meeting when the application will next appear
on the agenda of the Board.
A. If the certificate of mailing is not filed on or before the last date permitted for such
filing under § 144-3C or if the applicant does not comply with the provisions of
§ 144-4, the application will not be placed upon the agenda of the Board (or, if
already placed upon the agenda, stricken therefrom). Notwithstanding the
requirements of § 144-4, if the applicant places a sign at the time and in the manner
required by § 144-4 but the sign does not stand for the entire period required, the
Board, if satisfied that the sign had stood for a sufficient period of time and that the
applicant had taken all reasonable steps to restore the sign once the applicant had
become aware that the sign was not standing, may act upon the application if the
applicant can demonstrate to the Board’s satisfaction that the failure to comply with
§ 144-4 was not the applicant’s fault. In order to process an application that either
was not placed upon an agenda or, if placed, was stricken therefrom, the applicant
must request the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration to place the application on the agenda of a future
meeting of the Board. (In the case of a petition by the owner of the subject property
for an amendment of a provision of Chapter 240 of the Code, that request shall be
made of the Town Administrator. [Amended 7-24-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Once the date of the meeting at which the application will be discussed is
determined, the applicant must repeat the procedures set forth in §§ 144-3B,
144-3C and 144-4 of the Code within the time periods allotted by those sections.
C. If more than six months pass from either the date of the meeting when the
application was to have appeared on the agenda of the Board for the first time but
did not or the date of the meeting of the Board from which the application was
stricken, the applicant will be required to submit an updated list of the names of all
of the owners and the postal addresses of all of the lots which lie within the mailing
area.
§ 144-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 144-7
144:6
ARTICLE III
Notification of Demolition
§ 144-8. Property owners to be notified of demolition.
No more than 14 days and no less than seven days before more than 50% of the main
building (as defined in § 240-4 of the Code) on a subject property is demolished, the
applicant shall notify the owners of the properties that are contiguous to the subject
property of the date on which such demolition shall occur. Notification shall be done by
first-class mail addressed to the contiguous properties.
§ 144-9. Signs.
§ 144-10. Penalty for failure to notify owners of demolition.
A violation of § 144-8 shall be punishable by a fine of $250.
A. No more than 14 days and no less than seven days before more than 50% of the
main building (as defined in § 240-4 of the Code) on a subject property is
demolished, the applicant shall post a sign on the subject property announcing the
date for the demolition. The color, material, size, content and wording of the sign
shall be prescribed by, and from time to time may be changed by, resolution of the
Town Board. The specifications for the sign shall be kept on file in the Town's
Building Department.
B. The sign shall be placed on the subject property in a location where it will be clearly
visible to a person standing in front of the subject property. It shall be no more than
10 feet back from the edge of the paved portion of the street abutting the subject
property's front lot line.
§ 144-8 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES § 144-10
144:7

Chapter 147
OPERATING PERMITS
§ 147-1. Purpose.
This chapter is designed to provide a more modern regimen for requiring operating
permits for certain types of uses and for places of public assembly. This modernization is
accomplished by utilizing provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
(19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.).
§ 147-2. Operating permit requirements.
A. Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities listed below and
for the buildings listed below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities
exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or
2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of the State of New York"
and incorporated by reference into Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code (19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.) by 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to, commercial
and industrial operations which produce combustible dust as a by-product,
fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an occupant
load of 100 persons or more;
(5) Parking garages as defined in § 147-2I; and
(6) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial
potential hazard to public safety, as determined by the Building Inspector.
B. Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate the type of
building listed in § 147-2A shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to
commencing such activity or operation.
C. An application for an operating permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or
otherwise acceptable to the Building Inspector. Such application shall include such
information as the Building Inspector deems sufficient to permit a determination by
the Building Inspector that quantities, materials, and activities, as the case may be,
conform to the requirements of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (19
NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.). If the Building Inspector determines that tests or reports
are necessary to verify conformity, the applicant shall pay for and provide such tests
or reports to the Building Inspector, who may reject any test or report that he/she
determines was not performed properly or cannot be used to determine conformity
to the Uniform Code.
D. The Building Inspector or his/her designee shall inspect the subject premises prior
§ 144-10 OPERATING PERMITS § 147-2
147:1
to issuing an operating permit.
E. If more than one activity listed in § 147-2A is to be conducted at one location, the
Building Inspector may require a separate operating permit for each such activity,
or the Building Inspector may, in his or her discretion, issue a single operating
permit to apply to all such activities.
F. Unless sooner revoked or suspended, an operating permit shall remain in effect for
one year from the day on which it is issued. Regardless of the day on which an
operating certificate is actually renewed or reissued, the expiration date of any
reissued or renewed operating certificate shall be the day that is one year after the
day when the most recent prior operating certificate expired. The reinstatement of
an operating certificate after it has been revoked or suspended shall not extend its
expiration date.
G. If the Building Inspector determines that any activity or building for which an
operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable provision of the
Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended immediately.
H. The fee specified in § A250-1 shall be paid at the same time that an application for
an operating permit, for an amended operating permit, or for reissuance or renewal
of an operating permit is submitted.
I. Condition assessments of parking garages.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of § 147-2I, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONDITION ASSESSMENT — An on-site inspection and evaluation of
a parking garage for evidence of deterioration of any structural element or
building component of such parking garage, evidence of the existence of any
unsafe condition in such parking garage, and evidence indicating that such
parking garage is an unsafe structure.
DETERIORATION — The weakening, disintegration, corrosion, rust, or
decay of any structural element or building component, or any other loss of
effectiveness of a structural element or building component.
PARKING GARAGE — Any building or structure, or part thereof, in which
all or any part of any structural level or levels is used for parking or storage of
motor vehicles, excluding:
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An individual who is licensed or otherwise
authorized under Article 145 of the Education Law to practice the profession
of engineering in the State of New York and who has at least three years of
experience performing structural evaluations.
Buildings in which the only level used for parking or storage of motor
vehicles is on grade;
(a)
An attached or accessory structure providing parking exclusively for a
detached one- or two-family dwelling; and
(b)
(c) A townhouse unit with attached parking exclusively for such unit.
§ 147-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 147-2
147:2
§ 147-3. Amendments to Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (19 NYCRR
1219.1 et seq.).
For the purposes of this chapter, references or citations to the Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code (19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.) shall mean not only that Code as it
currently exists but as it may exist from time to time in the future due to amendments or
recodifications thereof.
§ 147-4. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
RESPONSIBLE PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER—The professional engineer
who performs a condition assessment, or under whose supervision a condition
assessment is performed, and who seals and signs the condition assessment
report.
UNSAFE CONDITION — Includes the conditions identified as unsafe in
Sections 304.1.1, 305.1.1 and 306.1.1 of the 2015 edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code [a publication currently incorporated by reference
into Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.)
by 19 NYCRR 1226.1].
UNSAFE STRUCTURE — A structure that is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, or structurally unsafe, or is of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
(2) To obtain or renew an operating permit for a parking garage or to have an
operating permit for a parking garage reissued, the applicant must present to
the Building Inspector a condition assessment of the parking garage performed
by a responsible professional engineer.
(3) The Building Inspector shall not issue, renew or reissue an operating permit
for a parking garage if the condition assessment shows that the parking garage
is in an unsafe condition or is situated within an unsafe structure.
(4) The Building Inspector shall revoke or suspend any operating permit for a
parking garage if the Building Inspector determines that the parking garage
either is in an unsafe condition or is situated within an unsafe structure.
A. The Town Board may appoint a person to act as Fire Inspector. Firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of buildings and structures shall be performed by
the Fire Inspector if one is appointed, or by the Building Inspector or other code
enforcement officer designated by the Building Inspector to perform such
inspections at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures
which contain an area of public assembly or are occupied as dormitories shall
be performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple dwellings not
included in § 147-4A(1), and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and
occupancies not included in § 147-4A(1), shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
§ 147-2 OPERATING PERMITS § 147-4
147:3
B. In addition to the inspections required by § 147-4A, a firesafety and property
maintenance inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Fire Inspector, if one is appointed, or
by Building Inspector, or other code enforcement officer as may be designated by
Building Inspector to perform such inspections, at any time upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an authorized agent
of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Building Inspector of a written statement alleging that
conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.) or the Energy Code (defined in
§ 147-4E) exist; or
(3) Receipt by the Building Inspector of any other information, reasonably
believed by the Building Inspector to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable
cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (19 NYCRR 1219.1 et seq.) or
the Energy Code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall
be construed as permitting an inspection under circumstances where a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such court order
or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this chapter shall supersede,
limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New York State Office
of Fire Prevention and Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire
Administrator under Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
D. The fee specified in § A250-1 of this Code shall be paid prior to or at the time of
each inspection performed pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not apply
to inspections performed by OFPC.
E. For the purposes of Chapter 147, the term "Energy Codes" means the following
provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code: Residential Code
(2015 IRC), Building Code (2015 IBC), Property Maintenance Code (2015 IPMC),
Mechanical Code (2015 IMC), Plumbing Code (2015 IPC), Fuel Gas Code (2015
IFGC), Fire Code (2015 IFC), 2017 NYS Supplement and Energy Conservation
Construction Code (2016 NYS).
§ 147-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 147-4
147:4
Chapter 148
PARKS AND FIELDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Commission — See § 5-11.
Quality of life laws; enforcement — See Ch. 34.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 52.
Animals — See Ch. 58.
Firearms — See Ch. 100.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 154.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
COMMISSION — The Recreation Commission of the Town of Mamaroneck.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS—The persons described in § 34-2 of the Code, plus
the Superintendent of Recreation and Town Administrator.[Amended 9-22-2004
by L.L. No. 12-2004]
FIELD — The Carpino-Steffens fields which are located along Hommocks Road
behind Hommocks School.
ONE-DAY EVENT — An activity which is to be conducted on a single day and
which is anticipated to attract to the park or the field where it will be conducted
50 or more persons who will participate in, work at (whether as paid staff or as
volunteers) and/or watch the event.
ORGANIZED ACTIVITY — An event or series of events that is overseen,
planned, run or sponsored by a group (such as a club, a neighborhood association or
an organization affiliated with a place of worship) or by a league (such as the Little
League or the Mamaroneck Junior Soccer League) or by one or more individuals
who form a group of persons to participate in a specific activity on a regular basis
(such as weekly lacrosse games). The examples of organized activities set forth
above are for illustrative purposes only and are not intended to limit the types of
activities that are considered organized activities under this chapter. Accordingly,
the rule of statutory construction known as ejusdem generis shall not be utilized
when determining whether a particular activity should be considered an organized
activity within the meaning of this chapter.
PARK —
Memorial Park which is bisected by Myrtle Boulevard with the northerly
portion lying along Myrtle Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue and the southerly
portion lying between Myrtle Boulevard, North Chatsworth Avenue and Vine
Street;
(1)
Gardens Lake Park which lies between Lakeside Drive and the New York
State Thruway; and
(2)
§ 147-4 PARKS AND FIELDS § 148-1
148:1
§ 148-2. Prohibited activities.
No person shall:
The unnamed park located at the corner formed by the intersection of Palmer
Avenue and Weaver Street.
(3)
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing definitions, an event sponsored by the Town or any
of its agencies, authorities, boards, commissions or departments shall not be
considered an organized activity or a one day event within the meaning of this
chapter.
A. Intentionally break, deface, destroy, disfigure, displace, mark, remove or tamper
with any bench, building, bridge, chain, decorative element, equipment, fence,
flagpole, flower, fountain, grass, lamp or lamppost, memorial marker, notice or
placard, pavement, plant, playing surface, railing, rock, sand, shrub, sign or
signpost, stone, table, tree (whether cut, fallen or standing), tree guard, wall,
monument, stake, post or other boundary marker within a park or a field;
B. Allow an animal to break, deface, destroy, disfigure, displace, mark, remove or
tamper with any bench, building, bridge, chain, decorative element, equipment,
fence, flagpole, flower, fountain, grass, lamp or lamppost, memorial marker, notice
or placard, pavement, plant, playing surface, railing, rock, sand, shrub, sign or
signpost, stone, table, tree (whether cut, fallen or standing), tree guard, wall,
monument, stake, post or other boundary marker within a park or a field;
C. Connect to, disconnect, expose, open, remove, rupture, tamper or interfere with any
conduit, electric or telephone line, fountain, pipe or any other public utility that is
located within a park or field;
D. Excavate any area of a park or a field;
E. Carry or discharge any firearms or guns of any kind whatsoever, including but not
limited to air rifles, BB guns, paintball or pellet guns and pistols within a park or
field;
F. Frighten, give or offer any food to, hunt, kill, molest, shoot, tease, throw stones or
any missiles at or trap any reptile or bird or the eggs of a reptile or bird or any
animal within a park or a field;
G. Discharge, place or cause to be placed or throw into the waters or upon the ground
within a park or a field any substance which may result in pollution of or damage
to such waters or the ground within a park or field or to any flower, grass, plant,
shrub or tree located within a park or field;
H. Deposit, dump or leave or cause to be deposited, dumped or left any ashes (other
than ashes in a designated and permanently constructed fireplace), bottles, boxes,
broken glass, cans, dirt, garbage, paper, refuse, rubbish, trash or other waste
anywhere within a park or on a field except for those items that are placed in the
receptacles provided for deposit of such items;
I. Fail to remove excrement deposited by that person's pet within a park or a field;
§ 148-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 148-2
148:2
§ 148-3. Regulated activities.
J. Drop, scatter or throw cigars, cigarettes, flammable material, matches or tobacco
within a park or a field;
K. Affix, draw, leave, paint, paste, place or post any advertisement, bill, circular,
notice, pamphlet, placard or other printed matter on any bench, building, bridge,
chain, decorative element, earth, equipment, fence, flagpole, flower, fountain,
grass, lamp or lamppost, log, memorial marker, pavement, plant, playing surface,
railing, rock, shrub, sign or signpost, stone,, table, tree (whether cut, fallen or
standing), tree guard, vehicle (whether motorized or not), wall, monument, stake,
post or other boundary marker within a park or a field;
L. Allow, cause or permit an animal over which a person has control or custody to run
at large or to be tethered by a leash exceeding six feet in length within a park or a
field;
M. Hit golf balls within a park or a field;
N. Enter, swim or wade in any waters located within a park or a field;
O. Camp or erect a tent or any other temporary or mobile shelter within a park or a
field;
P. Project, shoot or throw any arrows, boomerangs, darts, javelins or stones within a
park or a field;
Q. Possess any firecracker, rocket or other firework or explosive within a park or a
field;
R. Detonate, discharge, explode or otherwise set off or cause to be detonated,
discharged or exploded any firecracker, rocket, torpedo or other firework or
explosive within a park or a field or aim, direct or cause such items to be aimed at
or directed into a park or a field;
S. Climb upon any bench, building, bridge, chain, decorative element, equipment
(other than playground equipment designed for climbing), fence, flagpole, flower,
fountain, lamp or lamppost, log, memorial marker, plant, railing, rock, shrub, sign
or signpost, stone, table, tree (whether cut, fallen or standing), tree guard, wall,
monument, stake, post or other boundary marker within a park or a field; or
T. Engage in a regulated activity except when such activities are permissible under
§ 148-3.
A. Except while an event sponsored by the Town or a one day event is being
conducted, no person shall bring or consume any alcoholic beverage within a park
or a field or exhibit or offer for sale any merchandise, any durable goods or any
food products within a park or a field.
B. Except pursuant to rules promulgated by the Commission, no person shall:
(1) Bring in or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft over three feet in length,
whether motorized or not, upon any waters within a park or a field;
§ 148-2 PARKS AND FIELDS § 148-3
148:3
§ 148-4. Additional rules authorized.
§ 148-5. Hours.
(2) Build a fire except in a fireplace designated and constructed for such purpose
within a park or a field;
(3) Enter upon Gardens Lake when there is ice on its surface except in areas
designated by the Superintendent of Recreation for skating or sledding. Such
designation shall be done by displaying a safety flag or sign on the ice or on
an area adjacent to the ice;
(4) Operate a motorized model airplane or rocket within a park or a field;
(5) Attach or string any banner, rope or wire above, across or along the surface of
a park or a field or attach any banner, rope or wire to any bench, building,
bridge, chain, decorative element, equipment, fence, flagpole, flower,
fountain, lamp or lamppost, log, memorial marker, pavement, plant, playing
surface, railing, rock, shrub, sign or signpost, stone, table, tree (whether cut,
fallen or standing), tree guard, wall, monument, stake, post or other boundary
marker within a park or a field: or
(6) Ride a horse or a pony within a park or a field.
A. The Commission hereby is authorized to adopt any additional rules and regulations
with respect to the parks and fields and with respect to the conduct of the public
therein, provided that such rules and regulations are consistent and do not conflict
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. There shall be no fees for admission to or use of the parks and fields of the Town
except as established or authorized by the Commission. The fees established or
authorized by the Commission shall be set forth in a written schedule, which may
be amended by the Commission from time to time. All fees shall be collected by
the Town's Recreation Department.
C. The Commission may delegate some or all of the duties given to it by this chapter
to the Superintendent of Recreation.
A. The benches and paths of the parks shall be open to the residents of the Town every
day of the year at dawn for passive recreation such as walking, jogging or sitting.
The remaining areas of the parks shall be open to the residents of the Town every
day of the year starting at 9:00 a.m. All areas of the parks shall close at dusk except
when an event sponsored by the Town or a one day event is being conducted, in
which case the park where the event is held shall close at the later of dusk or 1/2
hour after such event is concluded.
B. The fields can be used only by those persons to whom permits have been issued and
can be used only for the reason specified in the permit The fields shall be open for
use by the persons to whom a permit has been issued from 9:00 a.m. to dusk except
when an event sponsored by the Town or an organized activity or a one day event
is being conducted in which case the field where the event is held shall close at the
later of dusk or 1/2 hour after such event is concluded.
§ 148-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 148-5
148:4
§ 148-6. Permits.
C. The opening and closing hours of a park or a field shall be posted so that those
hours are visible to the public.
A. Neither an organized activity nor a one day event shall be conducted within a field
unless the applicant is a resident of the Town of Mamaroneck or if the applicant is
not a person, it is an entity which conducts its activities within the Town of
Mamaroneck and a permit has been issued therefor by the Superintendent of
Recreation. The form of the application for such permit shall be prescribed by the
Commission but at a minimum shall require the applicant to:
(1) Supply the name and address of the group or person applying for the permit;
(2) State the entity with which the applicant is affiliated, if any;
(3) Specify the date or dates and the hours when the organized activity or one day
event will take place;
(4) Specify the park or the field at which the organized activity or one day event
will take place;
(5) Describe the organized activity or one day event in such detail as is required
by the Superintendent of Recreation;
(6) Estimate the number of persons expected to participate in, work at (whether as
paid staff or as volunteers) and/or watch the organized activity or one day
event;
(7) State whether it is expected that alcohol will be consumed by persons present
at the organized activity or one day event;
(8) State whether it is expected that food will be consumed by persons present at
the organized activity or one day event; and
(9) State whether any merchandise, durable goods or food products will be
exhibited or offered for sale.
B. A permit shall not be required to conduct an organized activity within a park.
C. A one day event shall not be conducted within a park unless the applicant is a
resident of the Town of Mamaroneck or if the applicant is not a person, it is an
entity which conducts its activities within the Town of Mamaroneck and a permit
has been issued therefor by the Superintendent of Recreation. The form of the
application for such permit shall be prescribed by the Commission but at a
minimum shall require the applicant to:
(1) Supply the name and address of the group or person applying for the permit;
(2) State the entity with which the applicant is affiliated, if any;
(3) Specify the date and the hours when the one day event will take place;
(4) Specify the park at which the one day event will take place;
§ 148-5 PARKS AND FIELDS § 148-6
148:5
§ 148-7. Traffic regulations.
No person shall:
(5) Describe the one day event in such detail as is required by the Superintendent
of Recreation;
(6) Estimate the number of persons expected to participate in, work at (whether as
paid staff or as volunteers) and/or watch the one day event;
(7) State whether it is expected that alcohol will be consumed by persons present
at the one day event;
(8) State whether it is expected that food will be consumed by persons present at
the one day event; and
(9) State whether any merchandise, durable goods or food products will be
exhibited or offered for sale.
D. The Superintendent of Recreation shall grant a permit for an organized activity or a
one day event, provided a properly completed application form is submitted and the
fee therefor, if any, is paid unless:
(1) A permit for the park or field requested by the applicant already has been
issued for the same date and time; or
(2) In the judgment of the Superintendent of Recreation, the type of activity or the
number of people that such activity may attract could result in the park, the
field or the environs being damaged or persons being injured or would violate
any federal, state, county or local law or regulation; or
(3) Less than 30 days shall have elapsed since the last one day event was
conducted on any field or park by the same permittee for the same purpose.
E. The Superintendent of Recreation shall have the power to impose conditions on a
permit that are reasonably calculated to prevent damage to a park, a field, the
environs or people attending or participating in the activity or people in the vicinity
of the park or the field where the activity is being conducted.
F. Upon request by an enforcement officer, a permittee shall display the permit issued
by the Superintendent of Recreation to that officer.
A. Fail to comply with any applicable provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York while driving within a park or a field;
B. Fail to observe and obey traffic or a parking sign within a park or a field;
C. Park a vehicle or other means of transportation or leave any other property within a
park or a field overnight;
D. Park a vehicle or other means of transportation within a park or a field unless the
operator thereof stays within that park or that field during the time that such vehicle
or other transportation device is so parked;
§ 148-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 148-7
148:6
§ 148-8. Enforcement.
Every enforcement officer shall have the power to issue court appearance tickets, notices
of violations, summonses or warnings for a violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-9. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this chapter hereby is declared to be a violation. Upon
conviction for violating any of sections of this chapter, the convicted person shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 148-10. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to the Town of Mamaroneck or any independent contractors
engaged by it while such contractors are acting within the scope of their duties to the
Town.
E. Ride a bicycle or a skateboard, rollerblade or skate on other than a designated path,
a paved road or a parking area within a park or a field; or
F. Operate an all-terrain vehicle (ATV), go-kart, golf cart or a snowmobile on other
than a paved road or parking area within a park of a field.
§ 148-7 PARKS AND FIELDS § 148-10
148:7

Chapter 154
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Noise — See Ch. 141.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 154-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK, PARKING OR PARKED — The stopping of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
upon any public highway and leaving such motor vehicle or motorcycle unattended by
a person capable of operating it for a period longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers or freight.
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.[Added 5-1939]
SIDEWALKS — That portion of the street between the physically established curblines
and the designated property lines.
STREET — Every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways, bridle paths and
footpaths.
VEHICLE —Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon the street.
§ 154-3. License required; application. [Amended 7-1-1953; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996]
No person shall barter, sell, peddle, hawk or vend goods, wares, merchandise, produce
or services of an established business upon the streets, roads, highways or public places
of the Town or by going from house to house soliciting purchases unless a license so to
do has previously been obtained by him from the Town Clerk. The applicant for such
license shall register his name, address, date of birth and social security number with the
Police Chief as a condition for obtaining such license.
§ 154-4. Vehicle license required. [Amended 5-3-1939]
No vehicle of any kind or description drawn by an animal or animals or propelled by
§ 148-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 154-4
154:1
hand or other power shall be used for the barter and sale of goods, wares, merchandise or
produce therefrom upon the streets, roads, highways or public places of the Town unless
a license therefor shall first have been obtained from the Town Clerk, which license shall
at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place on the inside of such vehicle.
§ 154-5. Applications for licenses. [Amended 5-3-1939]
Applications for licenses under this chapter may be refused by the Town Clerk, as
provided by law.
§ 154-6. Personal permits. [Amended 7-1-1953]
Where a vehicle has been licensed as provided in § 154-4 of this chapter, such license
shall include the right of a driver or operator of such vehicle to sell, peddle, hawk or
vend the goods, wares and merchandise carried in such vehicle; provided, however,
that no person, including the owner of such licensed vehicle, shall operate the same
without a personal permit to be issued by the Police Chief, upon the production of
satisfactory proof of the fitness of the applicant therefor, and such permit shall expire
on the 31st day of December after the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to permit any salesman or helper upon any vehicle
for which a peddler's or hawker's license has been obtained to peddle, hawk or vend the
goods, wares or merchandise carried in such vehicle, by means of any stand or box or
otherwise than from the vehicle itself, unless a peddler's or hawker's license has been
separately obtained for each such salesman or helper, in accordance with the provisions
of § 154-3 of this chapter.
§ 154-7. License fees. [Amended 5-3-1939; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
The fee for a license issued pursuant to this chapter is as set forth in § A250-1.
§ 154-8. Exceptions.
A. Delivery vehicles. The provisions of this chapter requiring licenses for vehicles
shall not be construed to require licenses for delivery vehicles owned by or used by
grocers, bakers or other persons, firms or corporations having within the Town a
store, storehouse or warehouse for the sale or distribution of or an establishment for
the manufacture of the merchandise carried in said vehicle nor for the drivers or
operators of such vehicle.
B. Interstate and solicited orders. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
selling, bartering or vending of goods, wares or merchandise where such goods,
wares or merchandise are shipped from outside the state or where orders for goods,
wares or merchandise are solicited and such goods, wares or merchandise are
subsequently delivered. [Amended 5-3-1939]
C. Food producers. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the selling,
peddling or vending of meats, fish, fruits and farm produce by farmers and/or other
persons who produce or catch such commodities. [Amended 5-3-1939]
D. State-licensed parties. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the holder of
§ 154-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 154-8
154:2
§ 154-9. Licenses: cancellation; nontransferability; expiration.
Any and all licenses granted pursuant to this chapter are subject to cancellation by the
Town Board upon cause therefor being shown, are not transferable and shall expire on
the 31st day of December following issuance.33
§ 154-10. Prohibited times for peddling and soliciting. [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-200834; amended 6-17-2020 by L.L. No. 6-2020]
No person shall barter, sell, peddle, hawk or vend goods, wares, merchandise, produce
or services of an established business upon the streets, roads, highways or public places
of the Town or by going from house to house soliciting purchases before 9:00 a.m.
(prevailing time) or after the later of 6:00 p.m. (prevailing time) or sunset.
§ 154-11. Decision not to allow solicitation. [Amended 12-17-1953; 10-20-1954;
6-17-2020 by L.L. No. 6-2020]
a license granted pursuant to § 32 of the General Business Law.
A. Any person who does not want in-person solicitation upon the private property that
he/she owns or occupies may advise the Town of his/her objection to solicitation
through a written or electronically transmitted notice either mailed or transmitted to
the Town Clerk that includes the following information:
(1) The name of the person(s) filing the objection.
(2) That person(s)' address.
(3) The date that a "no solicitation," "no peddlers" or a sign conveying that
message was erected on the property that the person owns or occupies.
B. The Town Clerk shall prepare, and from time to time update, a list of the names and
addresses of the persons who advise of their decision not to allow in-person
solicitation and either shall deliver such list to the Police Department and the
Building Department or provide those departments with electronic access to that
list. Periodically, but not less than annually, the Town Clerk may, but is not required
to, ask the persons appearing on the list whether they wish to remain on the list. The
Town Clerk shall strike from the list those persons who affirmatively state that they
no longer wish to be on the list and may, but is not required to, strike the name of
any person who does not respond within 30 days after the Town Clerk's inquiry
shall have been sent.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to barter, sell, peddle, hawk or
vend goods, wares, merchandise, produce or services of an established business on
private property included on the list prepared by the Town Clerk pursuant to
§ 154-11B of the Code if a "no solicitation," "no peddlers" or a sign conveying that
message is prominently displayed on that property.
33. Editor's Note: Former § 34-11, Advertisements and exceptions, which originally followed this section, was deleted
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996.
34. Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former § 154-10, Violations and penalties, to
§ 154-11.
§ 154-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 154-12
154:3
§ 154-12. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-17-2020 by L.L. No. 6-2020]
§ 154-13. Severability. [Added 6-17-2020 by L.L. No. 6-2020]
Should any provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any other provisions of this chapter, which may be implemented without the
invalid or unconstitutional provisions.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $500.
B. Every incident of a person violating a provision of this chapter shall be a separate
violation, even if committed on the same day.
§ 154-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 154-13
154:4
Chapter 158
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Water — See Ch. 231.
§ 158-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as a "Local Law Regulating the Administration
and Enforcement of the Plumbing Code for the Town of Mamaroneck, Outside of the
Incorporated Villages."
§ 158-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Town of Mamaroneck by providing for the licensing and regulation of the plumbing
trade.
§ 158-3. Licensed required.
No person shall do any plumbing work on any premises in the Town of Mamaroneck
unless such person shall first be duly licensed by the County of Westchester.
§ 158-4. Displaying license.
Any person, firm or corporation doing plumbing work in the Town of Mamaroneck shall
exhibit his or its license upon request to any officer of the Town and shall, while opening
any highway for purposes incidental to such work and while such highway is opened,
display a sign at least one foot square, plainly marked, showing the number of such
license. No street or highway may be opened without first complying with all regulations
pertaining to street openings.
§ 158-5. Prior approval of plans. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
9-15-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Except as provided in the last sentence of § 158-5A, the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration must issue a
permit before any plumbing work, including the installation of gas appliances or the
installation, removal or abandonment of oil or gas storage tanks, is started or before
there are any additions or alterations made to existing installations. The application
§ 154-13 PLUMBING § 158-5
158:1
for the permit shall be made on forms approved by the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration and shall be
signed by a licensed master plumber. The application shall be filed in the office of
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, together with plans and a description, in duplicate, showing and
describing the proposed plumbing work. No permit shall be required when the only
plumbing work to be done is the removal of stoppages, the repair of leaks or when
plumbing fixtures or residential cooking appliances are replaced without altering or
disturbing any gas supply piping, drain, soil, waste or vent pipe.
B. The plans filed with the application shall consist of such floor plans and sections as
may be necessary to show clearly all the work to be done, including all sewers,
drains, soil, waste and vent pipes. The plans also shall show the location of fixtures,
their traps and connections. The plans may be drawn to scale in ink or be prints
produced to scale.
C. If the plumbing work involves the installation, removal or abandonment of an oil or
gas storage tank, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration cannot issue a permit until a
performance bond or a cash bond is posted with the Town by the permittee or the
owner of the property on which the plumbing work is to be performed. The amount
of the bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of repairing any property, public or
private, that may be damaged during the course of the plumbing work for which the
permit is issued and shall be fixed by the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration in consultation with the
Town Engineer. Under no circumstances shall the amount of the bond be less than
$1,500. In cases where a street opening permit also is issued, the Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may
allow a single bond for both permits if he or she determines that a single bond will
be sufficient for the purposes of this chapter and of Chapter 187.35 Any bond posted
under this chapter shall be released to the person who posted it no later than six
months after a certificate of completion is issued for the plumbing work covered by
the permit, provided that such work is done in accordance with the provisions of the
permit and the provisions of any street opening permit and that all areas disturbed
during the work (including any rights-of-way) are restored to a condition that is
satisfactory to the Town Engineer. [Amended 12-7-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
D. Modification of approved plans or of the work described therein shall not be
permitted until such changes are approved, in writing, by the Building Inspector or
the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration on
written application, signed by a master plumber. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
E. A permit for plumbing work shall expire six months from the date it is issued unless
the plumbing work for which the permit has been issued is in progress. If the permit
expires, the applicant shall be required to reapply for a permit for plumbing work
pursuant to this section.
35. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 187, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 158-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 158-6
158:2
§ 158-6. Fees. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
The fee for a service provided or a license or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is
as set forth in § A250-1.
§ 158-7. House sewer inspections.
All house sewers between the building and the street line shall be laid by a licensed
plumber under the specifications set forth. This work shall be inspected once by the
inspector upon notification by the plumber that the entire line is complete and ready for
inspection.
§ 158-8. Plastic and fiber pipe. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Plastic pipe to be used in roof leaders, other stormwater pipes and underground drainage
pipes for groundwater may not be used until samples of plastic or fiber pipe of strong and
durable quality are submitted to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration for approval. Only if approved may they
thereafter be used in and around structures as set forth in plans submitted to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
§ 158-9. Notice of violations. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 158-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who omits or refuses to comply with or resists, willfully violates any of
the provisions of this chapter or who obstructs or hinders any inspector or officer in
A. Whenever a person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or whenever any
person omits or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter or deviates
from the approved plans and specifications for plumbing and draining filed with the
inspector, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration or either's designated representative shall serve notice of
violation thereof upon the master plumber doing the work and upon the owner or
occupant of the premises.
B. Such notice may be served personally or by mail and, if by mail, may be addressed
to such master plumber at the address registered by him with the Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or
either's designated representative and upon the owner or occupant at the address
given by him upon any application made by him for the plumbing work in
connection with which the violation occurs; or, if no permit is obtained, notice shall
be served upon the owner or occupant at the location of the work, but the failure of
the master plumber to register shall relieve the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated
representative from the requirement of giving such notice to the master plumber.
Unless the violation is removed within five days after the day of serving or the
mailing of such notice, exclusive of the day of serving or mailing, then each day
thereafter that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 158-6 PLUMBING § 158-10
158:3
the due performance of his duty hereunder shall be punishable for each conviction by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment, in case of default in
payment of the fine, for a period not exceeding 15 days. Each day the provisions of such
chapter are violated after due notice has been served upon the offender, in writing, shall
constitute a separate offense and subject the offender to a like penalty. Such violation
shall also subject any person committing the same to a penalty in the sum of $1,000,
recoverable in a civil action brought by or on behalf of the Town of Mamaroneck. In
addition, the Town may take whatever additional actions in the nature of injunction or
otherwise that is otherwise provided for by law.
§ 158-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 158-10
158:4
Chapter 161
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Solid waste — See Ch. 183.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
§ 158-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 158-10
161:1

ARTICLE I
Lot Maintenance
[Adopted 2-17-1937 (Ch. 46 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 161-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK, PARKING OR PARKED — The stopping of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
upon any public highway and leaving such motor vehicle or motorcycle unattended by
a person capable of operating it for a period longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers or freight.
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.[Added 5-3-1939]
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street between the physically established curblines
and the designated property lines.
STREET — Every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways, bridle paths and
footpaths.
VEHICLE —Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon the street.
§ 161-3. Abatement; notice to comply. [Amended 9-24-1947; 7-17-1996 by L.L.
No. 14-1996; 4-7-2021 by L.L. No. 5-2021]
A. Every owner, tenant or occupant of real property shall cut, trim or remove all brush,
grass, rubbish, noxious weeds, litter or other similar unsightly or objectionable
material therefrom at his/her/its own expense.
B. The Town Clerk, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration may serve written notice upon the
owner, tenant and/or occupant of any real property to trim, prune and, if necessary,
remove noxious weeds, rubbish, litter or other similar unsightly or objectionable
material from the property on a date that is not less than 10 days from the date of
such notice. Such notice may be served either personally or by mail, addressed to
any owner, tenant or occupant at the address shown for such property on the
assessment roll or in any letter or writing addressed to the Town Clerk, the Assessor
or the Receiver of Taxes.
C. If there is a failure to comply with the notice described in § 161-3B, the Town may,
but shall not be obligated to, cut, trim or remove all brush, grass, rubbish, noxious
weeds, litter or other similar unsightly or objectionable material from the property.
Pursuant to § 64, Subdivision 5-a, of the New York Town Law and § 10,
§ 161-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 161-3
161:3
§ 161-4. Lots at street intersections.36
All owners, tenants and/or occupants of premises at any corner formed by the
intersection of highways shall, within 15 days of the receipt from the Town Clerk of
written notice to do so, trim, prune and, if necessary, remove all hedges, brush, shrubs
and overhanging limbs of trees or any obstacle upon such part of the premises as is
specified in said notice, to the end that persons driving vehicles upon either of such
intersecting highways shall have an unobstructed view across such part of said premises
to the other of said highways for a distance of at least 20 feet from such intersection,
measured along such highway on which such vehicle is traveling.
§ 161-5. Penalties for offenses.
Subdivisions 1(ii)a(8) through (9-a), of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the soft and
hard costs incurred by the Town in doing so, including the prorated portion of the
salaries (including overtime) of Town employees who perform or supervise all or
some of the work, shall be assessed upon and constitute a lien and charge on the
real property until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be collected
in the same manner and at the same time as other Town charges.
D. The assessment of a lien upon the real property pursuant to this section shall be in
addition to the fines and penalties provided in § 161-5 of this article.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, as same may be amended
from time to time, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine of $250. [Amended 10-20-1954; 7-17-1996 by L.L.
No. 14-1996; 4-7-2021 by L.L. No. 5-2021]
B. Additional penalties. [Amended 12-17-1953]
(1) Violation of §§ 161-3 and 161-4 of this article shall subject the offender, for
each offense, to a civil penalty not to exceed $25.
(2) The penalty for violation as above provided shall be in addition to any fine
provided for in § 161-5A.
(3) Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
be a separate and distinct violation of said several provisions of this article and
shall render every person liable for a separate penalty for each such violation.
36. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning, § 240-53, for more restrictive provisions relating to obstructions at intersections in
residential districts.
§ 161-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 161-5
161:4
ARTICLE II
Residential and Commercial Properties
[Adopted 6-17-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970 (Ch. 61 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 161-6. Legislative intent. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
In order to prevent blight and the spread thereof, it is hereby declared that all structures
used for residential or commercial purposes, including but not limited to one-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings, shopping centers, supermarkets,
retail stores, discount houses, warehouses, manufacturing or fabrication plants, factories,
gasoline service stations, restaurants, food-service establishments, office buildings,
public garages, motor vehicle repair shops or other business uses, whether occupied
or vacant, and accessory structures, located in the Town of Mamaroneck, shall be
maintained in conformance with the standards set out in this article so as to assure
that these structures and properties will not adversely affect the neighborhood and the
community at large. It is found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance
and progressive deterioration, certain structures and properties have the further effect of
creating blighting conditions and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure
of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same. By reason of timely
regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, the growth of blight may be prevented
and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained and the desirability and
amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the
public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. This article has been prepared
and adopted with consideration of the character of the various zoning districts and the
stability for the particular uses therein.
§ 161-7. Definitions and word usage.
The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this article unless otherwise
expressly defined herein. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice
versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
PERSON — A natural person or persons, corporations, copartnerships, unincorporated
associations or any other organizations of two or more persons who is or are the owner or
owners, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee,
lessee or agent directly or indirectly in control of a building within the confines of the
Town, as defined aforesaid.
TOWN — All areas within the Town of Mamaroneck, exclusive of areas wholly within
any incorporated village.
§ 161-8. Standards for open areas.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect buildings and
structures and to prevent the development of stagnant ponds.
B. No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or standing, and said
baskets, carts or wagons shall be regularly collected and removed to the interior of
the building or buildings from which they were taken by the person responsible for
said building or buildings.
§ 161-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 161-8
161:5
§ 161-9. Standards for buildings and structures.
C. All fences shall be maintained by the person responsible for the property. Such
maintenance shall include but not be limited to the replacement and/or repair of
fences which may become in disrepair.
D. All landscaping shall be well maintained so that lawns, hedges, bushes and trees
shall be kept trimmed and free from becoming overgrown and unsightly where
exposed to public view and where the same may constitute a blighting factor,
thereby depreciating adjoining property. Such maintenance shall include but not be
limited to the replacement of trees and shrubs which may die and/or otherwise be
destroyed.
E. All recharge stormwater basins shall be maintained by the person responsible for
the property. Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The cleaning of storm sewers and other drainage appurtenances serving said
basin so that said installations function as designed.
(2) The removal of any garbage, rubbish, silt, topsoil or other foreign material
which creates an unsanitary condition or prevents or impedes the leaching
action of said basin.
F. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions.
Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be filled or necessary repairs or
replacement carried out. All off-street parking facilities shall be swept at least twice
a year.
G. Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards, rodent
harborage and infestation. They shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent
rubbish from being blown about the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or
cisterns shall be securely closed or barricaded from access to the public.
H. All permanent signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in good repair.
Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put into a good state of
repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or removed.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
I. No person shall deposit, throw or scatter or suffer, permit or allow the accumulation
of any filth, dirt, ashes, junk, garbage, wastepaper, dust, rubbish, sticks, stones,
grass, wood, leaves, paper or paper boxes, iron, tin, nails, bottles or glass of any
kind, old cars and parts thereof or any other kind of rubbish or waste material upon
any sidewalk, highway or public place or upon any vacant or improved lot, piece or
parcel of ground abutting upon any sidewalk, highway or public place or upon any
private property within the Town except in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 183, Solid Waste, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck.
A. All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be
repaired, coated, treated or sealed to protect them from deterioration or weathering.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, stairs, furnishings and fixtures of buildings shall be
§ 161-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 161-9
161:6
§ 161-10. Heating of occupied buildings and potable water. [Added 1-2-1974 by
L.L. No. 1-1974]
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Every floor, exterior wall, roof
and porch or appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent
collapse of the same or injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
C. The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good repair and be
structurally sound.
D. Exterior walls, including doors and windows, roofs and the areas around doors,
windows, chimneys and other parts of a building shall be so maintained as to keep
water from entering the building and to prevent undue heat loss from occupied
areas. Materials which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a workmanlike manner.
Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of the building shall be free from loose and
unsecured objects and material. Such objects or materials shall be removed,
repaired or replaced.
E. The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform such acts as may
be required of him from time to time to ensure that the building and its adjoining
yards remain safe and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or
to the public.
F. Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and rodent
harborage and infestation. The methods used for exterminating insects, vermin and
rodents shall conform to generally accepted practice.
A. Every owner, operator or person who shall have contracted or undertaken to heat or
to furnish heat for any building or portion thereof, or has a business establishment
where one or more persons are employed, shall heat or furnish heat for every
occupied room in such building or portion thereof so that a minimum air
temperature of 68° F. shall be maintained therein between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. and not less than 60° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., whenever the outer or street temperature shall fall below 50° F. Potable water
heating equipment shall be maintained to supply sufficient domestic hot water at
adequate pressure to each hot-water plumbing outlet at a minimum temperature
range of one hundred thirty degrees to one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (130°
to 140° F.) at all times.
(1) This section shall not apply where the failure to maintain the minimum
requirement is caused by a general shortage of fuel, negligent or malicious act
of the occupant, necessary repairs or alterations or any cause beyond the
control of the owner or occupant.
(2) The term "air temperature" shall mean a temperature of the atmosphere
obtained at the approximate center line of any interior wall at a distance of 48
inches above the average floor level of the room.
(3) This section shall not apply to buildings or portions thereof used and occupied
for trades, businesses or occupations where high or low air temperatures are
essential and unavoidable.
§ 161-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 161-10
161:7
§ 161-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 161-12. Enforcement. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall enforce this article.
§ 161-13. Janitorial services. [Added 5-19-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
B. No person shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required to
be supplied by the provisions of this article to be removed or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit except for necessary repairs,
alterations or emergencies.
A. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both. Any person violating any provisions
of this article shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of not more than $50 for the
first violation and in a sum of not more than $100 for subsequent violations, said
penalties to be recovered in a civil action in the name of the Town of Mamaroneck.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. Each and every day of violation is to be considered a separate violation under this
article II and, therefore, subjects the offender to a separate penalty for each and
every day. [Added 12-17-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975]
A. Whenever there are 10 or more families occupying any multiple dwelling and the
owner does not reside therein, there shall be a janitor, housekeeper or some other
person responsible on behalf of the owner, who shall reside in said dwelling or
within a distance of 300 feet from said dwelling, and who shall at all times maintain
the premises in compliance with this article and keep the premises free from filth,
garbage, refuse and rubbish and who shall be responsible for the daily collection of
garbage and other refuse from the occupants on a regular schedule and at a
reasonable time and place the same out for collection and who shall have charge of
such dwelling, except that where two or three multiple dwellings are connected or
adjoining, one resident janitor or such other person named above shall be sufficient.
The name of such janitor or other such person shall be registered with the Building
Department of the Town of Mamaroneck.
B. The owner or agent shall make his name, post office address and telephone number
known to all tenants by posting it in a lobby or public hallway or other method
satisfactory to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration and shall also make available and known to all
tenants and the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration the name, address and telephone number of an
alternate individual who shall be responsible during the absence of said
superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper. In the event that the landlord
chooses to post his telephone number, he must post the telephone number of an
agent authorized by him to make repairs and to act in emergencies. [Amended
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. When changes in personnel occur, it shall be the obligation of the owner or agent to
§ 161-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 161-13
161:8
keep the Building Department and tenants advised of all changes.
D. Said janitor, superintendent, caretaker or housekeeper shall have sufficient
knowledge, competence and responsibility and shall have authority from the owner
or operator to attend to or arrange for continual operation of all essential services
and facilities required under this article.
E. Failure of any janitor, superintendent, caretaker or housekeeper to comply with the
provisions of this article shall not relieve the owner or agent from the duties and
responsibilities imposed by this article.
§ 161-13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 161-13
161:9

Chapter 167
RECORDS
§ 161-13 RECORDS § 161-13
167:1

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 2-5-1975; amended in its entirety 3-1-1978 (Ch. 63 of 1975 Code)]
§ 167-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 167-2. Records access officer.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking and the
documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to our society. Access to
such information should not be thwarted by shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy
or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by which records
may be obtained from a department or agency, as defined by Subdivision 3 of § 86
of the Public Officers Law.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records required by the
Freedom of Information Law37 and those which were furnished to the public prior
to its enactment.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be construed in
favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Supervisor of the Town is responsible for ensuring compliance with the
regulations herein and designates the following person as records access officer:
Town Clerk
740 West Boston Post Road
Mamaroneck, New York 10543
381-7870
B. The records access officer (Town Clerk) will receive all applications and is
responsible for directing requests to the appropriate department head. Officials who
have been authorized customarily to make information or records available may be
approached directly.
C. The Town Clerk shall assure that department heads:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection; or
(b) Deny access to the records, in whole or in part, and explain, in writing,
the reasons therefor.
37. Editor's Note: See § 84 et seq. of the Public Officers Law.
§ 167-1 RECORDS § 167-2
167:3
§ 167-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at:
Town Offices
740 West Boston Post Road
Mamaroneck, New York 10543
381-7870
§ 167-4. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records produced on regular
business days at the Town offices.
§ 167-5. Requests for public access to records.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay established fees, if
any; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The department is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the department is a custodian, after diligent search,
cannot be found.
A. Where a request for records is required, such request may be oral or in writing.
However, written requests shall not be required for records that have been
customarily available without written request.
B. Response.
(1) Officials shall respond to a request for records no more than five business days
after receipt of the request, whether the request is oral or in writing.
(2) If, because of extraordinary circumstances, more than five business days are
required to respond to a request, receipt of the request shall be acknowledged
within five business days after the request is received. The acknowledgment
shall state the reason for delay and estimate the date when a reply will be
made. If access to records is neither granted nor denied within 10 business
days after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of a request, the request may
be construed as a denial of access that may be appealed.
C. A request for access to records should be sufficiently detailed to identify the
records. Where possible, the requester should supply information regarding dates,
§ 167-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 167-5
167:4
§ 167-6. Subject matter list; removal or copying of records.
§ 167-7. Denial of access to records.
file designations or other information which may help identify the records sought.
A. Origination and updating of list.
(1) A current list, by subject matter, of all records produced, filed or first kept or
promulgated after September 1, 1974, shall be available for public inspection
and copying.38 The list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit the requester to
identify the file category of the records sought.
(2) The subject matter list shall be updated periodically, and the date of the most
recent updating shall appear on the first page. The updating of the subject
matter list shall not be less than semiannual.
B. No records may be removed by the requester from the office where the record is
located. If the requested record cannot be copied in the office and must be sent out
for copying, the department head must make the necessary arrangements.
A. The Supervisor shall hear appeals or shall designate a person or body to hear
appeals regarding denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information
Law.39
B. Denial of access shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and advising the
person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the person or body established
to hear appeals, and that person or body shall be identified by name, title, business
address and business telephone number. The records access officer shall not be the
appeals officer.
C. If an agency fails to respond to a request within five business days of receipt of a
request as required, such failure shall be deemed a denial of access by the agency.
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a denial.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to hear
appeals shall commence upon receipt of written appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records;
(2) The records that were denied; and
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
F. The agency shall transmit to the Committee on Open Government copies of all
appeals upon receipt of an appeal. Such copies shall be addressed to: [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
38. Editor's Note: A list of records available for public inspection, originally attached to the resolution adopting this article,
is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
39. Editor's Note: See Art. 6 of Public Officers Law.
§ 167-5 RECORDS § 167-7
167:5
§ 167-8. Fees.
§ 167-9. Public notice.
A notice containing the job title or name and business address of the records access
officer, the name, job title, business address and telephone number of the appeal person
or body and the location where records are available for viewing and copying shall be
posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are kept and/or published in a local
newspaper of general circulation.
Committee on Open Government
162 Washington Avenue
Department of State
Albany, New York 12231
G. The person or body designated to hear appeals shall inform the appellant and the
Committee on Open Government of its determination, in writing, within seven
business days of receipt of an appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to the
Committee on Open Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection F
of this section. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
H. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in Subsection G of
this section, shall be subject to court review, as provided for in Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this article.
B. The fee for making copies is as set forth in § A250-1. [Amended 8-17-2011 by
L.L. No. 8-2011]
C. Maps, plans or other records. In instances where the Town cannot reproduce the
requested material, the department head or his designee will make all necessary
arrangements but all service reproduction and mailing charges shall be paid by the
requester directly to the company that does the work.
§ 167-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 167-9
167:6
Chapter 173
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 167-9 SEWERS § 167-9
173:1

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 173-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Mamaroneck Environmental Facilities
Sewer Act."
§ 173-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are specifically stated as follows:
A. To prohibit excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow of sewage and wastes
into the Town sanitary sewer system and all public sewers tributary thereto.
B. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes of a
flammable nature or which create in any way a poisonous or hazardous
environment for sewage maintenance and operation personnel.
C. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which may
cause maintenance difficulties in the trunk sewers, force mains, pumping stations,
sewage regulators and other structures and appurtenances to the Town system and
public sewers tributary thereto.
D. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which may
create operating difficulties at the Westchester County Publicly Owned Treatment
Works treatment plants as they now exist or may be constructed, modified or
improved in the future.
E. To prohibit and/or to regulate the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes which require, for treatment at the plants, greater expenditures than are
required for equal volumes or normal sewage.
F. To require the treatment, before introduction into the Town trunk sewer system and
public sewers tributary thereto, of such wastes as may otherwise impair the strength
and/or durability of the structures appurtenant to the system, by direct or indirect
chemical action, or interfere with the normal treatment processes.
G. To set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contribution into the Town
sanitary sewer system.
H. To prevent the introduction of any pollutant into the Town sanitary sewer system
which will interfere with its operation, including interference with its use or
disposal of sludge at the Westchester County Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
I. To prevent the introduction of any pollutant into the Town sanitary sewer system
which will either pass through the treatment works or otherwise be incompatible
with such works.
J. To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim municipal and industrial
wastewaters and sludges.
K. To provide for the equitable distribution of the operation and maintenance costs of
§ 173-1 SEWERS § 173-2
173:3
the Town sanitary sewer system.
L. To provide cooperation with the Westchester County Department of Health, the
Westchester County Department of Environmental Facilities and any other
agencies which have requirements for or jurisdiction over the protection of the
physical, chemical and bacteriological quality of watercourses within or bounding
the Town.
M. To protect the public health and welfare.
§ 173-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-2
173:4
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 173-3. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in
this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT—The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
"Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Superintendent of Highways of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — May be:
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of concentration in
parts per million (ppm) or in terms of weight in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING SEWER—A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the publicly owned treatment works.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The national pretreatment standards
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which
may be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine added
to water, sewage or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine remaining
at the end of a twenty-minute contact period at room temperature.
COMBINED SEWER —A sewer which receives both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in the
publicly owned treatment works' SPDES permit, where the publicly owned
treatment works is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such
pollutants to the degree required by the publicly owned treatment works' SPDES
permit.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The approval authority, defined hereinabove.
COOLING WATER—The water discharged from any system of condensation, air
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or any other sources to which the only pollutant
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such
representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from
which the indirect discharge originates or is duly authorized to bind his
principal.
(3)
§ 173-3 SEWERS § 173-3
173:5
added is heat.
COUNTY — The County of Westchester.
COUNTY SEWER — Any sewer owned and operated by the County of
Westchester.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION OR DEC OR
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, or,
where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Commissioner
or other duly authorized official of said agency.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACILITIES — The Westchester
County Department of Environmental Facilities.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Westchester County Department of Health.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream or the time the sample is taken.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste discharged directly or indirectly into
a publicly owned treatment works from temporary or permanent, mobile or fixed
storage devices, including but not limited to those utilized in vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, septic tanks, cesspools, trailers and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants, as defined in this section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants into any publicly
owned treatment works from any source, including holding tank wastes and
scavenger wastes.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge from any industry
identified in the SIC Manual, as amended and supplemented, under the category
Division D, Manufacturing, and such other classes of significant waste products as,
by regulation, the approval authority may deem appropriate.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from the industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — An inhibition or disruption of any publicly owned treatment
works, its treatment or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal. An
industrial user interferes with a publicly owned treatment works whenever such
user:
Discharges a daily pollutant, loading in excess of that allowed in its permit
issued pursuant to Article VIII hereof by its contract with the publicly owned
(1)
§ 173-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-3
173:6
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD—Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347), which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority of
Section 307(b) of the Act.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage or other wastes, exclusive of sewage from
industrial users and significant industrial users, which when analyzed show by
weight the following characteristics:
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood, eggshells,
coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime cinder, ashes and all other
discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial wastes.
PASS THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through any publicly owned
treatment works into its receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which are a
cause of or which significantly contribute to a violation of any requirements of any
Town publicly owned treatment works' SPDES permits, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation. An industrial user significantly contributes
to such permit violation where it:
treatment works or by federal, state or local law.
Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents
from the user's average discharge.
(2)
Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would result in a violation of the applicable
SPDES permit or prevent sewage sludge use or disposal according to the
publicly owned treatment works' selected method of sludge management.
(3)
(1) BOD of 2,000 pounds per million gallons (240 milligrams per liter) or less.
Chlorine demand of 208 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams per liter)
or less.
(2)
Suspended solids of 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams per
liter) or less.
(3)
Discharges a daily pollutant, loading in excess of that allowed by its permit
issued under Article VIII hereof, by contract with the publicly owned
treatment works or by federal, state or local law.
(1)
Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and constituents
from the user's average discharge.
(2)
Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharge from other sources, would result in a permit violation.
(3)
Knows or has reason to know that any publicly owned treatment works is,
for any reason, violating its final effluent limitations in the permit and that
such user's discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
(4)
§ 173-3 SEWERS § 173-3
173:7
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
partnership, copartnership, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity
or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the
plural, where indicated by context.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution. It indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity of the pH scale
running from zero point zero (0.0) to fourteen point zero (14.0). A pH value of
seven point zero (7.0), the midpoint of the scale, represents neutrality; values above
7.0 represent acidic conditions.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of chemical, physical,
biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the publicly owned treatment
works which is designated to provide treatment, including recycling and
reclamation, of municipal sewage and industrial wastewater.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes or other means. No industrial user shall ever increase
the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute or discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
categorical pretreatment standard or regulation except where expressly authorized
to do so by such pretreatment standard or regulation.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater than one-half (1/2) inch
in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW — A treatment works,
as herein defined, which is owned and/or operated by the Town.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer controlled by public authority.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water into which
treatment or untreated sewage is discharged.
sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the publicly owned treatment
works' violation.
§ 173-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-3
173:8
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories or
institutions and free from stormwater, surface water, industrial wastes and other
wastes.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. The
mixture of sewage, as above defined, with industrial wastes or other wastes also
shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning of this definition.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, regulating, pumping and
transporting sewage to and away from the publicly owned treatment works
treatment plant.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT)
— A publicly owned treatment works treatment plant, as herein defined.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demanded payment for the use of a publicly
owned treatment works for handling any sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
accepted for admission thereto in which the characteristics thereof exceed the
maximum values for limits of such characteristics in normal sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER—Any industrial user of the county publicly
owned treatment works who:
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION OR SIC — A classification
pursuant to the latest edition and amendments of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office
Management and Budget.
Is subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, based on his
operation;
(1)
Is a manufacturing industry and uses priority pollutants or substances of
concern and discharges either in detectable quantities;
(2)
Has a discharge which represents 5% or more of the flow or load to the
publicly owned treatment works; or
(3)
Is found by the Superintendent, NYSDEC or EPA to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
(4)
§ 173-3 SEWERS § 173-3
173:9
STATE — The State of New York.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (OR SPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to § 17-0803 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN — A sewer intended to carry only
stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters and drainage but excluding
industrial wastewaters other than cooling waters and unpolluted waters.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Highways of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS—Total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is
suspended in water, wash water, sewage or other liquid and which is removable by
laboratory filtering or flotation, skimming and sedimentation. Measurement shall
be as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.
TOWN — The Town of Mamaroneck.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck.
TOWN SEWER — Any sewer owned and operated by the Town of Mamaroneck.
TOWN SEWER DISTRICT—The Town sanitary sewer district as created, altered
or modified by action of the Mamaroneck Town Board.
TOWN TRUNK SEWER SYSTEM — The trunk sewers, force mains, pumping
stations, sewage regulators, publicly owned treatment works and other appurtenant
structures owned and operated by the Town of Mamaroneck.
TOXIC POLLUTION — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in Section 307(a) of the Act or as promulgated by USEPA, NYSDEC or the
approval authority.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Toxic pollutants, as herein defined.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of
a liquid nature or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical
cost over the estimated life of the works, including intercepting sewers, outfall
sewers, sewage collection system, pumping power and other equipment and their
appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities; any work, including site acquisitions
of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process (including land
used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems prior to land
application) or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from treatment;
and any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating,
separating or disposing of municipal waste, including stormwater runoff, industrial
waste or waste in combined storm sewer and sanitary sewer systems. "Treatment
works" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to any county
§ 173-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-3
173:10
§ 173-4. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
ECL Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York
EPA and USEPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC and DEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
POTW Publicly owned treatment works operated by Westchester
County
ppm Parts per million
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
publicly owned treatment works from persons outside the Town sewer districts who
are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of a Town publicly owned
treatment works.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into a county publicly owned treatment works.
USER CHARGE—A charge levied on a user of a publicly owned treatment works
or that portion of the ad valorem taxes paid by a user for the user's proportionate
share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of such
works under Section 204(b)(1)(a) and 201(a)(2) of the Act.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, business dwellings, industrial facilities and institution, together
with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the publicly
owned treatment works.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — Those permits issued pursuant to
Article VIII of this chapter.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon
the state or any portion thereof.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 173-3 SEWERS § 173-4
173:11
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
§ 173-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-4
173:12
ARTICLE III
Use of Town Sanitary Sewer and Tributary Sewers
§ 173-5. Limitation of use; exception.
§ 173-6. Health regulations.
All requirements, directives and orders calling for the mandatory use of the Town
sanitary sewers and public sewers tributary thereto for the proper discharge of sewage,
industrial wastes and other wastes compatible with this chapter shall be established and
given by the Town.
A. The use of Town sanitary sewers and public sewers tributary thereto shall be strictly
limited and restricted, except as provided in Subsection B hereof, to receive and
accept the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes generated on or
discharged from real property lying within the bounds of the Town sanitary sewer
district as established and altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged, combined
and/or consolidated by action of the Town Board.
B. The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes generated on or
discharged from real property lying outside the bounds of the Town sanitary sewer
districts into the Town sanitary sewers and public sewers tributary thereto shall be
made only with the express consent of the Superintendent and upon the issuance of
a permit setting forth the terms and conditions for such discharge, in accordance
with Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 173-5 SEWERS § 173-6
173:13

ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Waters Not Containing Sewage
§ 173-7. Policy regarding existing local combined sewers and existing stormwater
connections.
§ 173-8. Discharge standards.
A. A regrettable and vexatious situation has been brought about by the deliberate
introduction of stormwater flows into the Town sanitary sewer system, local sewers
and thence into the county system causing the serious overloading of otherwise
adequate sanitary sewers. The county publicly owned treatment works are plagued
with extreme wet weather flows which unduly handicap the efficiency of plant
operation, increase operating costs and necessitate the enlargement of treatment
facilities.
B. It is one explicit purpose of this chapter by the application and enforcement thereof
to deter, prevent and eliminate, as far as possible, the introduction of stormwaters
into the Town sanitary sewer system and all public sewers tributary thereto.
However, it is recognized that in certain areas the immediate and strict application
and enforcement of this chapter against existing and established connections would
be infeasible and unreasonable.
C. This section shall not be construed to mitigate in any way the application and
enforcement of this chapter against the construction of any new combined sewers
and against any new connections discharging stormwater to the Town trunk sewer
system and public sewers tributary thereto or to the alleviation of unreasonable
flows of stormwater nor shall this statement of policy be construed to be used as a
defense against any changes which may be ordered by state or federal regulatory
agencies.
A. No stormwater connection from any building or yard nor any drain from any catch
basin, lake, swamp, pond nor any inlet for surface water, stormwater or
groundwater of any kind shall be connected to the Town trunk sewer system or any
public sewer tributary thereto or to any private sewer connected to any such public
sewer. Existing facilities mentioned above which are presently connected directly
or indirectly must be corrected.
B. Within any area served by a separate sanitary sewer system, no stormwater shall be
allowed to enter soil, waste or vent pipes from any building. Within any such area,
no down spout or leader, gutter or other pipe, drain or channel which may at any
time carry stormwater surface drainage derived from hydraulic pressure or from
well points, cooling water or seawater shall be connected with any sanitary sewer.
Every joint in the connection to a sanitary sewer shall be made watertight so that no
leakage into or from such connection shall occur.
C. Subject to the approval of the Superintendent, the provisions, stipulations,
requirements and enforcement set forth in Subsections A and B above shall,
however, be subject in the first instance to the applicable provisions, stipulations
and requirements of any existing or amended rules, regulations, codes or ordinances
adopted by a municipality or sewer district having jurisdiction over public sewers
§ 173-7 SEWERS § 173-8
173:15
tributary to the Town trunk sewer system. Wherever there is a conflict between this
chapter and the existing rules and regulations of a governmental authority having
jurisdiction, the more stringent rule or regulation shall prevail.
§ 173-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-8
173:16
ARTICLE V
Discharges Excluded from Town Sanitary Sewers
§ 173-9. Exclusion of unpolluted waters.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any Town sanitary sewer
system or public sewer tributary thereto any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters,
except as provided in Article IV of this chapter.
§ 173-10. Prohibited materials, substances and wastes. [Amended 3-18-1998 by
L.L. No. 5-1998]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
any Town sanitary sewer system or public sewer tributary thereto, storm sewer or storm
drain or any private sewer connecting with a public sewer any of the following materials,
substances or wastes:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may
be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the Town sanitary sewer system, storm
sewers or storm drain. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system), be more than 5% nor any single reading be over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include but are not limited
to gasoline, diesel, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
diesel, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the Town, county or the state
or the EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer,
storm sewer or storm drain, or other interference with the operation of the Town
sanitary sewer system, such as but not limited to grease, garbage with particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissue, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood plastics, gas, tar asphalt, residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass
grinding, polishing wastes, ethelenyene glucol or petroleum products.
C. Any wastewater or waste material having a pH lower than 5.5 or having a pH higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment of the sewer system, storm sewer or personnel
employed in its operation.
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or prohibited substances or wastes, as
defined herein, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
Town sanitary sewer system or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard.
§ 173-9 SEWERS § 173-10
173:17
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to
life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers, storm sewer or storm drain for
maintenance and repair.
F. Any substance which may cause a Westchester County Publicly Owned Treatment
Works' effluent or any other product of the Westchester County Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall
a substance discharged to the publicly owned treatment works cause the publicly
owned treatment works to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Water Act or the Toxic Substances Control
Act or NYSDEC criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
G. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process,
such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
H. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
I. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
J. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of 100 mg/l of solvent-soluble materials or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures below 65° C. (150° F.).
K. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of
garbage grinders equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower [seventysix
hundredths (.076) horsepower metric] or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Superintendent.
L. Any wastewaters containing strong acid metal pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
M. Any wastewaters or waste materials containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, as defined herein.
N. Any wastewaters or waste materials containing phenols or other odor-producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limitations which may be established
by the Superintendent or exceeding limitations set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard.
O. Any material which contains or causes:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to
fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as
but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
(2) Excessive discoloration in the sewer system or at the publicly owned treatment
works treatment plant, such as but not limited to dye solutions and vegetable
§ 173-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-10
173:18
§ 173-11. Action by Superintendent.
If any wastewaters or waste materials are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the Town sanitary or public sewers tributary thereto, which wastewaters or waste
materials contain substances or the characteristics enumerated in § 173-10 of this article
and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create
a hazard or danger to life or constitute a public nuisance, after advising the user(s) as
specified in § 173-12, the Superintendent may:
§ 173-12. Notice of Superintendent's action.
§ 173-13. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
The federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory,
tanning solutions.
(3) Unusual BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant additional load on the publicly owned treatment works,
except as provided for under Article VII.
P. Any wastewaters or waste materials containing more than two mg/l of the following
gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides.
Q. Any wastewaters or waste materials from industrial processes or hospital
procedures containing antibiotics or viable pathogenic organisms in sufficient
concentrations or amounts to interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the publicly owned treatment works.
A. Reject the wastewaters or waste materials.
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the publicly owned
treatment works in accordance with §§ 173-13 and 173-15 of this article.
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
D. Require additional payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastewaters or waste materials in accordance with § 173-37 of this chapter.
A. In all cases where the Superintendent determines there is a condition which may
have a deleterious effect on or create a danger or hazard to persons, he may take
any or all of the actions provided for in § 173-11 hereof immediately upon giving
informal notice to the user.
B. In all other cases, the Superintendent shall give notice to the user by personal
service or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to it at the address
provided for that purpose on the users permit application of the Superintendent's
pending action by a notice of violation. Service by mail shall be deemed complete
upon receipt of the return receipt or five days from mailing, whichever sooner
occurs. The user shall have 10 days from service to respond to the notice of
violation and to request a hearing, pursuant to Article X.
§ 173-10 SEWERS § 173-13
173:19
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter, shall prevail. The
Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 173-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-13
173:20
ARTICLE VI
Toxic Substances Prohibited or Accepted Conditionally
§ 173-14. Permissible concentration of toxic substances.
The concentration in sewage of any of the following substances shall not exceed these
concentrations judged by the Superintendent to be toxic to biological sewage treatment
processes or to the biota of the receiving waters and shall not exceed the limits specified
below at the point of discharge into the Town trunk sewer system or public sewer
tributary thereto. These limits may be revised by the Superintendent in accordance with
§§ 173-11 and 173-13 of Article V of this chapter.
Regulated Pollutant
Permissible Average Daily
Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
Cadmium 0.7
Hexavalent chromium 2.0
Total chromium 3.0
Copper 2.8
Lead 0.4
Mercury 0.2
Nickel 2.8
Zinc 1.8
Arsenic 0.2
Total cyanide 0.8
Selenium 0.2
Barium 2.0
Silver 0.8
Phenols 4.0
Oil and grease 100.0
§ 173-15. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
§ 173-16. Excessive discharge.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by the Superintendent or by an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process water or
in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the
Town, county or state.
§ 173-14 SEWERS § 173-17
173:21
§ 173-17. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge
of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the Town for review and shall be approved by
the Town before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a
plan as directed by the Superintendent. No user who commences contribution to the
publicly owned treatment works after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted
to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been
approved by the Town. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge,
it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone the Superintendent and
notify the receiving publicly owned treatment works treatment plant of the incident.
The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration,
volume and corrective actions.
§ 173-18. Written notice.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the
Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works, fish kills or any
other damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law.
§ 173-19. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 173-17 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-19
173:22
ARTICLE VII
Discharges into Town Sanitary
Sewer System and Public Sewers Only After Approval
§ 173-20. Approval; when required.
Whenever any industrial waste is produced in such quantities as will, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, injure the public sewers into which they may be discharged or
adversely affect the treatment of sewage or which does not yield readily to treatment by
the processes employed in the publicly owned treatment works treatment plants, such
discharge will not be permitted into the public sewers without previous approval as
prescribed under Article VI.
§ 173-21. Wastes requiring approval.
§ 173-22. Radioactive wastes.
Any person discharging radioactive material or fission products must be registered
with the Superintendent and such other control agencies as may be required by law,
rule or regulation. The active elements and their local concentration permitted to be
discharged into the public sewers shall be based upon the latest knowledge available in
this technology and be at all times within limits set by this and other municipal, county,
state and federal agencies.
A. The following are some of the industries the wastes from which may require
approval and/or pretreatment before discharge into the Town sanitary sewer:
aluminum forming, battery manufacturing, coil coating, copper forming, electrical
and electronic components, electroplating, explosives manufacturing, foundries,
gum and wood chemicals, ink formulating, inorganic chemicals, iron and steel
manufacturing, leather tanning and finishing, metal finishing, metal molding and
casting, nonferrous metals manufacturing, organic chemicals and plastic and
synthetic fibers, paint formulating, pesticides, petroleum refining, pharmaceutical
manufacturing, plastics molding and forming, porcelain enameling, pulp and paper,
steam electric, textile mills and timber products processing.
B. In addition, the following manufacturing industries may also require approval and/
or pretreatment before discharge into the Town sanitary sewers: brewing, distilling,
meat packing, food processing, salt works, slaughterhouses, dairies, dairy products,
sugar refining, fat rendering, syrups, jam or jelly production or any industry
producing wastes with strong acidic or alkaline reactions or which will form
deposits in or cause damage to the sewers or the appurtenances of the publicly
owned treatment works treatment plants. The process or processes employed in the
pretreatment of such wastes shall in each case be satisfactory to and shall have the
written approval of the Superintendent as set forth under Article VIII of this
chapter.
§ 173-20 SEWERS § 173-22
173:23

ARTICLE VIII
Issuance of Permits
§ 173-23. Permits; when required.
§ 173-24. Applications for permits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge directly or indirectly into public
sewers or into any private sewer or any combined sewer discharging into a public
sewer sewage combined with industrial wastes or other wastes, the characteristics
of which combination do not conform to the concentration limits prescribed for
"normal sewage" under Article II of this chapter or to discharge any toxic
substances or any other objectionable material or substances as specified under
Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter except upon the issuance of a permit
therefor by the Superintendent and upon such terms and conditions as may be
established by the Superintendent in the issuance of such a permit.
B. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to a publicly
owned treatment works shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or contributing to the publicly owned treatment works. All existing
significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the publicly owned
treatment works shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after
the effective date of this chapter.
A. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with
the Town an application in the form prescribed by the Town. Existing users shall
apply for a permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter, and
proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or
contributing to the publicly owned treatment works.
B. All applicants for a permit to discharge sewage combined with industrial wastes or
other wastes into public sewers shall fill out and file with the Superintendent an
application, including an industrial survey questionnaire, as a prerequisite for the
consideration of such a permit. In support of the application, the user shall submit,
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) The name, address and location (if different from address).
(2) All SIC numbers, as defined in Article II hereof, that could be used to describe
the production, manufacturing or other processes utilized on or at that location.
(3) A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or
expected to be produced at said property or premises, including a description
of the character of each waste, the average daily three-minute peak wastewater
flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any, and
representative analyses. The characteristics of wastewater constituents to be
submitted shall include but are not limited to those prohibited and regulated
discharge parameters mentioned under Articles IV, V, VI, VII and VIII herein
as determined by a reliable, certified analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as
§ 173-23 SEWERS § 173-24
173:25
amended;
(4) The anticipated time and duration of all wastewater flows.
(5) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all
sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(6) A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises,
including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(7) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any county, state or federal pretreatment standards and a
statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O & M) or additional pretreatment, or both, are required for the user to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.
(8) If additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard.
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection B(8)(a) above shall exceed nine
months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent, including as a minimum whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to
the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse
between progress reports to the Superintendent.
(9) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
(10) The type and amount of raw material processed (average and maximum per
day).
(11) The number and type of employees, hours of operation of the plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
(12) Any other information as may be deemed by the Superintendent to be
§ 173-24 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-24
173:26
§ 173-25. Terms and conditions.
Terms and conditions as may be required and imposed by the Superintendent in the
issuance of the permit are as follows:
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
C. The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Town may issue a wastewater discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
A. A limitation upon the average and maximum volume of wastewater constituents
and characteristics and the rate of flow permitted from the premises.
B. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of facilities
or equipment for intermittent or continuous measurement of sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes discharged from the premises into a public sewer.
C. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of detention
tanks or other facilities or equipment for reducing the maximum rates of discharge
of sewage to such a percentage of the twenty-four-hour rate as may be required by
the Superintendent.
D. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of such
pretreatment facilities as may be required by the Superintendent.
E. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of a suitable
control or sampling manhole or manholes in any sewer discharging to a public
sewer and carrying such sewage.
F. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of grease,
oil and sand interceptors, separators or traps that are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing such substances in excessive quantities or any
flammable waste or other harmful ingredients.
G. The submission to and approval by the Superintendent of the plans for any of the
facilities or equipment required to be installed and maintained by the permittee.
H. Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewer system
and carry out the intent and provisions of this chapter, including but limited to a
requirement that, subsequent to the commencement of operation of any
pretreatment facilities, periodic reports shall be made by the permittee to the
Superintendent setting forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the
sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, after treatment, may be determined.
I. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the permittee at his own expense.
J. A violation by the permittee of the permit shall be a cause for revocation or
suspension of the permit.
§ 173-24 SEWERS § 173-25
173:27
§ 173-26. Control manholes.
K. A unit charge or schedule of user charges, surcharges or other fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a Town sanitary sewer.
L. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting
schedule.
M. A compliance schedule.
N. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports per
§§ 173-17, 173-18, 173-28, 173-29 and 173-30 of this chapter.
O. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater
discharge as specified by the Town and affording the Town access thereto.
P. Requirements for notification of the Town of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater pretreatment system.
Q. Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
R. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
A. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying wastewater shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with such necessary members and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his own expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. Without limiting the discretion of the Superintendent under Subsection A of this
section, control manholes shall, except for good cause shown, be required in the
following instances:
(1) Control manholes shall be required if a user discharges more than 50,000
gallons per day of wastewater to a Town sanitary sewer.
(2) Control manholes shall be required if a user discharges more than 500 pounds
per day of BOD and/or 625 pounds per day of suspended solids to a Town
sanitary sewer.
(3) Control manholes with continuous flow recording and totalizing capabilities
shall be required if a user discharges more than 250,000 gallons per day of
wastewater or more than 500 pounds per day of BOD and/or 625 pounds per
day of suspended solids to a Town publicly owned treatment works.
(4) Control manholes shall be required if a user discharges any toxic pollutant
which is in excess of the limitations which have been placed on such
§ 173-25 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-26
173:28
§ 173-27. Measurement and analysis of wastes.
All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the requirements
of 40 CFR 136, as amended, and shall be determined at the control manhole or, if the
point of connection with the public sewer is inaccessible, control manholes shall be
considered to be the nearest suitable ones upstream and downstream in the public sewer
from the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all discharges
of a user are appropriate or whether grab samples should be taken.
§ 173-28. Reporting requirements for significant industrial users.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction
of wastewater into the Town sanitary sewer, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum
daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the user to compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a
duly licensed professional engineer.
§ 173-29. Periodic compliance reports.
discharges by the categorical standards as amended thereto or as restricted by
the limitations set by the USEPA, NYSDEC or the approval authority.
(5) Control manholes shall be provided in accordance with the terms and
conditions contained in the wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Superintendent.
A. Report required.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such
pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of
the discharge into the sanitary sewer shall submit to the Superintendent during
the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. This requirement shall also pertain to other significant
industrial users as directed by the Superintendent.
(2) This report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting
period exceeded the average daily flow reported in compliance with § 173-24
§ 173-26 SEWERS § 173-29
173:29
§ 173-30. Permit modification.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard,
the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such
standard. Where a user becomes subject to a national categorical pretreatment discharge
permit as required by § 173-23, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit
shall submit to the Supervisor within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by § 173-24B(7) and
(8).
§ 173-31. Duration of permits.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. The user
shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Town during its term as the limitations or requirements prescribed
in Article V are altered or if other just cause exists. Any changes or new conditions in
the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 173-32. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval
of the Superintendent. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms
and conditions of the existing permit.
§ 173-33. Confidential information.
of this chapter. At the discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of
such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
B. The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users where they are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection A(1) of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis
of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass, where requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or
with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed
in accordance with procedures contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit,
applicable pretreatment standards or as approved by the Superintendent.
A. Any information submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter may be
§ 173-29 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-33
173:30
claimed as confidential by the submitted in order to guard the confidentiality
of business information or trade secrets. Confidential portions of otherwise
nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the business and may be
submitted separately to facilitate identification and handling. A business may assert
a business confidentiality claim covering the information by placing on or attaching
to the information, at the time it is submitted, a stamped or typed legend or other
suitable form of notice employing language such as "trade secret," "proprietary"
or "company confidential." Justification of the confidentiality claim must also be
provided by means of written statements on company letterhead. If no claims are
made at the time of submission, the Superintendent may make the information
available to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information
will be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 2.
B. Effluent information and data provided to the Commissioner pursuant to this
chapter shall be available to the public without restriction.
§ 173-33 SEWERS § 173-33
173:31

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 173-34. Penalties for offenses.
§ 173-35. Publication of list of users not in compliance.
The Town shall annually publish in the area's largest daily newspaper a list of those
significant industrial users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment
standards or requirements contained in this chapter at least once during the previous 12
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the
user(s) during the same 12 months.
A. A violation of the provisions of Articles III to VIII, inclusive, or of §§ 173-36,
173-37 or 173-38 of Article X of this chapter shall be an offense, and each such
violation may be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In lieu of or in addition
to such fine or imprisonment, or both, each such violation shall be subject to civil
penalty not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.) for any one violation, to be recovered
in an action or proceeding brought by the Counsel to the Town in the name of the
Town in a court of competent jurisdiction. Each day of a continuing violation shall
be subject to a separate fine, imprisonment or civil penalty.
B. In addition to the penalties prescribed in Subsection A of this section, the Counsel
to the Town may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the Town in a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain by injunction
any violation of this chapter.
C. Where any violation of this chapter causes an expense to the Town, such expense
may, in the discretion of the Superintendent, be separately collected by a civil suit
against the violator, brought by the County Attorney in the name of the Town in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 173-34 SEWERS § 173-35
173:33

ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 173-36. Power and authority of inspectors.
§ 173-37. Protection from damages.
Any unauthorized persons who maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the Town trunk sewer system or public sewer tributary thereto shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 173-38. Sewerage surcharge.
§ 173-39. Action by the Superintendent; hearing.
A. The Superintendent, the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or the United States Environmental Protection Agency may enter
upon private lands for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing as well as for the inspection, review and copying of industrial
user discharge monitoring records in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The Superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes used in
any industrial operation not having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or the on-site facilities for waste treatment.
B. Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the necessary
work referred to in this section shall be punishable by such penalties as may be
prescribed under Article IX of this chapter.
A. In addition to any other tax, fee, charge or sewer rent imposed or levied for the
construction, maintenance, operation, repair, improvement and management of the
Town trunk sewer system or any public sewer tributary thereto, the owner or lessee
of any parcel of real property connected with such system or sewer, including but
not limited to real property connected to such system or sewer, by means of a
private sewer or drain discharge into the Town trunk sewer system or any public
sewer tributary thereto, shall pay a sewerage surcharge for the use of such system
or public sewer for discharging any sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes
accepted for admission thereto in which the characteristics resulting from the
pollutants contained therein exceed the maximum levels of such characteristics in
normal sewage or wastes, as defined under Article II herein. Such surcharge will be
based on formulas which reflect the costs of treatment of sewage pollutants above
and beyond the maximum levels defining normal sewage.
B. Failure to pay sewerage surcharges within 45 days after receipt of a written
statement assessing such charges shall constitute a violation of § 173-34 of this
chapter.
A. Any person who is denied a license or permit under this chapter or whose license or
permit is suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall have
an opportunity to be heard by the Superintendent or his designee.
§ 173-36 SEWERS § 173-39
173:35
§ 173-40. Federal and state statutes, rules and regulations.
Any reference within this chapter to federal or state statutes, rules or regulations shall
mean such statutes, rules and regulations as exist upon the effective date of this chapter.
B. Any person aggrieved by an action of the Superintendent as specified in Subsection
A of this section may request a hearing within 30 days of such decision.
C. At such hearing, such aggrieved person shall hear the reasons for the
Superintendent's actions and have the opportunity to present evidence on his or her
behalf.
D. Any testimony at such hearing shall be given under oath.
E. The aggrieved person may be represented by counsel.
F. A stenographic or other suitable record of such proceeding shall be maintained by
the Superintendent.
§ 173-39 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 173-40
173:36
Chapter 174
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 173. Water — See Ch. 231.
§ 174-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 12-5-2018 by L.L. No. 11-2018]
§ 174-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this
section:
REVENUE—The amount of money that the Town Board determines must be collected
in a given fiscal year in order to operate, maintain and repair the sanitary sewer system
and, if deemed appropriate by the Town Board and not prohibited by General Municipal
Law § 453(3), to expand such system.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The conduits, drains, pipes, interceptors, laterals,
mains, pumps, trunk lines and the other appurtenances or facilities owned, operated and
maintained by the Town of Mamaroneck (whether located within or outside the Town's
municipal boundaries) that are used to collect, treat and/or transport sewage.
A. The Town Board finds that it is in the public interest to raise funds to operate,
maintain and repair the sanitary sewer system and, if deemed appropriate by the
Town Board and not prohibited by General Municipal Law § 453(3), to expand
such system through a sewer rent rather than by taxation because a sewer rent more
equitably distributes the cost since it is a function of usage computed based upon
water consumption and is charged to all the users of the sanitary sewer system,
including tax-exempt properties.
B. The sewer rent law is intended to levy charges for sanitary sewer service based upon
a property's discharge of sewage into the sanitary sewer system. The sewer rent law
calls owners of real property that discharge sewage into the sanitary sewer system
"system users." The owners of real property whose sewage is not discharged into
the sanitary sewer system (e.g., properties served by septic systems) are not "system
users" since the discharge therefrom does not enter the sanitary sewer system. The
owners of these properties are not subject to a sewer rent.
C. There are properties that do both. Certain consumers of water, such as golf courses,
have facilities, such as clubhouses and locker rooms, that discharge sewage into the
sanitary sewer system but also consume water that is not returned as sewage to the
sanitary sewer system, such as water used to irrigate fairways or fill water hazards.
This chapter takes that distinction into consideration by imposing sewer rent for the
facilities that do discharge sewage into the sanitary system and exempting from
sewer rent the facilities that do not discharge sewage into the sanitary system.
§ 173-40 SEWER RENTS § 174-2
174:1
SEWAGE — Water-carried human or animal wastes, and any other waste, whether or
not it contains organic matter.[Amended 1-21-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
SEWER DISTRICT — The Town of Mamaroneck Consolidated Sewer District as it
currently is constituted and as it may be expanded or contracted from time to time.
SEWER RENT — The charges established from time to time by the Town Board of the
Town of Mamaroneck for discharging sewage into the sanitary sewer system.[Amended
12-5-2018 by L.L. No. 11-2018]
SEWER RENT FUND — The fund into which the sewer rents are deposited.
SYSTEM USERS—The owners of real property, other than the Town of Mamaroneck,
its authorities or the Larchmont-Mamaroneck Joint Garbage Disposal Commission, that
discharge sewage into the sanitary sewer system, whether such property is located within
or outside the Town's municipal boundaries.[Amended 12-5-2018 by L.L. No. 11-2018]
WATER CONSUMPTION — The total volume of water delivered by water sources to
a property owned by a system user.
WATER SOURCE — Any entity that delivers water to a property owned by a system
user.
WJWW — The Westchester Joint Water Works.
§ 174-3. Rates; billing; adjustments.
A. Annually, the Town Board, by resolution, shall set the rate per gallon or per cubic
foot, as the case may be, of water consumption to be used in determining the sewer
rent for the following fiscal year. That rate shall be calculated by dividing the
revenue by the water consumption of all system users in the previous fiscal year.
The resolution establishing and imposing the sewer rent shall be adopted only after
a public hearing held upon five days' public notice or such other period as may be
mandated by General Municipal Law § 452(2) or any statute that may replace it.
B. A system user shall pay a sewer rent equal to the rate set pursuant to § 174-3A,
multiplied by 90% of the system user's water consumption.
C. Billing.
(1) So long as WJWW is the billing agent for the sewer rent, the sewer rent due
from system users whose water source is WJWW shall be the date on which
those invoices sent to them by WJWW that contain a charge for the sewer rent
are due and payable. For all other system users and if WJWW ceases to be the
billing agent for the sewer rent, the sewer rent shall be due and payable on the
first day of February, May, August and November of each year.
(2) In the case of system users whose water source is WJWW, invoices for sewer
rent shall be sent to the address to which WJWW sends its invoices for water
usage. For all other system users and if WJWW ceases to be the billing agent
for the sewer rent, invoices for sewer rent shall be sent to the same address that
the Town sends bills for real estate taxes to such system users.
(3) The failure to receive a bill for the sewer rent shall not be grounds for waiving
penalties or interest imposed as the result of a late payment.
§ 174-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 174-3
174:2
D. Any system user who maintains that such system user's sewer rent should be
reduced for any given year may make one application to the Town Board for a
reduction in that year's sewer rent. [Amended 1-21-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015;
5-19-2021 by L.L. No. 9-2021]
(1) Such application must be in writing, must be made no later than March 31 of
the following year, and be supported by evidence that proves either:
(a) That the system user's water consumption was less than the water
consumption that was used to calculate the system's user's sewer rent for
that year; or
(b) That the amount of the system user's water consumption that actually was
discharged into the sanitary sewer system was less than the amount of
water consumption used to calculate the system user's sewer rent.
(2) Failure to apply for a reduction in the sewer rent by the last date on which such
application can be made is an absolute bar to a reduction in sewer rent for the
year at issue.
E. If the Town Board reduces a sewer rent pursuant to § 174-3D(2), that system user's
sewer rent shall be recalculated based upon the portion of that system user's water
consumption that actually was discharged into the sanitary sewer system and not
90% of that system user's water consumption. [Added 1-21-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
F. If a system user has installed water meters that exclusively measure the volume of
water being used for activities that do not result in sewage being discharged into the
sanitary sewer system, the system user shall not be subject to sewer rent based upon
the volume of water measured by such meters. To be eligible for this exemption, a
system user must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer (or other
designated town official) that the water measured by such water meters is being
used solely for activities that do not result in sewage being discharged into the
sanitary sewer system. The exemption shall last for three years but can be renewed
for additional three-year periods if on or before the date on which the then-current
exemption expires, the sewer user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer (or other designated town official) that the water measured by such water
meters is still being used solely for activities that do not result in sewage being
discharged into the sanitary sewer system. The Town Engineer (or other designated
Town official) shall maintain a record of the date on which each exemption is
granted or renewed. The failure of a system user that has been granted an exemption
to renew that exemption prior to its expiration date shall subject that user to a sewer
rent for the water consumed between the expiration date and the date upon which a
renewal is granted even though had the exemption been renewed prior to its
expiration date, the system user would not have been subject to a sewer rent for the
consumption of such water. The failure of the Town Engineer (or other designated
Town official) to maintain a record of the date on which an exemption is granted or
renewed shall not be a defense to the imposition of a sewer rent under the
circumstances described in the preceding sentence. [Added 12-5-2018 by L.L. No.
11-2018]
§ 174-3 SEWER RENTS § 174-4
174:3
§ 174-4. Late payments; penalties; liens; enforcement.
§ 174-5. Use of sewer rent fund.
A. A penalty of 1% of the amount shown as due for sewer rent on an invoice shall be
charged for any payment of sewer rent that is made after the date on which it is due
and payable. An additional penalty of 1% shall be added to the amount shown as
due for sewer rent on an invoice for the sewer rent for each calendar month starting
with the first calendar month after the date on which such invoice was due and
payable.
B. Sewer rents imposed upon real property owned by a sewer user shall constitute a
lien upon that real property or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents shall
have been established and imposed. The lien shall be prior and superior to every
other lien or claim except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful
charge imposed by or for the state or a political subdivision or district thereof.
C. The Town Board, acting on behalf of a sewer district may bring and maintain an
action as upon contract for sewer rents in arrears, including penalties and interest,
or to foreclose liens for such sewer rents. As an alternative to such action, the Town
Board may cause a statement to be prepared annually setting forth the amount of
the sewer rents in arrears, including penalties and interest, the real property affected
thereby and the name of the person in whose name such real property is assessed.
The Town Board shall levy the amounts contained in such statement against the real
property liable at the same time and in the same manner as Town taxes, and such
amounts shall be set forth in a separate column in the annual tax rolls. The amounts
so levied shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and at the same time
as may be provided by law for the collection and enforcement of Town taxes. The
failure of the Town Board to follow the alternative enforcement mechanism
described in the preceding sentence in any given year shall not preclude it from
following that procedure in other years.
A. The sewer rents, including penalties and interest, shall be credited to a special fund,
to be known as the "sewer rent fund."
B. As mandated by General Municipal Law § 453, moneys in such fund shall be used
in the following order:
(1) For the payment of the costs of operation, maintenance and repairs of the
sanitary sewer system or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have
been established and imposed.
(2) For the payment of the interest on and amortization of, or payment of,
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction of the
sanitary sewer system or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have
been established and imposed (other than indebtedness, and the interest
thereon, which is to be paid in the first instance from assessments upon
benefited real property).
(3) For the construction of sewage treatment and disposal works with necessary
appurtenances including pumping stations or for the extension, enlargement,
or replacement of, or additions to, the sanitary sewer system, or parts or parts
§ 174-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 174-5
174:4
§ 174-6. Initial sewer rent.
Notwithstanding the effective date of the local law adding this chapter to the Code of
the Town of Mamaroneck, the initial sewer rents shall be imposed starting on October 1,
2015.
thereof.
C. As mandated by General Municipal Law § 453, sewer rents shall not be used to
finance the cost of any extension of any part of the sanitary sewer system (other
than any sewage treatment and disposal works with necessary appurtenances
including pumping stations) to serve areas not currently served by sewers if such
part has been constructed wholly or partly at the expense of real property especially
benefited or for the payment of the interest on, and the amortization of, or payment
of, indebtedness which is to be paid in the first instance from assessments upon
benefited real property.
§ 174-5 SEWER RENTS § 174-6
174:5

Chapter 175
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 174-6 SIGNS § 174-6
175:1

ARTICLE I
Outdoor Illumination
§ 175-1. Parking lots.
Parking lots, including those used as accessories to retail businesses which are to be
operated or used after daylight hours, shall be adequately illuminated, and the minimum
illumination shall be 1/10 of one watt per square foot of parking area distributed over
the entire area, employing a minimum number of poles and fixtures to meet these
standards. Lights shall be provided with reflectors arranged so that the illumination is
directed downward and away from adjacent buildings and any street or highway which
adjoins the parking lot. Shaded floodlights may also be used on the premises, but, where
used, such floodlights shall not interfere with the traffic lights and signals on streets or
highways adjacent to the parking lots or impair the ability of persons driving vehicles on
such highways to safely operate such vehicles.
§ 175-2. Sales lots.
Every light used for the illumination of a lot used for the sale or display of motor vehicles
or the sale of other merchandise and car-washing establishments shall be provided with
an opaque shade which shall extend downward or in the direction of the axis of the bulb
as far as the filament so as to entirely cover the bulb. All lights shall be shielded so that
no light will be transmitted directly to adjoining property or to the street, except that the
sidewalk area immediately abutting the premises may be illuminated by lights on the
premises. Shaded spotlighting shall be arranged as provided in § 175-1.
§ 175-3. Temporary relief permits. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Whenever it has been adequately demonstrated to the Building Inspector or the Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration that compliance with
the terms of this chapter cannot be effectively and immediately made, the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration
shall have the authority to grant a temporary permit for the continued operation of such
nonconforming equipment, but only in the event that the owner has taken all necessary
steps to secure compliance with this chapter. Such temporary permit shall be issued for
no longer a period than three months, at the expiration of which period of time the owner
holding such temporary permit shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 175-1 SIGNS § 175-3
175:3

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 175-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY SIGN — Any sign related to a residence, business or profession
conducted or to a commodity or service sold or offered lawfully existing upon the
premises where such sign is located.
AWNING SIGN — Any visual message incorporated into an awning.
BAR — The Town of Mamaroneck Board of Architectural Review.
BUILDING INSPECTOR/DIRECTOR OF BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT AND
LAND USE ADMINISTRATION—The Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, or such other officer duly appointed
to perform the duties of that position.[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
EXTERIOR SOURCE — Any source of artificial light originating from a location
outside of a sign.[Added 4-4-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
FRONT OR FACE OF A BUILDING — The general outer surface of the building
abutting or fronting upon any main street or main public highway.
ILLUMINATED SIGN —
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign, except address numbers, that is affixed to or painted on
the interior of a window or glass, or any sign located within six inches of the inside face
of the window or a door, which sign is designed to be visible from the exterior of the
window or door.
INTERIOR SOURCE — Any source of artificial light originating from within a
Any sign which
(1) Is illuminated by artificial light; and
Either:
(a) Is located outside of a building or structure; or
Is located within a building or structure but can be seen from outside that
building or structure.
(b)
(2)
A.
A sign shall not be considered an illuminated sign within the meaning of Article II
of this chapter if it:
(1) Is located within a building or structure;
(2) Is illuminated by an exterior source; and
Can be seen from outside that building or structure if such exterior source
is not directed at or designed specifically to illuminate such sign. [Amended
4-4-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(3)
B.
§ 175-4 SIGNS § 175-4
175:5
sign.[Added 4-4-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
NONACCESSORY SIGNS—Any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted
or to a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
PERSON — One or more persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is erected or maintained over any street,
sidewalk, alley or highway within the Town of Mamaroneck.
PYLON SIGN — An integral, nonstructural architectural feature normally at right
angles to the wall which may be used for the display of a sign(s).
ROOF SIGN—A sign erected upon or above the roof of a building, but shall not include
a pylon or other structure which protrudes above the roof and is an integral part of the
building upon which the same is attached.
SHADED LIGHT — Those lights provided with an opaque shade which shall extend
downward, or in the direction of the axis of the bulb, beyond the filament so no part of
the filament extends beyond the end of the shade opening.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or any device attached to a building or painted
or represented thereon which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner,
pennant, logo, insignia, device, trade flag, symbol or representation which is in the
nature of or is used as an announcement, direction or advertisement for commercial
purposes or otherwise. A "sign" includes any message and any billboard, neon tube,
string of lights or similar device placed upon, outlining, hung, painted upon or attached
to part of a building or lot but does not include the flag or insignia of any nation or group
of nations or of any governmental agency or of any political, educational, charitable,
philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event
except when displayed in connection with a commercial promotion.
STANDING SIGN—A sign not attached to a building commonly referred to as ground,
monument or directory sign, but not including pole signs.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is designated to advertise or announce a
particular event or series of events, to solicit political support or to announce the
availability for sale of any type of property intended to be available for a limited period
of time.
WALL SIGN—A sign which is attached directly to or painted on the building wall and
is parallel to the building wall.
§ 175-5. Permit required. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
After the effective date of this chapter and except as otherwise herein provided, it shall
be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to erect, construct, paint, alter,
relocate, reconstruct, display or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, displayed
or maintained within the Town of Mamaroneck any sign or signs without first having
obtained written permit from the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration for such sign or signs and without having
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 175-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-6
175:6
§ 175-6. Exemptions from permit requirement.
The following signs do not require a permit:
A. Signs of duly constituted governmental bodies, including traffic or similar
regulatory devices and legal notices.
B. Flags or emblems of political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organizations.
C. Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public, charitable or
religious institutions, where the signs are located on the premises of said institution.
D. Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets and the like.
E. Signs not visible off the lot upon which they are situated.
F. Up to two professional nameplates which do not individually exceed one square
foot in area.
G. Identification signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes, not
exceeding a total of 30 square inches in surface area.
H. Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order, rule or
regulation.
I. Address signs. Not more than two address signs shall be permitted for each street
frontage. No single permitted address sign shall exceed two square feet in surface
area with a total area for all allowable signs not to exceed four square feet and are
to be located not less than five feet back from the street line. Address signs shall
show only the numerical address designations (in number or script) of the premises
upon which they are situated, except that residential address signs may include the
name of the family resident therein.
(1) The figure or figures comprising the number to be displayed on a building or
on a mailbox, lamppost or sign pole hereunder shall be at least three inches in
height and shall be placed on the front of said building or on a mailbox,
lamppost or sign hereunder in a prominent and conspicuous place and in such
manner as to be plainly legible from the center of the street at all times between
sunrise and sunset. The color of said figures shall be in sharp contrast to the
color of their background; provided, however, that so far as the purpose or
intent of this section is concerned, the front of a building shall be construed as
that side of the building which faces the street on which the number or
numbers shall be displayed on such side of such building or premises.
(2) The numbers shall be so placed so that they will not be obstructed by trees,
shrubbery, porches or other extensions of the building.
(3) Wherever practicable, said number shall be placed near some light or source
of illumination so that it may be readily seen at night.
(4) Where the building upon which the number is to be displayed is more than 50
feet from the edge of the right-of-way (whether improved or not) of the street
or road serving the building, the number shall be displayed on a mailbox,
§ 175-6 SIGNS § 175-6
175:7
§ 175-7. Restrictions in all districts.
Sign prohibitions and restrictions. The following prohibitions and general restrictions
shall apply in all building zones:
lamppost or sign readily visible from the road or street and in no event further
back than 15 feet from said road or street right-of-way.
(5) The display of any house number other than the number assigned by the post
office is expressly prohibited.
J. Cautionary signs which are less than 36 square inches in size, such as but not
limited to "danger," "no trespassing," "alarm," etc. No more than one sign shall be
placed at the front of the house, and no more than one sign should be placed upon
any wall, with a maximum of six signs allowed.
K. Private traffic signs, including directional, regulatory, warning or informational
signs of a noncommercial nature which are in the public interest, such as but not
limited to "exit," "entrance," "parking," "one-way," etc. Each such sign shall not
exceed three square feet in area.
L. Signs giving the name of the person making alterations or repairs to the premises
upon which such sign is erected, but only during the period of such repairs, shall be
not more than six square feet in area and limited to one sign for each lot or plot and
located on the building or, if standing signs, located not less than the applicable
minimum yard dimensions for structures as set forth in Chapter 240, Zoning. No
permit is required.
M. Signs on premises during the period of new construction giving the name of the
architect, contractor or builder shall be not more than six square feet in area and
limited to a maximum of two signs per plot and located on the building or, if
standing signs, located not less than the applicable minimum yard dimensions as set
forth in Chapter 240, Zoning.
N. Block parties conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the Town Clerk may have
two signs up to six square feet in area displayed for no longer than the day of the
event and 48 hours prior thereto. No other block party signs are permitted.
O. The number of the permit issued by the Building Department must be displayed on
all signs in letter of one inch in height at the bottom right-hand corner of the sign.
A. Only accessory signs shall be permitted.
B. Billboards shall be prohibited.
C. Roof signs shall be prohibited.
D. No sign or part thereof shall consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers, balloons,
spinners or other similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices, except as part of
limited special events, grand openings and holiday season promotions as approved
by the Town Board. No such special event shall exceed a period of 15 days and
shall not be repeated for at least a one-hundred-twenty-day interval thereafter.
§ 175-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-7
175:8
§ 175-8. Application for permit.
E. No sign shall project above the parapet of a building.
F. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision for
drivers nor at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may
interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device by making use of the word "stop," "look," "danger" or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character or red, green or amber illumination or reflection
in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
G. No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on the front face of any building or
otherwise upon any property, improved or unimproved, or public ways adjacent
thereto except as provided in § 175-13 herein.
H. Signs painted directly upon the surface material of a building or other structure are
prohibited.
I. Any permanent sign placed on a building or upon any property containing flags,
banners and/or any material which moves in any way through operation of the wind
and/or any mechanical device is found by this chapter to be objectionable and as a
general practice to be not in character with the community. However, it is
recognized that on rare occasions a flag, banner or other material which can be
movable by operation of the wind may be in character with a particular architectural
design. Therefore, the Board of Architectural Review is empowered to grant special
permits for signs of such description, provided that there is a specific finding by the
Board of Architectural Review that the sign is for new construction and that the
particular sign is an integral aspect of the architectural design of the new
construction which enhances such new construction and is in character with the
general surrounding community. Upon such findings, the Board of Architectural
Review may grant a special permit which shall be renewable every two years. Upon
application for renewal, the Board of Architectural Review shall ascertain that the
sign in question has been well maintained and that it continues to be an integral part
of the architectural design of the property and is in character with the surrounding
community. This section shall not include signs containing flags, banners, etc., for
special events as set forth in § 175-7D.40
A. Any person desiring to procure a permit for a sign or signs shall file with the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration of the Town of Mamaroneck a completely filled-out sign
application along with product and color samples of all finishes and sign elements;
four-by-six-inch color photographs of the site and adjacent parcels within 50 feet of
the building and eight copies of the following, which shall contain: [Amended
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) A scale drawing showing the lettering and pictorial matter composing the sign,
a description of the construction details of the sign structure and the intensity
and type of lighting to be provided in accordance with § 175-12.
40. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding illuminated signs, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 4-4-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007. See now § 175-12.
§ 175-7 SIGNS § 175-8
175:9
§ 175-9. Unsafe and nonconforming signs.
(2) A location plan showing the position of the sign on the building or premises.
(3) Such other information as the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may require to show
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Board of Architectural Review shall review the application for conformance
with these additional standards:
(1) Signs should be designed to be compatible with the surroundings and
appropriate to the architectural character of the buildings on which they are
placed. Sign panels and graphics should relate with and not cover architectural
features and should be in proportion to them.
(2) Signs should be appropriate to the types of activities they represent.
(3) Layout should be orderly and graphics should be of simple shapes, such as
rectangle, circle or oval.
(4) No more than two typefaces should be used on any one sign or group of signs
indicating one message.
(5) The number of colors used should be the minimum consistent with the design.
Groups of related signs should express uniformity and create a sense of
harmonious appearance.
(6) The use of sharply contrasting colors may be prohibited if inconsistent with
the character of the sign and its surroundings. Signs on the same building
should be similar in color, size, shape and location.
(7) Illumination should be appropriate to the character of the sign and
surroundings.
C. An application for a sign permit must be accompanied by the filing fee set forth in
§ A250-1. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
D. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or the BAR relative to
the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision, in writing, to the Zoning
Board of Appeals as provided in § 175-15. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Whenever it shall appear to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative that
any sign has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of any
of the terms of this chapter or is unsafe and insecure or is in such condition as to be
a menace to the safety of the public, he shall thereupon issue or cause to be issued
a notice, in writing, to the owner, if the whereabouts of such owner is known,
informing such person of the violation of this chapter or the dangerous condition of
such sign and directing him to make such alteration or repair thereto or to do such
things or acts as are necessary or advisable to place such structure in a safe,
§ 175-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-9
175:10
§ 175-10. Residential Districts.
§ 175-11. Business and Light Industry Districts.
In Business, Service Business, Mixed-Use Business, Urban Renewal and Light Industry
Districts, as established by Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of
substantial and secure condition and to make the same comply with the
requirements of this chapter within such reasonable time as shall be stated in
such notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified,
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative may cause such sign or
such part thereof as is constructed or maintained in violation of this chapter to be
removed and may charge the expense of such removal to the person so notified;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative from adopting such
precautionary measures as may be necessary or advisable in case of imminent
danger to the public or to adjoining property to place such sign in a safe condition,
the expense of which shall be paid by the owner. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Every person maintaining a sign shall, upon vacating the premises where the sign is
maintained, forthwith remove such sign.
C. Any nonconforming sign which becomes unsafe or is removed for any reason may
not be replaced except by a sign conforming to this chapter.
D. Signs existing as of the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the
provisions hereof shall be permitted to remain for the duration of their useful life,
but in no event longer than two years, and shall not be replaced.
A. In Residential Districts, as established by Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of Mamaroneck, no signs shall be erected or maintained except the following:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental of property on which they are located shall
be not more than three square feet in area and limited to one sign for each lot
or plot and located on the building or, if standing signs, set back from the street
so as to be located not less than the applicable minimum yard dimensions for
structures, as set forth in Chapter 240, Zoning.
(2) Signs advertising the sale of lots in a subdivision approved by the Planning
Board of the Town of Mamaroneck consisting of two or more lots shall be not
more than six feet wide or four feet high and mounted as a standing sign such
that the top shall not be higher than 10 feet above the ground upon which it is
situated. Such signs shall be limited to one sign for each street on which the
subdivision has frontage and located within the subdivision and not less than
the applicable minimum yard setback dimensions for structures as set forth in
Chapter 240, Zoning.
B. The signs listed in this section must be located on the premises to which they
pertain.
§ 175-9 SIGNS § 175-11
175:11
Mamaroneck, no sign shall be erected or maintained except the following signs and
unless such signs comply with the following provisions, but any sign permitted in a
Residential District shall be permitted in Business and Light Industry Districts:
A. A wall sign which shall not extend more than 12 inches from such exterior building
wall or face.
B. The maximum vertical dimension or height of such sign as permitted in § 175-11A
above shall be 32 inches, except that the maximum height of lettering or pictorial
matter shall not exceed 24 inches unless such sign is composed entirely of separate
letters attached directly to the wall of a building, in which case the letters shall not
exceed 32 inches in height. The maximum horizontal dimension or length of such
sign shall not exceed the length of the street frontage of the business establishment
upon which such sign is erected or maintained, but no sign shall exceed 50 feet in
length on any street frontage for the same business. In no case, however, regardless
of the size of lettering or frontage of the property, may a sign exceed 100 square
feet. The lower edge of such sign shall not be located above the level of the floor of
the second story of the building upon which the sign is placed or maintained, and
no such sign shall extend beyond the top or ends of the building surface upon which
it is placed or otherwise attached. More than one sign for each business
establishment is permitted, provided that the combined signs do not exceed the
maximum limitations for a single sign for each frontage. No sign shall be erected
on any side wall of a building.
C. One two-sided standing sign of an overall outline area of not more than 30 square
feet per sign face which may refer to any single business enterprise whose building
or part thereof is 75 feet or longer, measured parallel to the street. For a plot having
over 150 feet in frontage, a maximum of two standing signs will be allowed. A
standing sign shall be oriented to generally face the street to which it is adjacent,
and all parts thereof shall be back from the street lines. No part of any directory or
monument sign shall be more than six feet above the ground, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 240, Zoning, relating to visibility at intersections. Said sign
shall not use guy wires for support. Pole signs existing as of the effective date of
this chapter may remain in place so long as the current occupant continues to
occupy the premises to which the sign is related, and such sign may continue as
long as it is kept in good repair as a legal nonconforming sign. However, any
alterations to the premises requiring a building permit, even in the case of existing
occupant, shall automatically require the removal of any existing nonconforming
pole signs relating to such occupancy. In no event shall a nonconforming pole sign
be allowed longer than four years.
D. Signs mounted on a pylon, which is an integral part of a building but not
constituting a building wall, may be considered as and substituted for standing signs
as permitted in § 175-11C above, except that signs on a pylon shall not extend
beyond the top or edges of the pylon, and the height of the top of such signs shall
not be higher than the height of the building permitted under Chapter 240, Zoning.
Pylon signs existing as of the effective date of this chapter may remain in place so
long as the current occupant continues to occupy the premises to which the sign is
related, and such sign may continue as long as it is kept in good repair as a legal
nonconforming sign. However, any alterations to the premises requiring a building
permit, even in the case of existing occupant, shall automatically require the
§ 175-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-11
175:12
removal of any existing nonconforming pylon signs relating to such occupancy. In
no event shall a nonconforming pylon sign be allowed longer than four years.
E. No interior sign shall be erected or maintained in the window of a building which
is visible from outside except as follows:
(1) One permanent, durably constructed and approved sign no greater than 20%
of the window area or eight square feet, whichever is smaller.
(2) One permanent sign indicating the hours of the establishment not greater than
one square foot in area.
(3) No window signs shall be so arranged as to prevent the viewing of displays or
the interior of the space, except for temporary use of window space for Town
or civic functions.
F. Signs identifying the builder or contractor in connection with buildings under
construction for which a building permit has been issued and is in effect, but only
during the period of construction, not more than 32 square feet in size and located
on the building as provided for in § 175-11A and B of this section or, if standing,
not less than 25 feet back from the street line and height not to exceed 10 feet.
G. No sign permitted in § 175-11A through F, inclusive, of this section shall face any
adjoining lot in a Residential Zone.
H. At the entrance of buildings with business establishments above the first floor,
nameplates of uniform design and appearance at the entrance of each such building
and not more than a total of three square feet and 18 inches in height may be
mounted at the sides of such entrance, provided that they are placed flat against the
wall adjacent to the entrance.
I. Signs that otherwise comply with appropriate sections of this chapter may bear
either the name of the proprietor of the business conducted, the business phone
number, the nature of the business, the goods sold or the services rendered on the
premises, or any or all of them.
J. Signs that otherwise comply with the appropriate sections of this chapter may be
attached flat and parallel upon the wall of the building and permitted to extend over
a public sidewalk, alleyway, highway or street, provided that such sign shall not
project more than 12 inches from the face of the building, and, if externally
illuminated, then shields, hoods or arms for such illumination shall not project more
than two feet from the building.
K. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises bona fide business
conducted or a product sold shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent
or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such
sign may be found within 10 days after written notification from the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration is hereby authorized to cause removal
of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
§ 175-11 SIGNS § 175-11
175:13
§ 175-12. Illuminated signs. [Amended 9-21-2005 by L.L. No. 16-2005; 4-24-2006
by L.L. No. 6-2006; 6-21-2006 by L.L. No. 12-2006; 9-6-2006 by L.L. No. 14-2006;
11-15-2006 by L.L. No. 16-2006; 2-27-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 4-4-2007 by L.L.
No. 5-2007]
building or structure to which such sign is attached. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
L. Awning signs shall not project from an awning. Graphics may be painted or affixed
flat to the surface of the front or sides and shall indicate only the name and/or
address of the enterprise or premises. Awning graphics shall be a single line of
lettering not exceeding six inches in height, but, if over three inches in height, shall
be debited against the permitted wall sign surface area.
M. The Board of Architectural Review may allow a directory sign for a shopping
center with an area of no more than eight square feet per tenant with the center or
anchor store(s) area not to exceed 20 square feet. In no event shall the directory sign
exceed 14 feet in height. The shopping center shall be identified by its own name(s).
The type of lettering and the colors must be the same for the directory sign. The
size of all the tenant signage must be the same, and the use of logos or company
emblems on the directory shall not be allowed.
A. Illuminated signs shall not be permitted in any residential district.
B. Illuminated signs within a building or structure.
(1) Illuminated signs located within a building or structure may be lit by either an
exterior or an interior source but must be situated at least five feet away from
every window and glass door of that building or structure. In addition to
freestanding signs, this subsection applies to machines that dispense products
for sale and to display cases, racks and refrigerators that contain products for
sale if illuminated signs are inextricably part of such machines, cases, racks or
refrigerators.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to signs, such as exit signs, that by law are
required (i) to be within a building or structure and (ii) to be illuminated. Such
signs, if lit by an interior source, may be situated anywhere within a building
or structure except in such places where laws, other than this section, prohibit
them from being situated.
C. Illuminated signs located outside of a building or structure shall not be lit by an
interior source.
D. Illuminated signs and their exterior sources shall be situated so that the light emitted
by such sign or its exterior source does not obscure a traffic signal from the vision
of an operator of a motor vehicle driving toward such signal.
E. Illuminated signs shall not flash, have lights that glow on and off whether randomly
or in a sequence or pattern, contain words or numbers that stream across the sign,
contain pictorial displays, be animated, swing, revolve or otherwise move. This
subsection shall not apply (i) to calendars, clocks or thermometers or (ii) to
illuminated signs located within a building or structure.
§ 175-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-12
175:14
F. An illuminated sign shall not be lit after 11:00 p.m. (prevailing time) unless such
sign advertises a business which, by law, is allowed to receive patrons after 11:00
p.m. (prevailing time) and such business is open to patrons after11:00 p.m.
(prevailing time). All illuminated signs for such business shall be extinguished
when the business closes.
G. Illuminated signs shall only contain words and numbers which:
(1) Spell or set forth the name of the business for which such sign advertises;
(2) Spell or set forth the street address of the business for which such sign
advertises;
(3) Spell or set forth the hours of operation of the business for which such sign
advertises; or
(4) Show the date, time and/or outdoor temperature.
H. The light emitted by an exterior source for an illuminated sign shall:
(1) Be directed toward the sign;
(2) Be oriented so that it is not emitted directly onto an adjoining property, the
sidewalk or the street;
(3) Be enveloped by an opaque shade for such length as is necessary so that,
except for the opening through which the light shines, the source of the
illumination is entirely covered; and
(4) Have a maximum nighttime illumination level of 20 footcandles when
measured at a distance of 25 feet at right angles from the face of the sign.
I. The type, capacity, quality and installation of the wiring or other equipment used to
light an illuminated sign shall comply with all applicable codes, laws, ordinances
and regulations.
J. Any illuminated sign existing upon the effective date of this section that does not
comply with this section shall be permitted to remain in its current location until the
earlier of its removal by the owner of the sign or March 31, 2009. Thereafter, such
sign shall be removed and not replaced. While standing, such sign may not be
enlarged or substantially altered.
K. Subsections A, E, F and G of this section shall not apply to illuminated signs that
honor or commemorate a religious event, holiday or season.
L. This section shall not apply to illuminated signs that are erected to alert the public
of an emergency.
M. This section shall not apply to public utility companies, the United States of
America, the State of New York, the County of Westchester, the Town of
Mamaroneck, the Mamaroneck Union Free School District, the Villages of
Larchmont, Mamaroneck or Scarsdale or any independent contractors engaged by
any of them.
§ 175-12 SIGNS § 175-13
175:15
§ 175-13. Temporary signs.
The erection, installation or maintenance of temporary signs, as defined in § 175-4, is
hereby prohibited, except that the Building Department may grant special permission for
the maintenance of the following signs:
§ 175-14. Safety.
§ 175-15. Variances.
The Zoning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck may, in appropriate cases and after
public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, vary or modify the
application of the sign regulations prescribed in this chapter in harmony with the general
purpose and intent as follows:
A. A temporary sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area which is erected by a
municipal, charitable or nonprofit organization is permitted for a period not to
exceed 30 days. A temporary sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area which is
erected in a business zone by a political organization is permitted for a period not
to exceed 30 days.
B. The name and address of the sponsor and person responsible for removal are to be
identified.
C. Temporary interior signs announcing special sales or events shall be permitted in a
business district. Such signs shall cover not more than 25% of the window area to
which they are affixed and shall be removed within 15 days.
A. No signs shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free egress from any
window, door or fire escape or so as to become a menace to life, health or property.
B. All signs affixed to any wall or building shall be securely fastened thereto.
C. All signs illuminated by electricity shall conform with respect to wiring and
appliances to the provisions of Chapter 106, Fire Prevention and Building
Construction, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck relating to electrical control.
A. The Zoning Board may permit signs to be erected or maintained which do not
comply with the regulations herein prescribed for Business and Light Industry
Districts or projecting signs, provided that the Zoning Board of the Town of
Mamaroneck determines that the applicant is entitled to relief using the same rules
for granting variances as govern the granting of area variances under Chapter 240,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck.
B. Upon the issuance of a building permit, the Zoning Board may permit standing
signs to be erected and maintained upon vacant property or open unoccupied areas
for a period of no more than one year, announcing the proposed construction and/
or use of the property; provided, however, that such signs so permitted shall not
exceed the equivalent of sign space allowed under the regulations prescribed for the
district within which the sign is located.
C. Any variance granted shall be limited to a period not to exceed two years from the
date granted, with the right to appeal to the Zoning Board of the Town of
§ 175-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 175-15
175:16
§ 175-16. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to all other remedies permitted at law or equity, any person who shall fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution therefor
in the Town Court and, upon conviction, shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $250
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed five days, or both. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 175-17. Fees. [Added 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
The fee for a service provided or an application made pursuant to this chapter is as set
forth in § A250-1.
Mamaroneck for renewal. The foregoing variance powers shall not be deemed to
limit the general variance powers of the Zoning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck
allowed or provided for in Chapter 106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction,
of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck and shall be deemed in addition thereto.
§ 175-15 SIGNS § 175-17
175:17

Chapter 177
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Signs — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 177-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Site Plan Approval Law of the Town of
Mamaroneck."
§ 177-2. Purpose.
In order to ensure that proposed development and use of land within the unincorporated
area of the Town of Mamaroneck will have a harmonious relationship with the existing
or permitted use of contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods and so to ensure that
the health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience of the public is fully considered,
this chapter is hereby enacted.
§ 177-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SITE PLAN — A plan which shows the proposed development and use of land within
the unincorporated portion of the Town of Mamaroneck. Such plan shall consist of a
map affirmatively demonstrating compliance with and adequate provision for all of the
criteria, matters and items listed in this chapter.
§ 177-4. Approving agency designated.
The approving agencies for site plans and all amendments to and modifications thereof
shall be as follows: Pursuant to § 274-a of the Town Law, the Town Board hereby
delegates to the Planning Board the approval authority for all site plan applications.
§ 177-5. Standards.
In acting on any site plan application, the Planning Board, in addition to all other
§ 175-17 SITE PLAN REVIEW § 177-5
177:1
applicable laws, is hereby granted the powers set forth in § 274-a, Subdivision 1a, of the
Town Law of the State of New York and shall consider the standards set forth therein in
granting site plan approval. The approving agency shall also take into consideration the
following standards:
A. Traffic access and roads. All proposed traffic access points and roads shall be
adequate but not excessive in number, adequate in width, paving, grade, alignment
and visibility and not located too near street corners or other places of public
assembly. Necessary traffic signalization, signs, dividers and other safety controls,
devices and facilities shall be given proper consideration and duly provided
wherever appropriate or warranted.
B. Pedestrian safety and access. Safe, adequate and convenient pedestrian access and
circulation shall be provided both within the site and to adjacent streets, with
particular attention to all intersections with vehicular traffic.
C. Circulation and parking. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be arranged
with consideration given to their location, sufficiency and appearance and to
prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of persons connected with or visiting
the use. The interior circulation system shall be adequate to provide safe
accessibility to, from and within all required off-street parking areas.
D. Screening and landscaping. All structures, recreational, parking, loading, public and
other service areas shall be reasonably landscaped and/or screened so as to provide
adequate visual and noise buffers in all seasons from neighboring lands and streets.
The scale and quality of the landscaping and screening on site shall be harmonious
with the character of and serve to enhance the neighborhood.
E. Environmental quality. All bodies of water, wetlands, steep slopes, hilltops, ridge
lines, major stands of trees, outstanding natural topography, significant geological
features and other areas of scenic, ecological and historic value shall be preserved
insofar as possible; soil erosion shall be prevented insofar as possible; flood hazard
shall be minimized; air quality shall be well within legal limits; and all potentially
ecological disruptive elements of site preparation, such as blasting, diversion of
watercourses and the like, shall be conducted according to the highest standards of
professional care.
F. Fire protection. All proposed structures, service areas, fire lanes, hydrants,
equipment and material shall be adequate and readily accessible for the protection
of the proposed uses from fire.
G. Drainage. [Amended 6-30-1986 by L.L. No. 6-1986]
(1) A storm drainage system which demonstrates affirmative compliance with the
form, scope and substance of all applicable design criteria shall be provided to
accommodate expected loads from the tributary watershed when developed to
the maximum density permitted under the existing zoning standards. Drainage
shall be conducted to a point of adequate and suitable disposal.
(2) On sites of 10,000 square feet or more and in other instances determined by
the Planning Board to be appropriate after consultation with the Town
Engineer, development shall be so designed and executed as to limit overflow
§ 177-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 177-5
177:2
from the site to zero increase in the rate of runoff and to create zero decrease
in the rate of upstream runoff into the site, as related to existing conditions,
except that the Planning Board, after consultation with the Town Engineer,
may substitute a different requirement for a particular site if it determines that
the substituted requirement will be more effective in controlling flooding and
erosion at the site and at other locations.
(3) On parcels of five acres or more, the Planning Board may require that
development be so designed and executed as to reduce the rate of runoff by a
stipulated percentage, not to exceed 20%, as compared with existing
conditions, through drainage systems, water retention and/or the maintenance
of open spaces, both those required under ordinary circumstances and such
additional open spaces as may be required for this purpose, but without
reducing the rate of runoff into the site from upstream. Such a requirement
shall not be applied unless the Planning Board determines that it is an
appropriate and important means of preventing an increase in erosion and
flooding at the site and/or at other locations. In making such determination, the
Planning Board shall consult with the Town Engineer and with the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District, who shall respond
within the time limits set by this chapter. Failure to respond within such time
limits shall be deemed approval by such agencies.
H. Refuse and sewage disposal. The public and/or private disposal systems shall be
sufficient to safely and adequately handle the type and volume of refuse and sewage
which can reasonably be anticipated to be generated by the land uses on site.
I. Water supply. The public and/or private delivery systems for bringing potable water
to each of the uses on site shall be shown to be sufficient.
J. Location and dimension of buildings. The location, arrangement, size and design of
the buildings, lighting and signs shall be comparable to each other and with the site
as a whole. At a minimum, a distance equal to the average height of the principal
buildings on the site at the point where said buildings are most closely proximate to
each other shall be provided between all buildings on the site unless, in the opinion
of the approving agency, compelling considerations of topography or design dictate
otherwise.
K. Impact of the proposed use on adjacent land uses. Adjacent and neighboring
properties shall be protected against noise, glare, unsightliness or other
objectionable features. Where a proposed use is a nonresidential use which would
adjoin residential areas, special consideration shall be given by the approving
agency to minimizing the impact of the proposed use on the residential properties.
L. Design requirements and guidelines. [Added 5-18-2004 by L.L. No. 8-2004]
(1) For properties located in the B-Business District, the approving agency shall
apply the design requirements and guidelines contained in § 240-45H of the
Code.
(2) For properties located in the SB - Service Business District, the approving
agency shall apply the design requirements and guidelines contained in
§ 240-46H of the Code.
§ 177-5 SITE PLAN REVIEW § 177-5
177:3
§ 177-6. Approval required for issuance of permits.
§ 177-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:
§ 177-8. Application procedure.
The application procedure for site plan approval shall involve a three-stage process:
a presubmission conference, site plan application and public hearing by the Planning
(3) For properties located in the B - MUB - Business-Mixed Use Business District,
the approving agency shall apply design requirements and guidelines
contained in § 240-47H of the Code.
(4) For properties located in the UR - Urban Renewal District, the approving
agency shall apply the design requirements and guidelines contained in
§ 240-48.1D of the Code.
(5) If there is a conflict between any of the provisions of § 177-5A through and
including K of the Code and any of the provisions of the applicable design
requirements and guidelines, the provisions of §§ 240-45H, 240-46H, 240-47E
or 240-48.1D of the Code, as the case may be, shall be applied.
A. No building permit shall be issued until site plan approval shall have been obtained
from the approving agency.
B. No certificate of occupancy for any structure or use upon or within the site shall be
issued until all of the required conditions of the site plan approval have been met.
The continued validity of any certificate of occupancy shall be subject to continued
conformance with the approved site plan and conditions attached thereto.
C. Any amendment of a site plan shall be subject to the same approval procedure as
provided in this chapter except where a waiver pursuant to §§ 177-12 or 177-17
herein has been granted.
A. A single one-family dwelling which is not part of a staged development.
B. A single two-family dwelling which is not part of a staged development.
C. All alterations to existing buildings or structures, whether or not there shall be a
change of use which is permitted within the zoning district, provided that the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration and the Town Engineer make a written finding that the alteration
will not substantially intensify the use or substantially modify the site with respect
to generation of traffic, pedestrian movement, parking needs, noise, glare, exposure
to hazard from fire or flood, utilization of water supply, sanitary sewer, drainage or
other utility system and will not, in any other way, have a substantial impact upon
the character or environment of the surrounding area, and provided further that, if
such written finding is not made, the application shall be referred to the approving
agency for site plan review. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 177-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 177-8
177:4
Board. The Planning Board may adopt such rules and regulations as may be required to
implement the application procedure.
§ 177-9. Presubmission conference.
§ 177-10. Contents of application; filing.
A. Prior to the submission of a site plan application, the applicant shall meet in person
with the Planning Board and with the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration. The purpose of such conference
shall be to discuss proposed uses or development in order that the necessary
subsequent steps may be undertaken with a clear understanding of the approving
agency's requirements in matters relating to site development. [Amended
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. Because all applications for site plan approval must comply with this chapter, any
application requiring a variance or special permit must show that such variance or
special permit has been granted, or, where permitted, that such special permit
application is being simultaneously submitted to the approving agency, by the
appropriate agency prior to the filing of the site plan application with the Secretary
to the Planning Board.
A. Within six months of the presubmission conference, 16 copies of the application for
site plan approval shall be filed with the Secretary to the Planning Board,
accompanied by a detailed development plan prepared by a licensed architect or
professional engineer under his professional seal, provided on a certified survey of
the site, which shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor, which plan shall contain
the information specified below:
(1) A map showing the applicant's entire property and adjacent properties,
including all improvements thereon, and streets, within a radius of 500 feet
from the perimeter of the site, at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch,
and any relevant deed restrictions or covenants pursuant to the deed, lease,
mortgage or any other document, where such restrictions or covenants affect
the use of the land, shall also be noted. A deed of ownership shall be
submitted. If the applicant for site plan approval is not the present owner of the
property, then a letter shall be submitted by the owner of the property
consenting to the application for site plan approval.
(2) The proposed use, location, height and design of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures not designated for demolition or removal, including
front elevations.
(3) Any proposed division of buildings and structures.
(4) Any proposed division of any building into units of separate occupancy.
(5) The proposed spatial arrangement of land uses.
(6) Existing topography and proposed grade elevations at intervals of two feet or
less.
§ 177-8 SITE PLAN REVIEW § 177-10
177:5
(7) The location of all existing watercourses, intermittent streams, wetland areas,
rock outcrops, wooded areas and other significant existing features.
(8) The general configuration of all existing and proposed public and private
roads, drives and walkways.
(9) Proposed final grades, including detailed information relative to methods to be
used to retain, stabilize and/or refurbish regraded areas.
(10) The location of all parking and truck-loading areas, with access and egress
drives thereto.
(11) The location of traffic safety devices and directional flow of traffic.
(12) The location of any outdoor storage.
(13) The location and description of all existing and proposed site improvements,
including but not limited to drainage pipes, drains, culverts, ditches, bridges or
other drainage works, retaining walls and medians, dividers and fences.
Drainage information shall be provided by a licensed professional engineer,
furnished under his seal.
(14) The location of all proposed and existing easements.
(15) The location of any special and/or zoning district lines.
(16) A description of the method of water supply and sewage and garbage disposal
and the location of such facilities.
(17) The location, height and size of all signs.
(18) The location, height, quality and design of all landscaping and buffer areas.
(19) The location, height and design of lighting, power and communication
facilities.
(20) Letters or permits from other agencies having jurisdiction as to their comments
on the site development plan, as well as a certification from the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration of the Town of Mamaroneck that the proposed site plan or
amendment meets all requirements of Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of Mamaroneck, or, if it fails to meet all such requirements, those
variances which would be necessary in order for the applicant to obtain a
building permit. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
(21) The location of fire and other emergency zones, including the location of fire
hydrants.
(22) The location, height, design and direction of all exterior and rooftop structures
and facilities, including the placement of noise baffles and appropriate
screening, provided that all are in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
240, Zoning, § 240-56, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck and such
other provisions of law as may be applicable.
§ 177-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 177-10
177:6
§ 177-11. Referral of applications. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Planning Board shall forward one copy of the site plan application to the Town
Engineer, the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration, the Fire Department, the County Planning Department, the
Traffic Committee and the State Department of Transportation, if the site plan shows
frontage along a state highway, and other local, state, county, regional and federal
agencies having jurisdiction, as well as to any technical consultants that the Planning
Board, in its discretion, deems necessary or appropriate for a thorough review of the
application.
§ 177-12. Public hearing and action by Planning Board.
(23) The proposed location and design of all parking and access facilities as are
required for the handicapped pursuant to the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(24) A list of all property owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the
perimeter of the property which is the subject of the application, along with
their mailing addresses as are recorded in the Assessor's office of the Town of
Mamaroneck, with a certification by the person preparing said list that he or
she has compared the list to the records maintained in the Assessor's office of
the Town of Mamaroneck and that they are accurate and contain the names
and addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of the perimeter of the
subject property.
(25) Any other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine and provide
for the proper enforcement of this chapter as determined by the approving
agency.
B. If the site plan indicates a development in stages, a supplementary plan shall be
submitted simultaneously with the proposed site plan, indicating the total
contemplated development.
C. A site plan, following approval by the approving agency, shall be valid for a period
of 24 months from the date of such approval. If there is no substantial change in the
condition of the site and/or its environs, site plan approval may be extended by the
approving agency for one additional period of one year.
D. After approval of a complete site plan, subsequent applications for alterations
which are referred to the approving agency by the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration and/or Town
Engineer, in accordance with § 177-7C herein, need only contain documents and
information which directly relate to the alteration under consideration. However,
the alteration will be considered in relation to the entire site plan previously
approved. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
A. Public hearing.
(1) A public hearing on a site plan application shall be scheduled and conducted
§ 177-10 SITE PLAN REVIEW § 177-12
177:7
§ 177-13. Integration of other procedures.
Whenever the circumstances of the proposed development require compliance with this
Chapter 177 and with any other local law, ordinance or requirement of the Town,
the approving agency shall, in all cases where it is practicable, attempt to integrate,
as appropriate, the site plan review as required by this chapter with the procedural
submission requirements of such other local laws, ordinances and requirements;
provided, however, that such attempt to integrate such procedures shall not in any way
interfere with any of the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable local law,
ordinance or requirement.
by the Planning Board, unless such hearing has been waived pursuant to
§ 177-12A(2), within 62 days after certification to the Planning Board, by
the Secretary to the Planning Board, of receipt of a properly completed
application. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 2-16-2005 by L.L.
No. 2-200541]
(2) The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive the hearing requirement after
having made written findings setting forth why such waiver is not inconsistent
with the purpose of this chapter.
(3) If the Planning Board fails to waive or to conduct a hearing within 62 days
after certification, the application shall be deemed to be approved. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. Action by Planning Board.
(1) Within 62 days of the date of the public hearing held after the receipt of a
properly completed application or, where the hearing is waived, within 62 days
after the Planning Board meeting at which the waiver was granted, the
Planning Board shall act to either approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions the site plan application and shall specify what conditions, if any,
are necessary. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(2) Planning Board disapproval shall include written findings.
(3) Approval of amendments to an approved site plan shall be acted upon in the
same manner as an application for the approval of an original site plan. The
fact that a hearing was held or that it was waived upon the original application
does not predetermine how an amended site plan application is to be
processed. Each application should be judged on its own merits and by its
potential impacts.
C. The person applying for the approval of a site plan must comply with the
notification procedures contained in Chapter 144. [Added 2-16-2005 by L.L. No.
2-200542]
41. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law shall become effective 4-30-2005 if it was
filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
42. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law shall become effective 4-30-2005 if it was
filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 177-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 177-14
177:8
§ 177-14. Filing of approved site plan. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The approved site plan shall be revised by the applicant to include all conditions imposed
by the approving agency. It may then be signed and dated by the Secretary to the
Planning Board. The approving agency shall submit a signed copy of the approved site
plan, revised as set forth above, to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
§ 177-15. Fees. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
Every application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in
§ A250-1. Should an agency of the Town having jurisdiction over an application deem it
necessary to hire consultants for technical review and/or on-site inspection, the applicant
shall be required to pay the actual cost to the Town for such services.
§ 177-16. Performance guaranty.
The approving agency may require that public improvements and landscaping be secured
by a performance guaranty in the same manner prescribed for such improvements in
Chapter 190, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck and/or
through the use of letters of credit approved as to form by the Counsel to the Town and
as to substance by the approving agency.
§ 177-17. Waiver of requirements.
Upon a finding by the approving agency that, due to the particular character or limited
nature of a development or change in use or to special conditions peculiar to a site,
the submission of a preliminary and/or final site plan or of certain portions of the
information normally required as part of the site development plan is inappropriate or
unnecessary or that strict compliance with said requirements will cause extraordinary
and unnecessary hardship, the approving agency may vary or waive such submission
or requirements wherever, in the opinion of the approving agency, such variance and
waiver will be consistent with the goal of promoting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the community. The findings for granting such
waiver shall become a part of the public record.
§ 177-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation and be punishable by a fine of
up to $250 for each such violation, except that the placing of any structure on a property
which requires site plan approval or amendment to a site plan approval without first
obtaining said site plan approval shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months.
§ 177-14 SITE PLAN REVIEW § 177-18
177:9

Chapter 178
SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
§ 178-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Site Plan Approval for Residential Development
Law of the Town of Mamaroneck."
§ 178-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to ensure that proposed development and use of land will
preserve and protect environmental features, have a harmonious relationship with
existing or permitted uses of contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods, enhance
the appearance of the community and make sure that the health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the public is fully considered.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below:
FOOTPRINT, AREA — The square footage of the area lying within a footprint of a
building or structure or the area lying within the footprint of an improved surface that is
not a building or a structure.
FOOTPRINT, BUILDING — The outline of the imaginary line formed by the vertical
downward extension of the ends of the roof of a building or structure that is intended
to shelter, house or enclose people, animals or property. This definition applies both to
one-family and two-family dwellings and to accessory buildings or structures that have
a roof.
FOOTPRINT, OTHER IMPROVED SURFACES — The outline of any improved
surface that is not a building or a structure that is intended to shelter, house or enclose
people, animals or property, such as, but not limited to, driveways, patios, walkways,
tennis courts and swimming pools.
MAP — A map of a) the parcel, b) the properties that abut the parcel, c) the properties
immediately across the street and d) the streets that the parcel abuts. To determine
whether a property is "immediately across the street from the parcel," the lot lines of
the parcel shall be projected across the streets on which the parcel abuts. Any property
that such extension touches shall be considered a property "immediately across the street
from the parcel." If the parcel is a corner lot, the lot that is cater-cornered from the parcel
also shall be considered a property that is "immediately across the street from the parcel."
PARCEL — The single lot that is the subject of a site plan application.
§ 177-18 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL § 178-3
178:1
PRINCIPAL USE — A one-family or a two-family dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL SITE PLAN—A map prepared to the specifications of, and containing
the necessary elements required by, the Town Code for either the development of a
parcel with a one-family or a two-family dwelling and/or an accessory use for a onefamily
or a two-family dwelling or the regrading of a parcel only. The map shall show
the arrangement, layout, grading, landscaping and design of the proposal and the other
elements required to be shown by this chapter. In this chapter the words "site plan" are
synonymous with "residential site plan."
SITE DISTURBANCE, AREA — The square footage of the area of a parcel where
construction and/or regrading is proposed.
§ 178-4. Proposed improvements subject to this chapter; exemptions.
A. The following improvements shall be subject to this chapter:
(1) Any construction on a vacant parcel unless exempted by § 178-4C(1). A
vacant parcel includes an improved parcel whose principal use has been
removed.
(2) Construction on an improved parcel where 70% or more of the square footage
of the existing principal use has been or is proposed to be removed.
(3) Where the area of site disturbance of the parcel when divided by the area of
the parcel equals or exceeds for parcels in the:
(a) R-6 Zoning district: 45%.
(b) R-7.5, R-10 and R-15 Zoning Districts: 40%. [Amended 6-15-2016 by
L.L. No. 9-2016]
(c) R-20, R-30 and R-50 Zoning Districts: 35%.
B. Notwithstanding § 178-4A, if within three years after a certificate of occupancy or
a certificate of compliance is issued with respect to a parcel for work that did not
require site plan approval, an application is made by or on behalf of one or more of
the owners to or for whom such certificate was issued for a permit to do more work
on that parcel, and if the work proposed by that application, when combined with
the work for which such certificate had been issued, would have required site plan
approval if both projects had been proposed at the same time, the work proposed
shall require site plan approval.
C. The following activities shall be exempt from this chapter:
(1) Construction on a parcel created by a subdivision plat that was approved by
the Planning Board on or after November 1, 2013, but before January 1, 2016.
This exemption shall not apply to a parcel meeting the description contained
in the preceding sentence for construction that is proposed to be done after the
initial certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance for improvements
on such parcel is issued.
(2) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary
by the Stormwater Management Officer.
§ 178-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 178-4
178:2
§ 178-5. Authority of Planning Board.
The Town Board grants the Planning Board the authority to review and approve, approve
with modifications and/or specific conditions or disapprove site plans and the other
powers set forth in § 274-a, Subdivision 2(a), of the Town Law of the State of New York.
§ 178-6. Application procedure.
The procedure for site plan approval shall involve a three-stage process: a conference
prior to the submission of a site plan application, attendance at meetings of the Planning
Board to allow it to consider the site plan application and to advise the applicant of any
other information that the applicant must supply in order for the Planning Board to have
all of the information it needs in order to make a decision, and a public hearing before the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement this procedure.
§ 178-7. Presubmission conference.
Prior to submitting a site plan application:
(3) Routine landscaping maintenance activity in areas that already have been
cultivated.
(4) Repair or repaving of existing walls, driveways, patios, walkways, tennis
courts and swimming pools, provided the parcel is not regraded in the process.
(5) Emergency activity needed to be done immediately in order to protect life,
property or natural resources.
(6) Reconstruction of a principal use that has been destroyed by fire or other
casualty, provided the reconstructed principal use is located within the same
footprint of the destroyed principal use.
(7) Construction undertaken pursuant to a building permit issued before the day
on which this chapter becomes effective.
D. This chapter shall not apply to a parcel for which an application for a building
permit, complete in all respects, was filed with the Building Department before the
day on which this chapter becomes effective.
A. The applicant shall meet in person with the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, the Town Engineer and
such other members of the Town staff or outside consultants as the Town staff
considers appropriate based upon the nature of the application to discuss the
applicant's proposal in order that subsequent steps be undertaken with a clear
understanding of the Planning Board's requirements for reviewing the site plan
application; and
B. The applicant must show that any variance or special permit required in order to
develop the parcel in accordance with the proposed site plan has been granted or, in
the case of a special permit that an application therefor has been submitted. If an
application for a required special permit has not been submitted, the applicant must
§ 178-4 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL § 178-7
178:3
§ 178-8. Contents of application; filing.
represent that an application therefor will be submitted to the Planning Board when
the site plan application is submitted.
A. Within six months of the presubmission conference, 19 copies of the application for
site plan approval shall be filed with the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, accompanied by a
detailed development plan prepared by a licensed architect or professional engineer,
under professional seal, drawn upon a certified survey of the parcel, prepared by a
licensed surveyor. The plan shall contain:
(1) A deed recorded in the office of the Westchester County Clerk showing that
the applicant is the owner of the parcel. If the applicant is not the owner, the
owner shall submit a letter authorizing a representative or a contract vendee to
proceed with the application and consenting to the application for site plan
approval.
(2) The map, which shall show all of the improvements on the parcel and on the
other properties shown on the map.
(3) The location of any zoning district lines lying within the area shown on the
map.
(4) The length, width, height, location and design of the existing buildings and
structures on the parcel that are not designated for demolition or removal; the
length and width of the other improved surfaces on the parcel; the area of the
footprint of the existing buildings and structures on the parcel; and the area of
the footprint of the other improved surfaces on the parcel.
(5) The length, width, height, location and design of the buildings and structures
proposed for the parcel; the length and width of the other improved surfaces
proposed for the parcel; the area of the footprint of the buildings and structures
proposed for the parcel; and the area of the footprint of the other improved
surfaces proposed for the parcel.
(6) Any proposed division of any building into units for separate occupancy.
(7) The distances between existing buildings or structures on the parcel and the
distances between existing buildings and structures and other improved
surfaces on the parcel.
(8) The distances between the buildings or structures that will exist on the parcel
after all construction or regrading is completed and the distances between the
buildings and structures and other improved surfaces that will exist on the
parcel after all construction or regrading is completed.
(9) A topographical map showing a) both the existing topography and the
proposed final grade elevations at intervals of two feet or less and the existing
grade on properties that abut the parcel for a distance of 10 feet from each of
the parcel's lot lines, and b) detailed information on the methods proposed to
be used to retain, stabilize and/or refurbish regraded areas.
§ 178-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 178-8
178:4
§ 178-9. Referral of applications.
The Secretary of the Planning Board shall forward one copy of the site plan application
to the Town Engineer, the Building Inspector, the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration, the Westchester Joint Water Works, and
other local, state, county, regional and federal agencies having jurisdiction, as well as to
any consultants that the Planning Board, in its discretion, deems necessary or appropriate
for a thorough review of the application. The Planning Board may, but is not compelled
to, consider the failure of the Westchester Joint Water Works to submit comments upon
the site plan application within 45 days after such application is forwarded to it to be an
indication that such nonresponding entity has no objection to the site plan application.
§ 178-10. Public hearing and action by Planning Board.
(10) The location of all existing watercourses, intermittent streams, wetland areas,
rock outcrops, wooded areas and other significant existing features that lie
within the perimeter of the map.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed parking areas and driveways.
(12) The location and description of all existing and proposed site improvements,
including but not limited to drainage pipes, drains, culverts, ditches, bridges or
other drainage works, retaining walls and medians, dividers, fences, utilities,
septic systems, lighting, generators, central air-conditioning equipment and
mechanical equipment for swimming pools. Drainage information shall be
provided under seal, by either a New York State licensed professional engineer
or a New York State licensed landscape architect.
(13) The location of all existing and proposed easements.
(14) The location, height, quality and design of all landscaping and buffer areas.
(15) Letters or permits from other agencies having jurisdiction containing
comments on the proposed site plan, as well as a certification from the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration that the proposed site plan meets all requirements of
Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Town Code or, if it fails to meet all such
requirements, those variances or special permits that are necessary in order for
the applicant to obtain a building permit if a site plan application is approved.
B. If the site plan indicates that the total proposed action will not be constructed at the
same time, a supplementary plan shall be submitted simultaneously with the site
plan, indicating what portions of the proposed action shall be constructed in the
future.
C. No building permit can be issued after the first anniversary of the date that the
Planning Board approves a site plan application. If there is no substantial change in
the condition of the parcel and/or its environs, the Planning Board, after conducting
a public hearing, may authorize the issuance of a building permit after the first
anniversary of the date that the Planning Board approved a site plan application but
before the second anniversary thereof.
§ 178-8 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL § 178-10
178:5
§ 178-11. Integration of other procedures.
The Planning Board shall, where practical, integrate the site plan review process with the
requirements of other applicable local laws, ordinances and requirements.
§ 178-12. Standards for reviewing site plans.
The Planning Board shall consider the following standards in reviewing a site plan
application and may modify or add those restrictions or conditions to its approval that
it determines to be necessary or prudent when applying these standards to the site plan
application.
A. Public hearing.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on a site plan application
within 62 days after a properly completed site plan application has been
received.
(2) In its discretion, the Planning Board may waive the public hearing, but to do
so, the Planning Board must make written findings setting forth the reasons
why such waiver will not be deleterious to the public health, safety or general
welfare, is appropriate for the particular site plan and is not inconsistent with
the purpose of this chapter.
(3) Before the public hearing can be opened, the applicant must demonstrate
compliance with the notification procedures contained in Chapter 144.
B. Action by Planning Board.
(1) Within 62 days from the date that the public hearing is closed or waived, the
Planning Board shall approve, disapprove or approve with modifications and/
or specific conditions the site plan application.
(2) Planning Board disapproval shall include written findings explaining the
grounds for disapproving the site plan application.
(3) An application to amend an approved site plan shall follow the same threestage
process as the original application but need only contain documents and
information which directly relate to the amendment under consideration.
However, the amendment will be considered in the context of the entire site
plan previously approved. The fact that a public hearing was waived upon the
original application does not automatically mean that a public hearing on the
amendment will be waived. Each application will be judged on its own merits
and by its potential impacts.
C. The person applying for the approval of a site plan must comply with the
notification procedures contained in Chapter 144. [Added 4-21-2021 by L.L. No.
7-2021]
A. Screening and landscaping. All structures, recreational and parking areas shall be
reasonably landscaped and/or screened so as to minimize, to the extent practical,
the impact on the peace, comfort or repose of reasonable persons of normal
sensitivities residing on the lots shown on the map. The scale and quality of the
§ 178-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 178-12
178:6
§ 178-13. Filing of approved site plan.
landscaping and screening on the parcel shall be harmonious with the character of,
and serve to enhance, the neighborhood.
B. Environmental quality. All bodies of water, wetlands, steep slopes, hilltops, ridge
lines, major stands of trees, outstanding natural topography, significant geological
features and other areas of scenic, ecological and historic value shall be preserved
insofar as possible. Soil erosion shall be prevented insofar as possible. Flood
hazards shall be minimized. Air quality shall be within legal limits. The Planning
Board shall require that all potentially ecological disruptive elements of site
preparation, such as blasting, diversion of watercourses and the like, be conducted
according to the highest standards of professional care.
C. Drainage. There shall be a stormwater pollution prevention plan or surface water
and erosion control plan that complies with the requirements of Chapter 95 of the
Town Code.
D. Location and dimension of buildings. The location, arrangement, size and design of
the buildings and structures shall be comparable to each other and with the parcel
as a whole.
E. Impact of proposal on adjacent land uses. The impact of noise, glare or other
features that disrupt the peace, comfort or repose of reasonable persons of normal
sensitivities residing on adjacent and neighboring properties shall be minimized to
the extent practical both during construction and after construction is complete.
F. Trees. The proposed site plan shall specify the trees exceeding six inches in
diameter at a height of four feet above the ground that the applicant proposes to cut
down and must demonstrate to the Planning Board's satisfaction why he or she
wishes to remove each such tree, as it is the Planning Board's duty to minimize the
number of trees of the aforementioned caliper that will be removed.
G. Regrading. Regrading shall comply with the conditions set forth in § 95-11 of the
Town Code and shall be designed so that the final grade of the parcel does not alter
the natural drainage patterns in such a way as to increase or concentrate current
runoff from the parcel onto the street or onto the lots that border the parcel.
H. Staging. The Planning Board shall designate the area of the parcel where the
materials and the equipment to be used shall be stored during construction and the
location of portable sanitary facilities that may be installed during construction. The
area so designated shall be the area that, in the judgment of the Planning Board, will
minimize, to the extent practical, the impact on the peace, comfort or repose of
persons residing on adjacent and neighboring properties and will reasonably protect
the remainder of the parcel from being disturbed.
A. The applicant shall submit five hardcopies and one digital copy (both in PDF and
TIF format) of an approved site plan.
B. If a site plan is approved with modifications and/or specific conditions, the
approved site plan shall be revised by the applicant to include all modifications and
conditions imposed by the Planning Board.
§ 178-12 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL § 178-13
178:7
§ 178-14. Fees.
Every application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by the fee set forth
in § A250-1. Should the Planning Board consider it necessary to hire consultants for
technical review and/or on-site inspection, the applicant shall be required to reimburse
the Town for such services or pay those consultants directly.
§ 178-15. Waiver of requirements.
If due to the particular character or the limited nature of the development for which a site
plan is sought, or due to special conditions peculiar to the parcel, or if strict compliance
with this chapter will cause extraordinary and unnecessary hardship, the Planning Board
may waive or vary the submission of a site plan application or of certain information
otherwise required as part of the application. The Planning Board also may waive or vary
such submission or requirements if, in its opinion, to do so will be consistent with the
goal of promoting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of
the public. The findings for granting such waiver or a variance shall be entered into the
public record.
§ 178-16. Minor revisions.
The Town Engineer or the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Development may approve minor revisions to an approved
site plan, necessitated by field conditions encountered during the course of construction
that could not have been anticipated during the approval process, so long as such revision
will not materially change the approved site plan and will not adversely impact the
neighboring properties or the environment.
§ 178-17. Approval required for issuance of permits.
§ 178-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation and be punishable by a fine not
less than $250 and not more than $500 for each such violation, except that commencing
construction of, or placing any structure on, a parcel which requires site plan approval
or an amendment to an approved site plan without first obtaining site plan approval shall
constitute a violation and be punishable by a fine not less than $500 and not more than
C. Approved site plans shall be signed and dated by the Town Engineer, who shall
submit one signed copy of the approved site plan to the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the development of a parcel that requires site
plan approval until a signed site plan is delivered to the Building Inspector or the
Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration.
B. No certificate of occupancy or compliance for any structure or use upon or within
the parcel shall be issued until all of the required conditions of the site plan approval
have been met. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Development may revoke any such certificate if the
parcel ceases to conform to the approved site plan and conditions attached thereto.
§ 178-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 178-18
178:8
$2,500.
§ 178-18 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF RESIDENTIAL § 178-18
178:9

Chapter 183
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106. Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
§ 183-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the orderly collection of solid waste and the
recycling of certain materials and to comply with § 120-aa of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York as enacted in § 23 of the Solid Waste Management Act of
1988, Chapter 70 of the 1988 Laws of New York State.
§ 183-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — Any enclosed structure having a roof and intended to be used for
residential, commercial, industrial, social and/or institutional purposes.
BULKY METALS—Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing machines, airconditioning
units, boilers, freezers, water tanks, lawn mowers, metal window and door
frames, other large metal appliances and any other items as may be determined from
time to time by the Commission.
BULKY WASTE — Furniture, including but not limited to beds, mattresses, chairs,
tables, rugs and carpets, wood, windows, linoleum, books and any other items as may be
determined from time to time by the Commission.
COMMISSION — The Larchmont-Mamaroneck Joint Garbage Disposal Commission.
DEMOLITION DEBRIS—Concrete, masonry, wood, plaster, aluminum or other siding
material, wire, asphalt, ceramic tiles, sheetrock, stones, bricks, clay pipes, concrete pipe,
window panes, dirt, tree stumps and other by-products of new construction activity,
renovation or rebuilding or other modification to a structure, appurtenances and grounds
(other than yard waste) and any other items as may be determined from time to time by
the Commission.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling units.
MULTIPLE-PURPOSE BUILDING — A building used for more than one use (e.g.,
residential, commercial, industrial and/or institutional).
MUNICIPALLY COLLECTED SOLID WASTE — Residential, commercial and
industrial waste that decomposes readily and other waste material routinely produced,
such as food waste (food remains and containers), and refuse and residue which are
collected by the Commission or Commission contractors. The term does not include
bulky metals, bulky waste, demolition debris, newspaper, recyclables or yard waste.
NEWSPAPER — Clean, post-consumer newspapers, including inserts. The term does
§ 178-18 SOLID WASTE § 183-2
183:1
not include newspaper which has been used for purposes inconsistent with recycling,
including but not limited to the wrapping of putrescible materials, packaging or painting.
The Commission may in its discretion further restrict the character of newspaper
included in the term "newspaper."
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building used for commercial, industrial, social
or institutional purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
partnership or any other legal entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The owner, lessee or occupant of a building and, in the
case of a multiple-occupant building, the term shall mean, at the option of the Town of
Mamaroneck, the owner or the party so designated by the owner.
PRIVATE DWELLING — A building containing only one or two dwelling
units.[Amended 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
RECYCLABLES — Such items as may be determined to be such from time to time
by the Commission and may include such items as cardboard, paper, newspaper, glass,
metals and plastics.[Amended 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
SERVICE UNIT — Each separate dwelling within multifamily dwelling, private
dwelling or multiple purpose building and each separate premises within a nonresidential
building or multiple purpose building. For example, in a building containing several
stores and several apartments, each store is a service unit, and each apartment is a service
unit; in a two-family house, each of the two dwellings is a separate service unit. A
premises containing more than one nonresidential building but operated as one entity
shall be a single service unit.
SOLID WASTE—All waste, refuse and residue collected and disposed of by municipal
or private collection.
YARD WASTE — Such materials as shall be determined from time to time by the
Commission and may include such items as brush, tree branches, twigs, grass and shrub
clippings, weeds and leaves.
§ 183-3. Required containers and storage.
A. Every person in charge within the Town of Mamaroneck is required to store the
solid waste that may accumulate on the premises over which he/she has charge in
the type of solid waste container required by this chapter. All containers shall be
stored in the manner required by the Town of Mamaroneck or the Commission.
[Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997; 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
B. Unless otherwise determined by the Town of Mamaroneck or the Commission,
solid waste to be collected from private dwellings shall be placed in watertight,
sturdy plastic containers having tight-fitting plastic covers and a capacity not
greater than 64 gallons. The weight of any such container plus its contents cannot
exceed 100 pounds. No portion of any such container shall be located below the
surrounding grade level. Solid waste shall not be placed out in plastic bags. Material
which is too large to be placed in containers shall be bundled and securely tied.
Such bundles shall not exceed four feet in length. Any tree branches included in
such bundles shall not exceed six inches in diameter. No container or bundle shall
§ 183-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 183-3
183:2
§ 183-4. Collection procedure. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
exceed 75 pounds in weight. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997;
1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
C. The Commission or the Town of Mamaroneck may require multifamily dwellings,
multiple-purpose buildings or nonresidential buildings to use watertight, sturdy
plastic containers having tight-fitting plastic covers and a capacity not greater than
96 gallons or specific metal containers, such as dumpsters. Such containers shall be
located in enclosures which shall screen them from view. Such enclosures:
[Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997; 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
(1) Shall be constructed of stockade fence material with hinged gates and with
latches to hold the gates closed;
(2) May be constructed of other material with the approval of the Town of
Mamaroneck Board of Architectural Review; and
(3) Shall have a height of the greater of five feet or 12 inches higher than the
containers which they enclose.
D. Prior to construction of any enclosure, a fence permit must be obtained from the
Building Department of the Town of Mamaroneck. If the Commission provides
collection services for the building, the Building Department shall not issue a
permit without obtaining the approval of the Commission.
E. The owner of any building which, prior to the effective date of this chapter, has an
enclosure to house all the containers which are required to be enclosed hereunder
shall not be required to erect a new enclosure even if the existing enclosure does
not meet all of the specific requirements of this chapter, provided that the existing
enclosure does screen the containers from view.43
A. The person in charge shall cause recyclables to be separated from solid waste.
B. The person in charge shall place all material intended for collection by the
Commission or the Town of Mamaroneck where it will be readily accessible for
collection as follows:
(1) Solid waste to be collected from private dwellings shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the curb in front of the dwelling. It shall be placed to the house side
of the curb, not in the street. If there is no curb, it shall be placed on the edge
of the property adjacent to the paved area of the street, but not in the street.
Solid waste shall be set out for collection no earlier than dusk of the day before
a scheduled collection day and no later than 6:30 a.m. (prevailing time) on a
scheduled collection day. [Amended 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
(2) Municipally collected solid waste of multifamily dwellings, multiple-purpose
buildings and nonresidential buildings shall be left for collection in accordance
with the regulations of the Commission.
43. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the required completion date for construction of enclosures, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021.
§ 183-3 SOLID WASTE § 183-4
183:3
§ 183-5. Special requirements for multifamily dwellings, multiple-purpose
buildings and nonresidential buildings.
§ 183-6. (Reserved)45
(3) Other material collected by the Commission or the Town of Mamaroneck shall
be placed on the curb (or if no curb, on the edge of the property adjacent to the
paved area of the street or roadway, but not in the street or roadway), readily
accessible to the collection vehicle. Such material shall be set out for collection
no earlier than dusk of the day before a scheduled collection day and no later
than 6:30 a.m. (prevailing time) on a scheduled collection day. If collection
vehicles are required to enter private property for collection of material, such
entry will be at the sole risk of the property owner. [Amended 1-20-2021 by
L.L. No. 1-2021]
(4) Recyclables shall be placed in containers purchased from the Commission or
in other containers approved by the Commission. The containers shall be
placed to the building side of the curb, not in the street. If there is no curb, they
shall be placed on the edge of the property adjacent to the paved area of the
street, but not in the street. Recyclables shall be set out for collection no earlier
than dusk of the day before a scheduled collection day and no later than 6:30
a.m. (prevailing time) on a scheduled collection day. [Amended 1-20-2021 by
L.L. No. 1-2021]
(5) There shall be no collection from any building where snow and ice has not
been cleared from access pathways or driveways.44
A. The person in charge of a multifamily dwelling, multiple-purpose building or
nonresidential building shall designate a common area on the building premises in
which solid waste is to be accumulated.
B. The person in charge of a multifamily dwelling, multiple-purpose building or
nonresidential building shall be responsible for the placement of solid waste for
collection in accordance with regulations promulgated from time to time by the
Commission and the Town of Mamaroneck.
C. The placement of solid waste by a lessee of a multifamily dwelling, multiplepurpose
building or nonresidential building in an area other than the common area
designated by the person in charge shall be deemed a violation of this chapter by
such lessee and not by the person in charge, provided that the person in charge shall
have properly designated a common area and shall have given the lessee adequate
notice thereof.
44. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(6), regarding the placement of material for collection prior to sundown, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021.
45. Editor's Note: Former § 183-6, Multiple-occupant commercial and industrial buildings, was deleted 10-22-1997 by L.L.
No. 13-1997.
§ 183-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 183-7
183:4
§ 183-7. Special requirements for certain multifamily dwellings, multiple-purpose
buildings and nonresidential buildings. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No.
13-1997]
Owners and occupants of multifamily dwellings, multiple-purpose buildings and
nonresidential buildings whose solid waste is not collected and disposed of by the
Commission shall provide for the collection of solid waste and shall also separate
recyclables from other solid waste. The recyclables shall be collected by the Commission
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Commission.
§ 183-8. Yard waste.
Yard waste shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Commission.
§ 183-9. Bulky metals.
Bulky metals shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 183-10. Disposal of bulky waste. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
Bulky waste shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Commission.
§ 183-11. Limitations on collections. [Amended 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
A. Quantities of solid waste to be collected are limited as follows:
(1) The equivalent of no more than three sixty-four-gallon containers of solid
waste shall be collected from each private dwelling each collection day.
[Amended 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
(2) Yard waste. Bundled, tied or containered yard waste not exceeding the
equivalent of three thirty-five-gallon containers shall be collected from each
service unit once each week. Trimmings, tree branches and logs may not
exceed four feet in length and six inches in diameter.
(3) Bulky waste. The equivalent of no more than one yard of bulky waste shall be
collected from each service unit once each week. The Commission shall have
the authority to decline to collect certain bulky waste according to the
Commission's ability to collect and/or dispose of such bulky waste. Wood
pieces may not exceed four feet in length and six inches in diameter. In the
event that bulky waste is declined for collection, the waste must be removed
from the curb within 24 hours of receipt of a notice of refusal.
(4) Leaf removal. During the fall season, leaves must be placed on the curb (or if
no curb, on the edge of the property adjacent to the street or roadway, but not
in the street or roadway) and will be collected in bulk in accordance with a
schedule determined by the Town of Mamaroneck. At all other times, leaves
must be bagged for curbside collection.
§ 183-7 SOLID WASTE § 183-11
183:5
§ 183-11.1. Commission transfer station. [Added 10-22-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
§ 183-12. Prohibited acts.
(5) Christmas trees. Trees shall be placed on the curb (or if no curb, on the edge
of the property adjacent to the street or roadway, but not in the street or
roadway) and will be collected in January of each year. Christmas trees are
exempted from the dimension requirements for yard waste.
B. The Superintendent of the Commission shall have the authority to decline to collect
certain solid waste according to the Commission's ability to collect and/or dispose
of such solid waste.
C. The following materials will not be collected:
(1) "Regulated medical waste," as defined in § 1389-aa of the Public Health Law
of the State of New York as enacted in Chapter 438 of the 1993 Laws of New
York State.
(2) Material classified as toxic waste by 6 NYCRR Part 366, The Identification
and Listing of Hazardous Wastes Pursuant to Article 27, Title 9 of the
Environmental Conservation Law, or any ensuing legislation more restrictive
than currently in force.
(3) Demolition debris.
(4) Waste products not accepted by the County of Westchester according to its
regulations.
D. The Commission will collect on scheduled days in accordance with its rules,
amounts of solid waste according to the limitations set forth in this law. Waste in
excess of the amounts set forth in this law must be removed or caused to be
removed by the person in charge at his expense.
A. Any resident of the Town of Mamaroneck may deliver or dispose of solid waste,
bulky waste, yard waste or recyclables at the Commission transfer station in
accordance with Commission limitations, rules and regulations. Only waste
generated from within the Town of Mamaroneck will be accepted at the transfer
station.
B. Subject to the approval of the Town of Mamaroneck, the Commission may establish
fees for the delivery and/or disposal of such items at the transfer station.
C. The delivery of disposal of waste at the transfer station is subject to the rules and
regulations of the Commission.
A. Recyclables shall not be placed in containers holding other solid waste.
B. Materials and objects other than recyclables shall not be mixed with recyclables
which have been left for collection.
C. Upon placement of solid waste for collection pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter, no person other than the person in charge or the Commission or its
§ 183-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 183-12
183:6
§ 183-13. Exemptions. [Amended 1-20-2021 by L.L. No. 1-2021]
If a person in charge of a private dwelling satisfies the criteria for exemptions from
the requirements of § 183-4B(1), (3) or (4) of this chapter, as set forth from time to
time by the Commissioners of the Larchmont-Mamaroneck Joint Garbage Disposal
Commission, the Superintendent shall grant such exemption upon such terms and
conditions as may be considered just. Any such exemption must be renewed every two
years.
§ 183-14. Administration. [Amended 6-1-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 10-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Commission may promulgate such regulations as it deems necessary to effect the
provisions of this chapter. Any regulations promulgated by the Commission which will
directly impact the residents of the Town of Mamaroneck shall be subject to the approval
of the Mamaroneck Town Board. All provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by
the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration, or the persons appointed by the Town Board pursuant to § 106-37B.
§ 183-15. Littering.
No person shall, within the Town of Mamaroneck, drop, deposit or otherwise dispose
of any refuse in any public places except within containers provided by the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 183-15.1. Property owners to be responsible for sidewalk.
Persons owning or occupying commercial or private property fronted by or adjacent to
sidewalks shall keep said sidewalks and the space from said sidewalks to the curbline
free from litter.
§ 183-16. Cleaning of sidewalks.
Each day, except Sundays and legal holidays, the sidewalk of each business
establishment shall be swept clean prior to 10:00 a.m., and such material shall not be
swept into the roadway but shall be placed in containers as required by this chapter. Each
store occupant (i.e. the person in charge of the business being conducted at the store) is
responsible for keeping the sidewalk in front of the store clean during business hours.
§ 183-17. Unsanitary conditions prohibited.
No person shall, within the Town of Mamaroneck, allow, permit or cause to exist any
unsanitary or filthy condition in or about any premises owned and/or used or occupied
designee (or a private carter with respect to buildings whose solid waste or any
portion thereof is not collected and disposed of by the Commission) shall remove
or disturb such solid waste. Nothing in the preceding sentence shall limit any
prohibitions or responsibilities set forth elsewhere hereunder.
D. The owners and occupants who are subject to § 183-7 shall not mix recyclables with
other solid waste and shall not mix other materials and objects with recyclables.
§ 183-12 SOLID WASTE § 183-17
183:7
by such person.
§ 183-18. Use of public garbage receptacles.
§ 183-19. Penalties for offenses.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed in any public garbage receptacle in the
Town of Mamaroneck any bag, the largest side dimension of which exceeds 10
inches by 15 inches, which contains any objects within it.
B. No person shall place or cause to be placed in any public garbage receptacle any
box with a capacity in excess of 350 cubic inches. Discarding of such boxes in
public receptacles is prohibited even if they are crushed, compacted, cut up or torn
up.
C. No person shall empty into a public garbage receptacle any bag or box of a capacity
described in Subsections A and B above.
D. No person shall deposit in any public garbage receptacle any household garbage
such as containers which are emptied prior to being removed from the household;
wrapping or packaging which was removed within the household from the object(s)
wrapped or packaged.
E. No person operating or employed by a commercial or industrial establishment shall
place any garbage emanating from the commercial or industrial establishment in
any public garbage receptacle.
A. Where recyclables are mixed with other municipally collected solid waste in a
container intended for collection and disposal, the Commission or its designee may,
in its discretion, decline to collect any and all of the contents of such container and
may leave a notice with the container noting the Commission's or its designee's
action. In the event that the Commission or its designee declines to collect under
this provision, it shall be the responsibility of the person in charge at the collection
point to remove said recyclables from such container prior to subsequent collection.
B. Where materials other than recyclables are left for pickup as recyclables in
accordance with this chapter, the Commission or its designee may, in its discretion,
decline to collect any and all of the contents of the container and may leave a notice
with the container noting the Commission's or its designee's action. In the event that
the Commission declines to collect under this provision, it shall be the
responsibility of the person in charge at the collection point to remove all materials
other than recyclables from the container prior to subsequent collection.
C. Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to $250 for each
such violation or by imprisonment, for the third and each subsequent offense within
a one-year period, for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day during
which a violation exists shall be considered a separate and distinct violation
punishable as a separate violation. [Amended 6-1-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
D. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be required by the
Commission to use clear plastic bags as prescribed by the Commission for
municipally collected solid waste to be left for collection and disposal for a period
§ 183-17 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 183-19
183:8
§ 183-20. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply only to that part of the Town of Mamaroneck outside of
incorporated villages, and whenever and wherever the words "Town of Mamaroneck"
are used, such words shall mean the Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated
villages.
§ 183-21. Conflicting provisions.
In the event that the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of another ordinance
or local law are in conflict, this chapter shall supersede said conflicting ordinance or
local law. This chapter supersedes Chapter 30 of the General Ordinances of the Town of
Mamaroneck enacted on March 14, 1990, and Local Law No. 1-1990.
§ 183-22. Construal of provisions.
not to exceed one year.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the retention of recyclables by
any person.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from dropping off
recyclables at a recycling facility designated by the Commission.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from transferring
recyclables privately through sale or gift, provided that in no event shall such
recyclables be left at the curb for any private pickup.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the private composting of yard
waste by any person on his own property, provided that all other laws, rules and
regulations with respect thereto are complied with.
§ 183-19 SOLID WASTE § 183-22
183:9

Chapter 187
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 154.
Solid waste — See Ch. 183.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 187-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COUNTY ROADS — Those roads constructed, improved, maintained and repaired
under Article 6 of the Highway Law and roads constructed or improved under a general
or special law which are maintained by the county.
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.
SIDEWALK — That paved portion of a street intended for pedestrian use and lying
between the curbline of the street and the adjacent property line.
STATE HIGHWAY — Those highways constructed or improved under the Highway
Law at the sole expense of the state, including the highways specified and described
in §§ 340 and 341 of the Highway Law and acts amendatory thereof, including the
highways heretofore classified or referred to as county highways elsewhere in the
Highway Law and heretofore constructed or improved at the joint expense of the state,
county and Town or state and county, as heretofore provided by law.
STREET—Any street, road or other public way dedicated to and accepted by the Town,
including all the area thereof lying within the bounds of the dedicated right-of-way.
TOWN — The unincorporated section of the Town of Mamaroneck.
TOWN HIGHWAY — Those highways constructed, improved or maintained by the
Town with the aid of the state or county, under the provisions of the Highway Law,
including all highways in towns, outside of incorporated villages constituting separate
road districts which are not state highways or county roads, as defined in this section.
TOWN SUPERINTENDENT — The Town Superintendent of Highways.
VEHICLE —Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon the street.
§ 187-2. Construction of sidewalks along county roads or state highways.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck may, by resolution, direct the Town
Superintendent to construct a sidewalk along a described portion of any county road
or state highway in the manner and not exceeding an expense to be specified in the
resolution, and the expense of constructing such sidewalk shall be a Town charge
§ 183-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 187-2
187:1
§ 187-3. Construction of sidewalks by property owner.
Any property owner, after applying for and receiving a permit, may construct a sidewalk
or curb on Town property or may build a drain from any structure, enclosure or lot of
ground at his own expense. Before the owner may proceed with the work, the Town
Engineer shall establish proper grades and the same shall be followed in laying such
sidewalk, curb or drain. The width, materials and construction of such sidewalks, curbs
and drains shall fully conform to standard specifications for such work. No drainage
piping shall be allowed to discharge onto the surface of any public right-of-way.
§ 187-4. Supervision of work.
No person or corporation shall have the right to make any opening in any street or
highway, including any sidewalk or curb, and all such openings in streets, sidewalks or
curbs must be made under the supervision of the Superintendent of Highways and by
employees working under him, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 187-5. Street opening permit required; fee. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
Any individual, corporation, public service corporation or any municipal board or body
which is required to maintain substructures in any street or highway, desiring to make or
to have made an opening in a street or highway, must make written application for the
same, addressed to the Superintendent of Highways. The Superintendent of Highways,
except in the case of a public service corporation or municipal board or body required to
maintain such substructures in any street or highway, shall have the discretion whether
the opening shall be made by Town employees or may be made by the applicant. An
application for a permit must be accompanied by the fee set forth in § A250-1, made
payable to the Superintendent of Highways.
§ 187-6. Bond or indemnity agreement for street openings.
and shall be paid in the same manner as other Town charges.
B. No such sidewalks shall be built along any state highway until the State
Superintendent of Public Works shall have given his consent thereto, pursuant to
§ 54 of the Highway Law, and no such sidewalk shall be built along any county
road until the County Superintendent of Highways shall have given his consent
thereto, pursuant to § 136 of the Highway Law.
A. If the street opening is to be made by a person or corporation other than a municipal
or public service corporation, the Town Superintendent of Highways may grant a
permit for such street opening and make such conditions for the granting of such
permit as he considers necessary under the circumstances, including a condition
that such person or corporation shall furnish to the Town of Mamaroneck a surety
bond in an amount approved by him and in such form as may be approved by the
Counsel to the Town, issued by a casualty or indemnity insurance company, which
bond shall indemnify the Town against all liability and expense by reason of any
act or omission in and about the opening of such street. In every case where the
Superintendent of Highways issues a permit for the opening of a street or highway,
he shall require the applicant for the permit to obtain proper public liability
§ 187-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 187-6
187:2
§ 187-7. Safety measures.
All openings in highways shall be properly guarded and shall, between sundown and
sunrise, be plainly lighted with red or yellow lights.
§ 187-8. Responsibility for utilities.
When the work is not done by Town employees, every applicant obtaining a permit
to open a highway shall be solely responsible for the protection and functioning of all
drains, sewers, basins, gas, water pipes, telephone and electric wires and conduits.
§ 187-9. Restoration of surface.
The surface of the highway opened shall be restored to as good condition as previous to
the excavation.
§ 187-10. Deposits on streets.
No person shall deposit any article, material or refuse or in any manner obstruct the
highway or any part thereof except as provided in § 187-11 of this chapter. Nor shall they
pipe a sump pump, roof or footing drains or other water source directly onto or directed
from a point source towards or onto the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way.
§ 187-11. Building materials permit.
No building material shall be placed upon any highway without a permit for the
Superintendent of Highways. Such permit shall be for a period no longer than three
months and shall not authorize the obstruction of any sidewalk or gutter or of more than
one-third (1/3) of the roadway immediately opposite the lot upon which the building
is to be erected and shall be revocable for cause by the Town Board. The holder of
such permit shall so guard such material with red lights at night as to avoid accidents.
Upon revocation of such permit, all materials deposited pursuant to such permit shall be
removed within 48 hours and the highway restored to its original condition.
§ 187-12. Driving across sidewalks and curbs; permit.
No vehicle shall be driven across any sidewalk or curb except at graded crossings in
existence and such as may be hereafter constructed without a temporary permit from
insurance for himself, his contractors, agents or servants, protecting the Town and
its Superintendent of Highways against any claim for injury to person or property
occasioned by the opening of such street.
B. In the case of a public service corporation or municipal board or body which is
required to maintain substructures in any street or highway, the Counsel to the
Town, in lieu of a bond, may accept and approve an indemnity agreement between
the Town and such public service corporation, municipal board or body which is
required to maintain substructures in any street or highway or liability insurance
protecting the Town and its Superintendent of Highways against all liability or
expense of whatever kind or nature, by reason of any act or omission of such public
service corporation, municipal board or body.
§ 187-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 187-12
187:3
the Superintendent of Highways. The applicant for such a permit shall deposit with
the Superintendent of Highways such sum as is considered by the Superintendent of
Highways sufficient to indemnify the Town of Mamaroneck against any damage to the
sidewalk or curb but not less than $100.
§ 187-13. Prompt removal of snow and ice.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge or control of any
building or lot of land abutting upon any street or public place where the sidewalk is
flagged, concreted or otherwise paved or laid shall, within 24 hours after the snow ceases
to fall, remove the snow and ice from such sidewalk so as to provide a continuous
passageway. In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it
cannot be removed without injury to the pavement, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant
or other person hereby charged with the duty to remove the same shall, within the time
specified above, cause the sidewalk to be strewn with ashes, sand and/or some other
abrasive substance and, thereafter as the weather shall permit, shall thoroughly clean said
sidewalk.
§ 187-14. Applicability; supersession of § 151 of Highway Law.
§ 187-15. Penalties for offenses.
A. This chapter shall not apply to the opening of streets or highways for the purpose of
making sewer house connections which are covered by the provisions of resolution
or ordinance adopted by the Town Board, August 18, 1936, and amended April 23,
1947, pursuant to the provisions of § 201 of the Town Law.46
B. This chapter supersedes the provisions of § 151 of the Highway Law as it relates to
the construction and maintenance of sidewalks along county roads and state
highways as they apply to the Town of Mamaroneck, Westchester County, State of
New York.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, as the same may be from
time to time amended, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 days or by a fine of not
more than $500, or both.
B. Additional penalties. Violation of § 187-13 of this chapter shall subject the
offender, for each offense, to a civil penalty not to exceed $25.
C. Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct violation of said several provisions of this chapter and shall
render every person liable for a separate penalty for each such violation.
46. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 158, Plumbing, and Ch. 173, Sewers.
§ 187-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 187-15
187:4
Chapter 190
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 187-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 187-15
190:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Authority. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
By authority of the resolution adopted by the Town Board on the eighth day of
September 1954, pursuant to the provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law, the Town
of Mamaroneck Planning Board has the power and authority to approve or disapprove
plats for subdivisions as provided in the Town Law. In pursuance of this authority,
the Planning Board hereby promulgates the following requirements relating to the
submission and consideration of subdivision plats.47
§ 190-2. Policy.
A. It is declared to be the policy of the Town Planning Board to consider land
subdivisions as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development
of the Town. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or
other menace. Proper provision shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage and
other needed improvements. The proposed streets shall compose a convenient
system conforming to the Official Map and shall be properly related to the
proposals shown on the Master Plan, if and when such a plan is adopted by the
Planning Board. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location as to
accommodate the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and air and to
facilitate fire protection. In proper cases, park areas of suitable location, size and
character for playground or other recreational purposes shall be shown on the
subdivision plat.
B. Should any of this chapter conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of the
Town Law, such provision of the Town Law shall apply. In order that land may be
subdivided in accordance with this policy, this chapter is hereby adopted.
47. Editor's Note: A resolution was adopted 8-8-1984 which increased the number of Planning Board members from five to
seven.
§ 190-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-2
190:3

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 190-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as follows:
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS — A map of the subdivision, which shall show the
subdivision lot outlines and which shall give particular attention to the details, limits and
types of all proposed construction of pavements, curbs, sewers, drains, water and other
appurtenances.
FINAL LAYOUT — A print of (and identical with) the proposed final plat submitted
for approval of the Planning Board. On approval, it is filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Board for future reference in determination as to whether requirements of the
Planning Board with respect to the subdivision shown thereon have been complied with.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan prepared by the Planning Board, pursuant
to § 272-a of the Town Law, which indicates the general location recommended for
the various functional classes of public works, places and structures and for the general
physical development of the unincorporated part of the Town of Mamaroneck and
includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof. Wherever reference is made hereinafter to the Master Plan, such
reference shall apply only if such Master Plan has been adopted by the Town Board.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map of the unincorporated area of the Town of Mamaroneck
established by the Town Board under § 270 of the Town Law, showing the streets,
highways and parks theretofore laid out, and adopted and established by law and any
amendments thereto adopted by the Town Board or additions thereto resulting from the
approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the subsequent filing of such
approved plats.
PLANNING BOARD — The Town of Mamaroneck Planning Board.
PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision
is presented to the Planning Board for approval, in ink on tracing cloth, which will be
submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT—The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration as a
declaration of intent.
SPECIFICATIONS — Such specifications relating to street and sanitary improvements
as may be required by the Town Engineer or Planning Board.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more plots, lots,
sites or other divisions of land for immediate or future sale or for building
development.[Amended 12-17-1986]
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly designated Engineer of the Town of Mamaroneck or
any licensed professional engineer employed by the Town Board and directed by said
Town Board to provide services for the Planning Board.
ZONING MAP—The existing map which forms a part of Chapter 240, Zoning, adopted
and/or amended by the Town Board.
§ 190-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-3
190:5

ARTICLE III
Procedures for Plats
§ 190-4. Applications; layouts.
Whenever any subdivision of land as hereinbefore defined is proposed to be made
either as a new subdivision or where plats already filed in the office of the Clerk of
Westchester County prior to the appointment of the Planning Board are entirely or
partially undeveloped and before any contract for the sale of or any offer to sell any part
of such subdivision is made and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall
be granted, the subdividing owner thereof or his agent shall apply, in writing, to said
Board for approval of such subdivision. For such subdivision, he should first file with
the Planning Board a preliminary layout and subsequently a final layout and a formal
plat as hereinafter specified in Article IV of these requirements, the intent being that the
Planning Board be afforded a review of any previously filed subdivisions that have not
been fully developed.
§ 190-5. Compliance required.
§ 190-6. Submission of preliminary layout.
Five copies each of the preliminary layout designated as such, at a scale not smaller than
50 feet to the inch, and indicating existing contours, waterways or any rock outcroppings
and other pertinent topographic features as further specified herein shall be filed with
the Planning Board. The Planning Board will then study the preliminary layout in
connection with the topography of the area, the existing requirements of Chapter 240,
Zoning, the Master Plan and the Official Map and will take into consideration the general
requirements of the community, the character of the neighborhood and the best use of the
land to be subdivided. Particular attention will be given to matters enumerated in § 277
of the Town Law, as well as to specific requirements for parks, playgrounds, school
sites, boulevards and main thoroughfares, the adequacy of street connections and the
suitability of the land for development.
§ 190-7. Decision on preliminary layout.
A. The preliminary layout, final layout, street profiles, parks, playgrounds or other
recreational areas and formal subdivision plat and all procedures relating thereto
shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions of §§ 276 and 277 of
the Town Law and with these requirements except where variation from these
requirements may be specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
B. The person applying for the approval of a subdivision must comply with the
notification procedures contained in Chapter 144. [Added 2-16-2005 by L.L. No.
2-200548]
A. After arriving at tentative conclusions, the Planning Board will discuss the
preliminary layout with the subdivider or his agents at a regular meeting or a special
meeting duly convened of said Board.
48. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law shall become effective 4-30-2005 if it was
filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 190-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-7
190:7
§ 190-8. Submission of final layout; certificate of approval. [Amended 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996]
The subdivider, following receipt of this communication with respect to the preliminary
layout and the changes, if any are to be made therein, shall, within six months thereafter,
make a submission to the Planning Board satisfactory to the Town Engineer, which
shall consist of such number of copies as the Planning Board shall from time to time
require of the final layout of the subdivision plat, accompanied by two separate sets of
prints showing the completed detailed construction drawings, including but not limited
to street profiles, construction details, etc., in accordance with the provisions of Article
IV of this chapter. Before the Planning Board accepts submission of the final layout,
including the construction drawings, and prior to setting the date for the public hearing,
it shall obtain from the Town Engineer or other duly designated official a certificate
stating that the street and any improvements already constructed by the subdivider
or improvements to be constructed in accordance with the construction drawings, as
approved, are satisfactory to him.
B. After such discussion, the Planning Board will communicate, in writing, to the
subdivider:
(1) All specific changes which it believes desirable in the preliminary layout.
(2) The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may
have been requested and which, in its opinion, may be waived without
jeopardy to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
A. If the certificate is with respect to improvements already made, said official shall
certify as to such parts of said improvements that are satisfactory as of the date of
his certificate. Before the Planning Board accepts submission of the final layout of
the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall obtain the approval without qualification
of the Westchester County Department of Health, Westchester Joint Water Works
No. 1 or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction in the premises. Upon
receipt of all such certifications and approvals, in writing and in satisfactory form,
the Planning Board shall accept submission of such final layout and shall set a date
within 62 days of such submission to hold a public hearing or waive such hearing
as required pursuant to § 276 of the Town Law. The Planning Board will then,
within 62 days from and after the date of the final submission above provided,
approve, modify or disapprove such final layout and the construction drawings by
endorsement thereon, and, upon approval, the subdivider shall submit to the
Planning Board the original Mylar and such copies as the Planning Board requires
of the final plat and the detailed construction drawings. The Mylar shall then be
turned over to the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration for safekeeping. If the Planning Board requires any
modifications of the subdivision plat or the construction drawings at the public
hearing, the subdivider shall be required to make such changes to the final plat and
construction drawings as submitted and resubmit new prints with the original Mylar
to the Planning Board at its next meeting with the approval of the Town Engineer,
and final action by the Planning Board will not be taken prior to the further meeting
at which these plans are submitted. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 190-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 190-9
190:8
§ 190-9. Completion of required improvements; performance bond.
If and when the Planning Board approves the final layout of the subdivision plat or the
construction drawings, the resolution adopted by the Planning Board shall require that
the subdivider complete all improvements in accordance with the plans and construction
drawings as provided in § 277 of the Town Law and with the provisions of this chapter
in all respects except so far as they are specifically waived by the Planning Board or,
alternatively, to file with the Planning Board a performance bond for a term not to
exceed three years and which, in all respects, shall comply with § 277 of the Town
Law and which shall be approved by the Town Board, as provided in said § 277 of the
Town Law. Except where the subdivider indicates by notation on the plat that streets,
highways or parks are not offered for dedication to the public, the subdivider shall also,
by the terms of said resolution, be required to tender offers for deeds of cession, in form
satisfactory to the Counsel to the Town, of all lands included in the beds of streets and
highways and for easements or parks as required by the Planning Board, and a note
of endorsement shall be placed upon the plan or plat reading as follows: "Approval of
this plat by the Planning Board does not constitute an acceptance by the Town of the
dedication of any street, highway, park or other public open space, but such acceptance
shall become effective only upon the adoption of a resolution by the Town Board."
§ 190-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-9
190:9

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards and Plat Requirements
§ 190-10. Requirements and principles.
The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and principles of land
subdivisions:
A. In general, the proposed subdivision shall conform to the Official Map and Master
Plan, if there is one.
B. The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide, where practicable, for
the continuation of principal streets in adjoining subdivision, and such
continuations shall be of a width at least as great as that of such existing connecting
streets. Every subdivision shall preferably have two connections to existing
highways, one of which may be through the streets of an adjoining subdivision.
C. In general, main highways and secondary highways shall not be less than the width
shown on the Official Map or as designated by the Planning Board; parkways and
boulevards shall be of such width as may be designated by the Planning Board. As
a general rule, the width of local streets shall not be less than 50 feet.
D. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall not in general exceed 400 feet in length, shall
have a minimum width of 50 feet and shall be equipped with a turnaround roadway
with a minimum radius of 45 feet to the curb at the closed end.
E. Each block shall be planned to provide two rows of lots, but irregularly shaped
blocks indented by cul-de-sac streets may be considered to be acceptable when
designed in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board.
F. Property line radii at street intersections shall be not less than 25 feet, and future
curblines shall be generally concentric therewith. Side lines of lots, so far as
practicable, shall be at right angles or radial to street lines.
G. Corner lots shall be increased in size to comply with front yard requirements on
both streets, and consideration to future back and side yards shall also be given.
H. Grades of all streets shall be the reasonable minimum but shall not be less than onehalf
of one percent (1/2 of 1%) nor more than 6% for main and secondary highways
nor more than 10% for local streets. All changes in grade shall be done by means of
a vertical curve.
I. Paved rear service streets of not less than 20 feet in width or, in lieu thereof,
adequate off-street loading space, suitably surfaced, shall be provided in connection
with all lots designed for commercial use.
J. In front of areas designated and zoned for commercial use or where the proposed
subdivision requires and the subdivider proposes to file a petition for a change in
zoning to permit such use, the street width shall be increased by such amount on
each side as may be deemed necessary by both the Planning Board and Zoning
Board to assure the free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or
parking vehicles and to provide adequate and safe parking space for such
commercial or business district.
§ 190-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-10
190:11
§ 190-11. Street construction.
Street construction shall be as follows:
Street Classification Local Residential Secondary Business
Minimum width of right-ofway
50 feet 50 feet 60 feet
Minimum width of pavement 26 feet except 30 feet where
the minimum residential lot
size is less than 1/4 acre
30 feet 40 feet
Minimum radius of horizontals
curves
150 feet 300 feet 400 feet
Minimum length of vertical
curves
100 feet, but not less than 20
feet for each 1% algebraic
difference of grade
200 feet but not less
than 30 feet for each 1%
algebraic difference of
grade
200 feet
Minimum length of tangents
between reverse curves
Maximum grade
100 feet 10% 200 feet 6% 200 feet 6%
Minimum grade pen. macadam 1% 1% 1%
Asphalt concrete 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Minimum sight distance 150 feet 250 feet 250 feet
NOTE: Street classification may be indicated on the Master Plan or be determined by the Planning Board.
§ 190-12. Contents of preliminary layout.
The preliminary layout shall be a pencil tracing, at a scale not smaller than 50 feet to
the inch nor larger than 30 feet to the inch. This preliminary layout is in the nature of a
K. In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other to any extent
whatsoever shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the inner street
lines shall be not less than 370 feet on main highways, 275 feet on secondary
highways and 125 feet on local streets; the outer street line in each case shall be
parallel to such inner street line, and future curblines shall be generally concentric
therewith.
L. In subdivisions of 10 acres or more, the Planning Board may require play areas for
public use of up to 10% of the gross area of the subdivision unless the Planning
Board determines otherwise.
M. Variations of the general requirements above outlined may be permitted by the
Planning Board on application to the Planning Board when, in its judgment, special
factors warrant such a variation.
N. All application provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law of the State of New York
and of § 239-k of the General Municipal law shall apply to the proceedings of the
Planning Board.
§ 190-10 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 190-12
190:12
declaration of intent and is for the purpose of permitting the Planning Board to pass upon
the general character of the proposed subdivision, so as to expedite the approval of the
final layout and plat by the Planning Board and Town Engineer. The preliminary layout
shall provide the following information:
§ 190-13. Contents of final layout and plat.
The final layout and plat shall be a map, in ink on tracing cloth to a suitable scale,
A. The proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
B. The name and address of the record owner (if corporate, the name and address of a
principal).
C. The date, true North point, scale and tentative new street names.
D. A map of the tract showing boundaries agreeing with a certified survey.
E. Natural features of importance, such as watercourses, swamps and woodlands.
F. The locations and names of existing streets and highways, easements or other public
properties or rights.
G. A topographic survey showing existing contour lines and waterways at sufficient
intervals to establish the character of the terrain.
H. A scaled plat showing the proposed street locations, limits of work, approximate
proposed lot dimensions and approximate areas of the lots.
I. A dimensional typical section indicating the proposed pavement and sidewalk areas
and curbing treatments.
J. The location of existing sewers, drains and water mains.
K. If the submission covers only a portion of the tract, a light dashed-line sketch of the
prospective future streets for the balance of the tract shall be shown on the same
drawing.
L. The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and streets and
also the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of adjoining
developments.
M. The widths of pavement and sidewalks of adjoining streets.
N. An area map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet as an insert on the same drawing,
showing all streets and property within 1,000 feet of the applicant's property. All
property held by the applicant, in whole or in part, individually or corporately, in
the area should be identified.
O. The approximate location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside
for playground or park use.
P. Zoning districts and boundaries thereof applicable to the subdivision and also such
provisions of the corresponding section of Ch. 240, Zoning, as the Planning Board
may require to be noted on the plan.
§ 190-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-13
190:13
properly prepared and certified and showing the following:
§ 190-14. Detailed construction drawings.
A final layout of the entire tract, in ink on tracing cloth, accompanied by necessary
specifications, shall be submitted to the Town Engineer. The detailed construction
drawings shall be at the same scale as the final layout and plat and shall provide the
following information:
A. Subsections A through F, inclusive, as listed under § 190-12, shall also apply to the
final layout and plat.
B. Lots, numbered and in substantial agreement with § 190-12, with final bearing,
distances and curve data, also showing proposed monument locations and
monument tie lines such as are necessary to permit reestablishment of lot corners
within the subdivision. All dimensions shall be in feet and hundredths of a foot.
C. Streets, showing the width of the right-of-way and referenced by notation to
construction drawings which will show the widths of proposed pavement, location
of sidewalks, typical sections with details of pavements, curbs, sewers, drains and
other data pertinent to the proposed construction.
D. A note providing for County Health Department approval.
E. The county block and sheet number applicable to the subdivision.
F. A note stating that existing contours and waterways are indicated on the detailed
construction drawings.
G. Necessary title boxes, a notation providing for Planning Board approval, a
statement of dedication of all streets within the subdivision and a delineation of
limits of said streets, provision for Town Engineer's approval subject to satisfactory
compliance with the construction drawings and such other references or notes as
the Board may require in particular cases. If the intention is that streets shall remain
as private streets, a notation as follows shall be added to the final plat: "No offer of
dedication of streets, highways or parks, if any, shown on this map is made to the
public."
A. Subsections A through F, inclusive, as listed under § 190-12, shall also apply to the
detailed construction drawings.
B. The width, location, horizontal geometrics and limits of paving of all streets,
parking areas or other public ways proposed by the developer and the locations and
limits of all proposed sidewalks, if any.
C. Existing contours, at an interval suitable to the Town Engineer, shown tied into a
top-cut line based on the profiles and cross sections of the proposed streets, the flow
lines and top-of-bank lines of streams that are to remain and also the general
locations of necessary swales with several spot elevations indicated so as to
establish the fact that adjacent lands be saved harmless from any flooding that
might otherwise be induced by filling and grading of the lots of the subdivision.
D. Typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks, showing curbs, gutters, depth
§ 190-13 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 190-14
190:14
and character of surface and of subbase, conforming with the current standard
details and requirements of the Town Engineer.
E. The location and size of all new water mains and connections to existing mains and
the location of fire hydrants. If alternative means of supplying water are provided
under the Public Health Law, submit the method and evidence of approval by the
County Commissioner of Health. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
F. The location and size of all new sanitary sewers and connections to existing sewers;
the location of manholes and type of construction; and the location and detail of
cradles or other supports where required by field conditions or rulings of the Town
Engineer or Planning Board. Laterals for each lot shall be carried to the property
line, unless this requirement is specifically waived by the Planning Board and a note
on the final plat states that connections to the main sewer along with necessary
pavement repair must be made by the individual lot owners. If alternative means of
sewering and treatment are to be provided under the Public Health Law, submit
details and evidence of approval by the County Commissioner of Health, and the
final plat shall be noted to this effect. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. The method of collecting and discharging stormwater and details of catch basins,
culverts, storm sewers, etc., conforming to the requirements of the Town Engineer.
H. Any water mains, sanitary sewers or other public facilities to be carried over or
under private property shall be in permanent easements not less than 10 feet in
width, having satisfactory access to a public highway or other public open space.
Details of such easements and evidence of their existence shall be provided.
I. Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all
streets to the same horizontal scale as the plan, but with enlarged vertical scale.
Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the elevation along
the center line of the existing street or streets, within 100 feet of the intersection,
shall be shown. All elevations must be referred to established United States
Government or approved local bench marks, where they exist within one-half (1/2)
mile of the boundary of the subdivision.
J. The Town Engineer may require supplementary existing ground profiles plotted on
the proposed profile at locations where steep slopes exist, showing present existing
elevations on either or both sides of the street at fifty-foot intervals parallel to the
center line. These supplementary existing profiles are developed by measuring
existing elevations at approximately five points on a line at right angles to the center
line of the street. Said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each
property line and points approximately 25 feet inside each property line. Cross
sections plotted upon tracing paper may also be required in certain areas as directed
by the Town Engineer.
K. Necessary roadway details of street pavements, including curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, granite monuments with covers, manholes and catch basins; the location
of proposed street trees, if any; streetlighting standards or all utility poles, showing
which will carry streetlights and street signs; the location, size and invert elevations
of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains and fire hydrants; and
the exact location and size of all water, gas or other existing or proposed
underground utilities or structures. Utilities governed by fixed elevations, such as
§ 190-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-14
190:15
§ 190-15. As-built drawings.
After completion of the construction work, a marked-up print of the construction
drawings made by a licensed professional engineer, showing adjustments or alterations
to final construction drawings, shall be submitted, showing all approved changes and
final locations of all street-line utilities, including all sanitary-sewer spur locations. This
print shall be known as the "as-built drawing." When this print is approved by the Town
Engineer, the tracings for the construction drawings shall be brought up-to-date, in ink,
by the same licensed professional engineer engaged by the subdivider and the tracing
shall be certified by that engineer or other duly qualified professional engineer suitable
to the Planning Board.
§ 190-16. Changes to plats after approval.
§ 190-17. Endorsement of plats.
§ 190-18. Ownership of streets.
sewers and drains, shall be shown on profiles with a notation showing waterline
clearances at crossings.
L. In the cases of large subdivisions that are to be improved by sections, each section
shall be clearly defined on the final plat and construction plan and profile by
dimensions and notes, so that applicable bond coverage ties in with the final plat.
A. Any erasures made on a plat after Planning Board approval but prior to its signing
shall be initiated by the Chairman or his designated representative.
B. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision
plat after approval has been indicated by signature on the plat.
A. Every subdivision plat submitted to the Planning Board for its approval shall carry
the following endorsement:
"Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck, New
York, on the _____ day of _________ 20___, subject to all requirements and
conditions of said resolution. Any change, erasure, modification or revision of this
plat, as approved, shall void this approval.
Signed this ______day of ___________ 20___.
Chairman"
B. The proposed subdivision final layout and plat shall be properly endorsed by the
County Health Department, as required by the County Sanitary Code, before any
public hearing is scheduled. The plat should be in final form before being presented
to the Planning Board or County Health Department for approval.
A. Title to the land in the bed of streets shown on the final layout and plat shall be
retained by the subdivider, and, when selling individual lots of the subdivision, the
§ 190-14 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 190-18
190:16
§ 190-19. Status of parks or reserved areas.
In the event that legislation exists that is applicable to any Planning Board resolution that
requires the subdivider to provide parks or other reserved areas, it shall be understood
that any park requirements made by the Planning Board are subject to a satisfactory
agreement between the Town Board and the subdivider as to the adequacy of and manner
in which any amount of money and/or other consideration may be granted, between the
Town and the subdivider, in exchange for the title to any parklands. All agreements shall
be satisfactory to the Town Board and the Counsel to the Town.
§ 190-20. Acceptance of streets, parks or reserved areas.
The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or imply the acceptance by the Town Board of any street, park, playground
or other space shown on said plat. The Planning Board will require said plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board will also require
the filing with the Counsel to the Town of a written agreement between the applicant
and the Town of Mamaroneck covering future title and maintenance of park areas and
title to the beds of the streets, with a description in proper form for recording, as well
as any necessary instruments, to ensure completion of landscaping and installation of
equipment in any park or playground area in accordance with such separate plans for
said park or playground areas as may be required by the Town Engineer.
§ 190-21. Completed improvements or bond required.
Before any building permit shall be issued, the subdivider shall either have completed all
improvements required by the Planning Board in its resolution approving the subdivision
plat and shall have obtained the approval of the Town Engineer, who shall certify
that all improvements are in accordance with the standards and specifications as set
forth in Article IV of this chapter, or, alternatively, shall have furnished a performance
bond issued by a bonding company conforming in all respects to the Planning Board
resolution approving the subdivision, which bond shall have been approved by the Town
Board and the term of which has not expired.
subdivider shall reserve title to the fee of the streets for the purposes of dedication
to the Town.
B. Except where the subdivider plans to retain the streets or other areas as private
streets, parks, etc., as set forth in § 190-7 of this chapter, then and in addition to the
notations previously specified all plats shall also bear the following notation: "Title
to land in the bed of all streets shown on this plat will be retained by the subdivider.
The contract or deed for any lot or part thereof shown on this plat shall in no case
include title to any part of the street."
§ 190-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-21
190:17

ARTICLE V
Fees
[Added 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
§ 190-22. Fees. [Amended 4-24-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Every application for subdivision plat approval shall be accompanied by the fee set forth
in § A250-1. Should an agency of the Town having jurisdiction over that application
deem it necessary to hire consultants for technical review and/or on-site inspection, the
applicant shall be required to pay the actual cost to the Town for such services.
§ 190-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 190-22
190:19

Chapter 191
SUSTAINABILITY COLLABORATIVE
§ 191-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Sustainability Collaborative in the Town of Mamaroneck. It shall serve
as an advisor to the Town Board and to such other authorities, boards, departments,
committees, commissions and employees of the Town as the Town Board may authorize
from time to time. The Sustainability Collaborative's role is strictly advisory. It cannot
bind or commit the Town or any of its authorities, boards, departments, committees,
commissions and employees to any contracts, or to undertake, or refrain from taking any
action.
§ 191-2. Goals.
A. The goals of the Sustainability Collaborative are to make recommendations for:
(1) Maintaining and improving the quality of life in the Town;
(2) Developing programs and protocols designed to prepare, mitigate and/or
respond to and from the aftermath of natural or other disasters;
(3) Preserving the Town's natural resources;
(4) Wherever possible and cost efficient, continuing to deliver the same types and
levels of services to the community (or adding to or improving such services
or the delivery thereof) in ways that reduce pollution, conserve or reduce the
consumption of energy or make the use of Town resources more efficient;
(5) Improving the Town's resiliency in combatting shortage of supplies and power
if such shortages arise, and
(6) Improving the Town's long term ability to provide basic needs such as fuel,
power, food and water to the community.
B. The Sustainability Collaborative shall report its activities and make its
recommendations to the Town Board in September of each year and at other times
either upon request of the Town Board or on its own initiative.
§ 190-22 SUSTAINABILITY COLLABORATIVE § 191-2
191:1

Chapter 192
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 90.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 161.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are described as follows:
SWIMMING POOL — Any private pool, whether permanently constructed or of the
portable type, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding
land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than two feet or an area of
115 square feet or greater, designed, used and maintained for swimming or bathing
purposes by an individual for use of members of his household and guests, whether
located indoors or on the applicant's land as an accessory use to a residence, and shall
include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
WADING POOL — A portable or permanent pool, container, device or structure
manufactured and sold as a wading pool or play pool or so placed upon the ground that,
when filled with water, it is suitable for or is used as a swimming, wading or play pool
for children and the depth of which is two feet or less.
§ 192-2. Accessory use; variance.
§ 192-3. Permit required.
No person shall construct, build, erect or enlarge a swimming pool until he shall have
first obtained a permit therefor.
A. A swimming pool may be permitted in any zoning district only as an accessory
structure to a principal building used for residential purposes and shall be located
on the same lot with the principal building. Said pool shall be for the exclusive use
of the occupants of the principal building and their guests.
B. A swimming pool may be permitted in any zoning district when said use is not an
accessory structure to a principal building used for residential purposes only upon
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Ch. 106, Fire
Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 191-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 192-4
192:1
§ 192-4. Application for permit.
Each application for a building permit to construct, build, erect, alter or enlarge a
swimming pool shall be accompanied by plans in sufficient detail to show:
§ 192-5. Design and construction standards.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter unless the proposed
swimming pool or the alterations to an existing swimming pool shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. A topographical survey of the property on which the pool is to be placed, showing
the location of the pool in relation to all property lines and other buildings and
appurtenances on the lot.
B. Pool dimensions, depth and volume, in gallons, and cross sections.
C. A waste disposal system.
D. Pool equipment, showing details of the filters, pump, chlorinator, strainers and hair
and lint interceptors.
E. Drains and drainage from the pool structure to a sanitary sewer.
F. The location of a fence and screening around the pool.
G. An estimate of the cost of said pool.
A. Location. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(1) The outside edge of any swimming pool coping, deck or walk shall not be
constructed, installed, located, maintained or operated within:
(a) Fifteen feet as required from the outside edge of the pool coping to the
side yard lot line, principal structure or accessory structure attached
thereto, except as set forth in this section.
(b) Twenty feet of any rear lot line.
(c) The required front or side yards of any residential property.
(d) Twenty-five feet of a septic tank or leaching field.
(2) A minimum of five feet is required to any accessory structure. No minimum
distance between a deck and a pool is required.
(3) A pool deck or patio must conform to side yard requirements of § 240-50.
B. Construction. All materials used in the construction of any swimming pool shall be
of durable quality, as determined by the Building Inspector or the Director of
Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, and waterproof and so
designed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning the bottom and sides of the pool.
Pool sides shall be smooth and free from cracks and open joints and be light in
color. Inlets shall be so located and spaced as to ensure satisfactory dispersion of
inflowing waters throughout the pool and to permit the draining, cleaning and
§ 192-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 192-5
192:2
disinfection of the bottom and sides. Sand, earth or wooden bottoms are prohibited.
They shall be so constructed that the area adjacent thereto shall pitch away from the
pool, and the top of the pool coping shall be at least two inches above the surface of
the area surrounding the pool deck. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Water supply. There shall be no cross-connections between the piping system of a
swimming pool and a potable water system. If water is supplied from a potable
water system, the inlet or fill pipe shall be located at least six inches above the
overflow level of such pool.
D. Drainage. There shall be provided at least one metal-grated outlet for the drainage
of pool water through the use of the filter pump or otherwise and for backwash
water disposal. Such outlet shall have an area of openings at least four times the
cross-sectional area of the required drainpipe, and the drainpipe shall be equipped
with a gate valve located outside the walls of the pool. The drain outlet and drain
piping therefrom shall be of such size as to permit the pool to be completely drained
in a period of 12 hours for private family-use pools and of four hours for other pools
but shall not be less than three inches in size.
E. Enclosures. Enclosures shall be in conformance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
F. Screening. Such screening as the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration may deem necessary. [Amended
10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
G. Lighting and wiring. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so
arranged and shielded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. Electrical
fixtures, wiring and installation therefor used in connection with the swimming
pool shall conform to the National Board of Fire Underwriters for Electrical Wiring
and Apparatus. All wiring for such installation shall be underground.
H. Disposition of wastewater. All wastewater shall be discharged into a public storm
drain or sanitary sewer. Where wastewater cannot be disposed of because of the
lack of the above-mentioned facilities, it shall be disposed of by means of dry well
or series of wells, provided that such wastewater will not overflow in any instance
onto abutting property or flood the existing leaching fields of a septic tank system.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
I. Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment. Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary
equipment shall be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of pool water during
each period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or disinfectants capable
of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in ventilated
rooms or structures. All rooms or structures shall be well lighted and equipped with
safeguards in case of chlorine leaks. All equipment shall be so constructed or
housed so that it may be used without causing any noise or disturbance to persons
residing adjacent to or near the pool.
J. Diving boards. No diving board or platform shall be used or installed in connection
with any swimming pool having a depth of less than eight feet. In swimming pools
of eight feet to 11 feet in depth, diving boards may be installed for use in the deep
§ 192-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 192-5
192:3
§ 192-6. Abandoned swimming pools.
If any swimming pool shall be abandoned or permanently discontinued, it shall be
filled in, regraded or dismantled and removed from the property. All required enclosure
fencing over four feet in height shall be altered or taken down to comply with this
chapter.
§ 192-7. Inspection. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
After a permit has been issued under the provisions of this chapter, all work thereunder
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated representative
or the persons appointed by the Town Board pursuant to § 106-37B at all times until
completion to ascertain that there is compliance with all provisions of this chapter and
all provisions of the application for the permit. The Building Inspector or the Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration or either's designated
representative and the persons appointed by the Town Board pursuant to § 106-37B shall
have the authority to stop any part of the work being done under any permit which is
not issued in conformity with the application for the permit or with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 192-8. Wading pools.
No person shall leave a wading pool uncovered and unattended in such a location or in
such a manner as to create a hazard to children living in the neighborhood. No wading
pool shall be located in the required front or side yards on any property.
§ 192-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is
provided, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by imprisonment for not more than
one year or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
area, provided that they are not more than three feet above water level. In pools
over 11 feet in depth, standard diving towers may be installed for use in the deep
area.
§ 192-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 192-9
192:4
Chapter 195
TAXATION
§ 192-9 TAXATION § 192-9
195:1

ARTICLE I
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 11-3-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976 (Ch. 74, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 195-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the reduction of the per centum of the real
property tax exemption provided for in § 485-b, Subdivision 2(a), of the Real Property
Tax Law.
§ 195-2. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as "Tax Exemption Reduction Law."
§ 195-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms used herein shall be
as set forth in § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 195-4. Business investment exemption reduced.
The real property tax exemption percentage as set forth in Subdivision 2(a) of § 485-b of
the Real Property Tax Law be and the same is hereby reduced to zero percent 0%.
§ 195-1 TAXATION § 195-4
195:3

ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 8-3-1977; amended in its entirety 10-5-1983 (Ch. 74, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 195-5. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended up to and
including Chapter 991 of the Laws of 1983, the purpose of this article is to grant a partial
exemption from taxation to the extent specified hereinafter, as to real property which is
owned by certain persons with limited income who are 65 years of age or over, meeting
the requirements set forth in such section, as amended.
§ 195-6. Exemption granted; conditions. [Amended 3-3-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993;
12-15-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993; 12-6-1995 by L.L. No. 13-1995; 4-16-1997 by L.L.
No. 3-1997; 5-7-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Real property owned by persons 65 years of age or over shall be exempt from Town
taxes, except district taxes, to the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation of such
lesser per centum of accessed valuation as hereinafter specified, subject to the following
conditions:
A. The owner or all of the owners must file an application annually in the Assessor's
office of the Town in which the real property is located. Applications must be filed
in the Assessor's office on or before the taxable status date of the Town assessment
roll, which is May 1 of each calendar year. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence,
the last date for filing such application in 2020 shall be June 16, 2020. [Amended
11-19-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012; 4-1-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020]
B. In order to be eligible to apply for a partial exemption in the amount of 50% of the
assessed valuation, the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners
must not exceed $26,000 from all sources as set forth in such § 467, as amended,
for the 12 consecutive months prior to the date that the application is filed. Where
title is vested in either the husband or the wife, the combined income may not
exceed such sum. Any such income shall be offset by all medical and prescription
drug expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance.
[Amended 5-2-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; 2-26-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003;
5-18-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004; 3-21-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
C. The owner or all the owners of real property located in the Town who are 65 years
of age or older and whose income or combined income from all sources for said
twelve-month period exceeded the maximum amount set forth in Subsection B of
this section by less than $8,400 shall be eligible to apply for a partial exemption as
set forth in the following table: [Amended 5-2-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001;
2-26-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003; 5-18-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004; 3-21-2007 by L.L.
No. 3-2007]
(1) For the period expiring June 30, 2007:
§ 195-5 TAXATION § 195-6
195:5
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $26,000.00 50%
$26,000.01 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000.00 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 35%
$29,000.00 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900.00 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800.00 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700.00 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600.00 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500.00 to $34,399.99 5%
(2) For the period commencing July 1, 2007, and expiring on June 30, 2008:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $27,000.00 50%
$27,000.01 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000.00 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900.00 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800.00 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700.00 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600.00 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500.00 to $35,399.99 5%
(3) For the period commencing July 1, 2008, and expiring on June 30, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $28,000.00 50%
$28,000.01 to $28,999.99 45%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000.00 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900.00 to $32,799.99 25%
$32,800.00 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700.00 to $34,599.99 15%
§ 195-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-6
195:6
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$34,600.00 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500.00 to $36,399.99 5%
(4) For the period commencing July 1, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $29,000.00 50%
$29,000.01 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000.00 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000.00 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900.00 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800.00 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700.00 to $35,599.99 15%
$35,600.00 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500.00 to $37,399.99 5%
D. The real property tax exemption provided herein on real property owned by
husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or older, once granted, shall not
be rescinded solely because of the death of the older spouse, so long as the
surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
E. Title to the property must be vested in the owner or, if more than one, in all the
owners for at least 24 consecutive months prior to the date that the application is
filed.
F. Persons reaching 65 years of age on or before December 31 are eligible to apply for
county tax purposes for the assessment roll applicable to that year. [Added
2-10-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999; amended 9-8-1999 by L.L. No. 6-1999]
(1) Tenant-stockholders of cooperative apartment corporations are eligible to
apply for county tax purposes.
(2) Veterans disability compensation shall not be included for purposes of income
eligibility calculation.
(3) Annual income limitations for county tax purposes: [Amended 5-2-2001 by
L.L. No. 3-2001; 2-26-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003; 5-18-2004 by L.L. No.
9-2004; 3-21-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
(a) For the period expiring June 30, 2007:
§ 195-6 TAXATION § 195-6
195:7
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $26,000.00 50%
$26,000.01 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000.00 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 35%
$29,000.00 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900.00 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800.00 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700.00 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600.00 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500.00 to $34,399.99 5%
(b) For the period commencing July 1, 2007, and expiring on June 30, 2008:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $27,000.00 50%
$27,000.01 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000.00 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900.00 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800.00 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700.00 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600.00 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500.00 to $35,399.99 5%
(c) For the period commencing July 1, 2008, and expiring on June 30, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $28,000.00 50%
$28,000.01 to $28,999.99 45%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000.00 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900.00 to $32,799.99 25%
$32,800.00 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700.00 to $34,599.99 15%
§ 195-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-6
195:8
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$34,600.00 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500.00 to $36,399.99 5%
(d) For the period commencing July 1, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt From Taxation
$0 to $29,000.00 50%
$29,000.01 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000.00 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000.00 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900.00 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800.00 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700.00 to $35,599.99 15%
$35,600.00 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500.00 to $37,399.99 5%
§ 195-6 TAXATION § 195-6
195:9

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Improvements to Aid Handicapped
[Adopted 3-21-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984 (Ch. 74, Art. III, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 195-7. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purposes of implementing § 459 of the Real Property Tax
Law of the State of New York, providing, under certain circumstances, for the exemption
from taxation for improvements to aid the physically disabled.
§ 195-8. Applicability; criteria for qualifying improvements.
This article shall apply to all improvements which meet the criteria set forth
hereinbelow, whether constructed prior to the adoption of this article or after the
adoption of this article.
§ 195-9. Criteria for qualifying disabilities.
For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed physically disabled if:
§ 195-10. Application.
Such an exemption shall be granted only upon submission of an application by the owner
or all of the owners of the real property on a form prescribed and made available by
the State Board of Equalization and Assessment. The applicant shall file, together with
the appropriate certified statement of physical disability or certificate of blindness, said
application, which must be completed and filed on or before the taxable status date of
the Town.
§ 195-11. Approval.
The Assessor of the Town, upon completion and filing of the necessary application and
A. Any improvement to real property used solely for residential purposes as a one-,
two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any
increase in value attributable to such improvement, if such improvement is used for
the purposes of facilitating and accommodating use and accessibility of such real
property by:
(1) A resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled; or
(2) A member of the resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if
such member resides in the real property.
A. Such individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified statement from a physician
licensed to practice in the State of New York on a form prescribed and made
available by the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment which
states that the individual has a permanent physical impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such individual's major life activities; or
B. Any individual submits a certificate from the State Commission for the Blind and
Visually Handicapped stating that such individual is legally blind.
§ 195-7 TAXATION § 195-11
195:11
certification provided for in § 195-10 above, shall make a determination as to whether or
not the improvement in question is necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and
accessibility by a resident who is physically disabled. Upon making such determination
of necessity, the Assessor shall approve the application and enter the taxable assessed
value of the parcel for which an exemption has been granted on the assessment roll, with
the amount of the exemption, as determined, to be stated in a separate column.
§ 195-12. Termination.
The exemption, once granted, shall continue on the property until the improvement
ceases to be necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility of the
property by the resident who is physically disabled for whom such exemption has
previously been granted, and it shall be the duty of the owner or owners to notify the
Assessor of such termination of necessity.
§ 195-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-12
195:12
ARTICLE IV
Abatement for Rent-Controlled Properties Occupied by Senior Citizens
[Adopted 2-25-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987 (Ch. 74, Art. V, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 195-13. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of Mamaroneck hereby adopts the provisions of § 467-b, as amended, of the
Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 195-14. Provision of abatement. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Hereinafter, there shall be provided tax abatement in rent-regulated apartments where
the combined income of members of the household containing senior citizens (62 years
of age or older) does not exceed the maximum income level provided by Real Property
Tax Law § 467-b, provided that, pursuant to § 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York, the benefits of such abatement are passed on to such senior citizens.
§ 195-13 TAXATION § 195-14
195:13

ARTICLE V
Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 6-19-1996 by L.L. No. 13-1996]
§ 195-15. Purpose. [Amended 9-9-2020 by L.L. No. 7-2020]
The purpose of this article is to authorize the payment of eligible delinquent taxes in
installments of up to 36 months.
§ 195-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ELIGIBLE DELINQUENT TAXES — The delinquent taxes, including interest,
penalties and other charges, which have accrued against a parcel as of the date on which
an installment agreement is executed.
ELIGIBLE OWNER — An owner of real property who is eligible to or has entered into
an installment agreement.
INSTALLMENT AGREEMENT — A written agreement between an eligible owner
and the Receiver of Taxes providing for the payment of eligible delinquent taxes in
installments pursuant to the provisions of § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law and this
article.
§ 195-17. Authorization to enter into installment agreements.
The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck is authorized to enter into an installment
agreement providing for the payment of eligible delinquent taxes in installments with
property owners. Such installment payment of eligible delinquent taxes shall commence
upon the signing of an agreement between the Receiver of Taxes and the eligible owner.
The agreement shall be kept on file in the office of the Receiver of Taxes.
§ 195-18. Terms and conditions.
§ 195-19. Eligibility.
A property owner shall not be eligible to enter into an agreement pursuant to § 1184 of
the Real Property Tax Law and this article where:
A. The maximum term of the installment agreement shall be 36 months. [Amended
9-9-2020 by L.L. No. 7-2020]
B. The payment schedule shall be monthly, bimonthly, quarterly or semiannually.
C. The required initial down payment shall be 15% of the eligible delinquent taxes;
however, at the eligible owner's option, the initial down payment can be any
percentage between 16% and 100%. [Amended 9-9-2020 by L.L. No. 7-2020]
D. Eligible properties shall include all properties within the Town of Mamaroneck.
A. There is a delinquent tax lien on the same property for which the application is
made or on another property owned by such person and such delinquent tax lien is
§ 195-15 TAXATION § 195-19
195:15
§ 195-20. Timing of entering into agreement.
A property owner shall be eligible to enter into an agreement pursuant to § 1184 of the
Real Property Tax Law and this article no earlier than 30 days after the expiration of the
warrant from the Receiver of Taxes.
§ 195-21. Amount due; payment of installments.
The amount due under an installment agreement shall be the eligible delinquent taxes
plus the interest that is to accrue on each installment payment up to and including the
date on which each payment is to be made. The agreement shall provide that the amount
due shall be paid, as nearly as possible, in equal amounts on each payment due date.
Each installment payment shall be due on the last day of the month in which it is to be
paid.
§ 195-22. Interest and penalties.
Interest on the total amount of eligible delinquent taxes, less the amount of the down
payment made by the eligible owner, if any is required, shall be that amount as
determined pursuant to § 924-a of the Real Property Tax Law. The rate of interest in
effect on the date the agreement is signed shall remain constant during the period of the
agreement. If an installment is not paid on or before the date it is due, interest shall be
added at the rate prescribed by § 924-a of the Real Property Tax Law for each month
or portion thereof until paid. In addition, if an installment is not paid by the end of the
fifteenth calendar day after the payment due date, a late charge of five percent of the
overdue payment shall be added.
§ 195-23. Default.
not eligible to be made part of the agreement pursuant to § 1184 of the Real
Property Tax Law and this article;
B. Such person is the owner of another parcel within the Town on which there is a
delinquent tax lien, unless such delinquent tax lien is eligible to be and is made part
of the agreement pursuant to § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law and this article;
C. Such person was the owner of property on which there existed a delinquent tax lien
and which lien was foreclosed within three years of the date on which an application
is made to execute an agreement pursuant to § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law
and this article; or
D. Such person defaulted on an agreement executed pursuant to § 1184 of the Real
Property Tax Law and this article within three years of the date on which an
application is made to execute an agreement pursuant to § 1184 of the Real Property
Tax Law and this article.
A. The eligible owner shall be deemed to be in default of the agreement upon:
(1) Nonpayment of any installment within 30 days from the payment due date;
(2) Nonpayment of any tax, special ad valorem levy or special assessment which
is levied subsequent to the signing of the agreement by the Town, and which
§ 195-19 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-23
195:16
§ 195-24. Notification of potential eligible owners.
§ 195-25. Effect of agreement on tax lien.
The provisions of § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law and this article shall not affect
the tax lien against the property except that the lien shall be reduced by the payments
made under an installment agreement, and that the lien shall not be foreclosed during
the period of installment payments, provided that such installment payments are not in
default.
not paid prior to the expiration of the warrant from the Receiver of Taxes; or
(3) Default of the eligible owner on another agreement made and executed
pursuant to § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law and this article.
B. In the event of a default, the Town shall have the right to require the entire unpaid
balance, with interest and late charges, to be paid in full. The Town also shall have
the right to enforce the collection of the delinquent tax lien pursuant to the
applicable sections of law, special tax act, charter or local law.
C. Where an eligible owner is in default and the Town does not either require the
eligible owner to pay in full the balance of the delinquent taxes or elect to institute
foreclosure proceedings, the Town shall not be deemed to have waived the right to
do so.
A. Within 45 days after the expiration of the warrant from the Receiver of Taxes, or as
soon thereafter as is practicable, the Receiver of Taxes shall notify, by first class
mail, all potential eligible owners of their possible eligibility to make installment
payments on such tax delinquencies. The Receiver of Taxes shall add one dollar to
the amount of the tax lien for such mailing.
B. The failure to mail any such notice, or the failure of the addressee to receive the
same, shall not in any way affect the validity of taxes or interest prescribed by law
with respect thereto.
C. The Receiver of Taxes shall not be required to notify the eligible owner when an
installment is due.
§ 195-23 TAXATION § 195-25
195:17

ARTICLE VI
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-6-1989 by L.L. No. 9-1989]
§ 195-26. Repealer.
Local Law No. 2-1985 is repealed.
§ 195-27. Purpose. [Added 1-4-2006 by L.L. No. 1-200649]
The Town Board hereby exercises the power given to it by § 458-a(2)(d)(ii) of the NY
Real Property Tax Law to set the maximum amounts of the assessed value of qualifying
residential real property as defined in section § 458-a(1)(d) of the NY Real Property Tax
Law that will be exempt from taxation pursuant to § 458-a of the NY Real Property Tax
Law. In § 195-28, NY "Real Property Tax Law" is abbreviated to read "RPTL."
§ 195-28. Amount of exemptions. [Added 1-4-2006 by L.L. No. 1-200650]
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of
15% of the assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed $54,000 or the product of $54,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the Town, whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section, where the
veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of operations, as documented by
the award of a United States campaign ribbon or service medal, or the armed forces
expeditionary medal, navy expeditionary medal, marine corps expeditionary medal
or global war on terrorism expeditionary medal, qualifying residential real property
also shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $36,000 or
the product of $36,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Town,
whichever is less.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this section,
where the veteran received a compensation rating from the United States Veteran's
Administration or from the United States Department of Defense because of a
service-connected disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt
from taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such property
multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed $180,000 or the product of $180,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the Town, whichever is less. For purposes of this
subsection, where a person who served in the active military, naval or air service
during a period of war died in service of a service-connected disability, such person
shall be deemed to have been assigned a compensation rating of 100%.
D. For the purpose of this article, a Gold Star Parent as defined in RPTL § 458-a,
Subdivision 7(a), is included within the definition of “qualified owner” contained
49. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 195-27, Implementation, as amended.
50. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 195-28, Cooperative apartments, added 5-20-1998 by L.L. No.
7-1998.
§ 195-26 TAXATION § 195-28
195:19
in section RPTL § 458-a, Subdivision 1(c), and real property owned by a Gold
Star Parent is included within the definition of "qualifying residential real property"
contained in RPTL § 458-a, Subdivision 1(d), provided that such property is the
primary residence of the Gold Star Parent.
§ 195-28 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-28
195:20
ARTICLE VII
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 5-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-200851; amended in its entirety 3-22-2018 by L.L.
No. 3-2018]
§ 195-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create a partial exemption from real estate taxes levied
by the Town of Mamaroneck on property owned by a person who served on active duty
in the United States Armed Forces during the time period from September 2, 1945, to
December 26, 1991, was discharged or released therefrom under honorable discharge
conditions and satisfies any other requirements set forth in § 458-b of the New York Real
Property Tax Law. This article makes the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck consistent
with Sec. 473.331 of the Laws of Westchester County.
§ 195-30. Definitions.
As used in this article:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the armed forces, other than active duty for
training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force and
Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person who served on active duty in the armed forces
during the time period from September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, was discharged
or released therefrom under honorable conditions and satisfies any other requirements
set forth in § 458-b1(a) of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the New York
State Board of Real Property Tax Services pursuant to Title One of Article 12 of the New
York Real Property Tax Law for use in a special assessing unit as defined in § 1801 of
the New York Real Property Tax Law.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final equalization rate
established by the New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services for the Town of
Mamaroneck pursuant to Article 12 of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War veteran or
the surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War veteran who remains unmarried. Where
property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the exemption to which each is
entitled may be combined. Where a Cold War veteran is also the surviving spouse of a
Cold War veteran and has not remarried, such person may also receive any exemption to
which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a qualified
owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided, however, that if any
portion of such property is not used exclusively for residential purposes, but is used
for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation, and only the portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall qualify for the exemption provided by this
51. Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former Art. VII, Persons With Disabilities and
Limited Incomes Tax Exemption, to Art. VIII.
§ 195-29 TAXATION § 195-30
195:21
article. Such property must be the primary residence of the qualified owner unless the
qualified owner is absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization
subject to such time limitations, if any, as are set forth in § 458-b1(f) of the New York
Real Property Tax Law.
SERVICE CONNECTED—Disability incurred or aggravated in the line of active duty,
or death resulting from a disability incurred or aggravated in the line of active duty.
§ 195-31. Application for exemption.
An application for the exemption authorized by this article shall be made by the qualified
owner, or all of the qualified owners, of qualified residential real property on a form
prescribed by the New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services. The qualified
owner or owners shall file the completed form in the Assessor's office. The Assessor
shall determine the applicant's eligibility for the exemption authorized by this article
as of the first taxable status date following the submission of a complete application
therefor. The applicant shall be required to refile at such times and under such
circumstances as may be set forth in § 458-b(4) of the New York Real Property Tax Law.
Any person convicted of willfully making any false statement in the application for such
exemption shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the New York Penal Law.
§ 195-32. Amount of exemption; limitations.
§ 195-33. Duration of exemption.
The exemption provided by this article shall be granted for as long as a qualified
owner owns a qualified residential real property. Exemptions provided by this article in
existence prior to January 1, 2018, shall not expire on their 10th anniversary but shall
continue for as long as the qualified owner owns a qualified residential real property,
without the qualified owner having to file another application.
A. Qualified residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of
15% of the assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed $54,000 or the product of $54,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest
class ratio, whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by this article, where the Cold War veteran
received a compensation rating from the United States Department of Veterans
Affairs or from the United States Department of Defense because of a serviceconnected
disability, qualified residential real property shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such property
multiplied by 50% of the Cold War veteran disability rating; provided however, that
such exemption shall not exceed $180,000 or the product of $180,000 multiplied by
the latest state equalization rate, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest
class ratio, whichever is less.
C. If a Cold War veteran receives an alternative veterans' exemption under Article VI
of this chapter, the Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to receive an exemption
under this article.
§ 195-30 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-33
195:22
ARTICLE VIII
Persons With Disabilities and Limited Incomes Tax Exemption
[Adopted 6-20-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001]
§ 195-34. Purpose.
The State of New York has enacted legislation, codified as § 459-c of the Real Property
Tax Law and entitled "Persons with disabilities and limited incomes." That statute went
into effect on August 16, 2000. It enables a local government to adopt a local law,
granting a partial exemption from real property taxes to persons with disabilities who
have limited income. The purpose of this article is to grant the exemption authorized by
§ 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law to real property owned by residents of the Town
of Mamaroneck who qualify for it.
§ 195-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the Town of Mamaroneck.
DISABILITY — A physical or mental impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or
illegal drug use, which substantially limits a person's ability to engage in one or more
major life activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
INCOME —
INCOME TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period for which the owner or owners of
the real property filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is filed,
the calendar year.
Includes social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from
the sale or exchange of a capital asset (which may be offset by a loss from the sale
or exchange of a capital asset in the same income year), net rental income, salary or
earnings and net income from self-employment, but shall be offset by all medical
and prescription drug expenses actually paid by a person with a disability which
were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance. "Income" shall not include a return
of capital, gifts, inheritances or monies earned through employment in the federal
foster grandparent program. In computing net rental income and net income from
self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the exhaustion,
wear and tear of real or personal property held for the production of income.
A.
Where title to the real property is vested in either a husband or a wife, "income"
shall include their combined incomes, except where the husband or the wife, or the
ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the property due to divorce, legal separation
or abandonment, in which case only the income of the spouse or the ex-spouse
residing at the real property shall be considered.
B.
If a person with a disability is receiving health-care as an inpatient of a residential
health care facility as defined in § 2801 of the Public Health Law of the State of
New York, the "income" of such person shall be limited to the amount that such
person's income exceeds the amount paid by such person or the spouse or a sibling
of such person for care in such facility.
C.
§ 195-34 TAXATION § 195-35
195:23
OWNER — In addition to a person or entity vested with title in fee simple absolute,
includes a tenant-stockholder of a cooperative corporation.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — A person whose disability meets the criteria of the
definition of "disability" of this section and who is certified to receive social security
disability insurance (SSDI) or supplemental security income (SSI) benefits under the
federal Social Security Act; or is certified to receive Railroad Retirement Disability
benefits under the federal Railroad Retirement Act; or has received a certificate from the
State Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped stating that such person is
legally blind. An award letter from the Social Security Administration or the Railroad
Retirement Board or a certificate from the New York State Commission for the Blind
and Visually Handicapped shall be submitted as proof of disability.
REAL PROPERTY — The real estate for which an exemption under this article is
sought. "Real property" includes real estate held in trust solely for the benefit of a person
or persons who would be eligible to apply for an exemption, pursuant to this article, were
such person or persons vested with title to that real property in fee simple absolute.
SIBLING — A brother or a sister, whether related through half blood, whole blood or
adoption.
§ 195-36. Exemption granted. [Amended 2-26-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003; 6-2-2004
by L.L. No. 11-2004; 3-21-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
Except as provided in § 195-36 of this article, where the owner of real property is a
person with a disability, or are one or more persons, both of whom have disabilities, or
is a husband, wife, or both, and one of them is a person with a disability, or are siblings,
at least one of whom has a disability and the income of the person with the disability
is limited by reason of such disability, that real property shall be exempt from taxation
by the Town of Mamaroneck to the extent set forth in the following table, provided an
application for such exemption is made in accordance with the provisions of this article:
A. For the period expiring June 30, 2007:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$0 to $26,000.00 50%
$26,000.01 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000.00 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 35%
$29,000.00 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900.00 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800.00 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700.00 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600.00 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500.00 to $34,399.99 5%
B. For the period commencing July 1, 2007, and expiring on June 30, 2008:
§ 195-35 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-36
195:24
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$0 to $27,000.00 50%
$27,000.01 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000.00 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900.00 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800.00 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700.00 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600.00 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500.00 to $35,399.99 5%
C. For the period commencing July 1, 2008, and expiring on June 30, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$0 to $28,000.00 50%
$28,000.01 to $28,999.99 45%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000.00 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900.00 to $32,799.99 25%
$32,800.00 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700.00 to $34,599.99 15%
$34,600.00 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500.00 to $36,399.99 5%
D. For the period commencing July 1, 2009:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$0 to $29,000.00 50%
$29,000.01 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000.00 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000.00 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900.00 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800.00 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700.00 to $35,599.99 15%
§ 195-36 TAXATION § 195-36
195:25
§ 195-37. Limitations on exemption.
§ 195-38. Cooperative corporations.
§ 195-39. Application procedure.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$35,600.00 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500.00 to $37,399.99 5%
A. Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other partial
exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total amount assessed.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, no real property may receive an exemption
pursuant to both this article and Article II of Chapter 195 of the Code of the Town
of Mamaroneck.
B. No real property shall be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this article unless
the real property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided, however,
that if any portion of such property is not used exclusively for residential purposes
but is used for other purposes as well, only such portion that is used exclusively for
residential purposes shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article; the
real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in whole or in part by a person
with a disability; except when that person is absent from the real property while
receiving health-related care as an inpatient of a residential health care facility, as
defined in § 2801 of the Public Health Law of the State of New York.
A. Although title to the real estate on which a cooperative apartment is located is
vested in a cooperative corporation, for the purpose of this article only, a person
with a disability who is a tenant-stockholder of a cooperative corporation shall be
deemed to be vested with title in fee simple absolute to a portion of the real estate
owned by the cooperative corporation. The portion deemed to be vested in a person
with a disability shall be the total percentage calculated by dividing the number of
shares of stock owned by the person with a disability by the number of outstanding
shares of stock in the cooperative corporation.
B. Provided the tenant-stockholder satisfies all of the criteria of this article, the portion
of the real estate owned by the cooperative corporation that is deemed vested in a
tenant-stockholder who is a person with a disability shall satisfy the definition of
"real property" in article and thus be eligible for the exemption created by this
article. Any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be credited by the Town
of Mamaroneck against the assessed valuation of the real estate owned by the
cooperative corporation.
C. The reduction in real property taxes realized by the cooperative corporation under
this article shall be credited by that corporation against the amount of real property
taxes payable by or chargeable to the tenant-stockholder who is a person with a
disability.
A. Application for an exemption pursuant to this article must be made annually by the
§ 195-36 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 195-39
195:26
owner, or owners, of the property, on forms prescribed by the State Board of Real
Property Services, and shall be filed in the office of the Assessor on or before
May 1 of each calendar year. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, proof of
a permanent disability need be submitted only in the year an exemption pursuant
to this article is first sought or the disability is first determined to be permanent.
[Amended 11-19-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
B. By no later than March 31 of each year, the Assessor shall mail to each person who
was granted an exemption pursuant to this article on the latest completed
assessment roll an application form and a notice that such an application must be
filed on or before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the exemption
to continue to be granted. Failure to mail such application form or the failure of
such person to receive it shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of
the payment of the taxes on the real property owned by such person.
§ 195-39 TAXATION § 195-39
195:27

ARTICLE IX
Taxable Status and Valuation Dates
[Adopted 3-7-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 195-40. Legislative findings and intent. [Amended 3-21-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 195-41. Taxable status date.
The taxable status date in the Town of Mamaroneck shall be May 1 of each year.
§ 195-42. Valuation date. [Added 3-21-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
In each year, the valuation date in the Town of Mamaroneck shall be the first day of July
of the immediately preceding year. If the day used as the valuation date by the New York
State Office of Real Property Tax Services becomes a day other than the first day of July
of the immediately preceding year, the valuation date in the Town of Mamaroneck shall
change automatically to be the same day as the day used by the New York State Office
of Real Property Tax Services for that purpose.
A. Under § 283.141(1) of the Laws of Westchester County, the taxable status date for
towns in Westchester County is June 1 of each year. By Local Law No. 3 of 2008,
the County of Westchester amended § 283.141 to allow a Town to elect May 1 of
each year to be its taxable status date.
B. The Town Board finds it is in the public interest to use May 1 of each year as the
Town's taxable status date because it will alleviate the timing difficulties with
respect to accepting and processing exemption applications, finalizing other work
relating to valuation and meeting the annual deadline for publishing the tentative
assessment roll. It also will make it possible for a Village within the Town, if it so
chooses, to cease being an assessing unit by following the procedure set forth in
Real Property Tax Law § 1402.
C. Under § 238.141(3) of the laws of Westchester County, a Town may elect to use
the valuation date used by the New York State Office of Real Property Tax
Services, currently July 1 of the immediately preceding year, to value the real
property within the Town of Mamaroneck. The Town Board finds it is in the public
interest to have the Town's date for valuation coincide with the date used by the
New York State Office of Real Property Tax Services for that purpose.
§ 195-40 TAXATION § 195-42
195:29

ARTICLE X
Adjustment of Veterans Real Property Tax Law § 458 Exemption
[Adopted 2-6-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 195-43. Purpose.
§ 195-44. Adjustment of the Section 458 exemption.
If, the total assessed value of the real property for which an exemption pursuant to
Section 458 has been granted increases or decreases as the result of a revaluation or
update of assessments, and a material change in level of assessment, as provided in Title
2 of Article 12 of Chapter 50-A of the Consolidated Laws of the State of New York, is
certified for the assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the Commissioner of Taxation
and Finance, the Assessor shall increase or decrease the amount of such exemption by
multiplying the amount of such exemption by the change in level of assessment factor.
A. Section 458 of the New York Real Property Tax Law ("Section 458") affords
certain veterans of military service or certain members of their families who own
real property a limited exemption from real estate taxes based upon what the statute
calls "eligible funds." Under Section 458, the maximum amount of the partial
exemption is $5,000. Since properties in the Town currently are assessed at only a
fraction of their actual value, a maximum of $5,000 affords a veteran a reasonable
exemption. However, since the Town Board anticipates that the assessments of real
property in the Town will be revalued to reflect their full value in time for the
promulgation of the 2013 tentative tax assessment roll, the exemption allowed by
Section 458 will be significantly diminished if the maximum amount of the
exemption remains fixed at $5,000.
B. Subdivision 5 of Section 458 authorizes the Town Board, by local law, to adjust the
maximum amount of the partial exemption which Section 458 allows to reflect
revaluation, thereby continuing to make the exemption produce a reasonable
reduction in real estate taxes for those persons entitled to it. Through this
enactment, the Town Board exercises the right given to it by Subdivision 5 of
Section 458.
§ 195-43 TAXATION § 195-44
195:31

ARTICLE XI
Taxation of Converted Condominiums
[Adopted 1-16-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 195-45. Purpose.
Pursuant to § 581 of the Real Property Tax Law, residential condominium units are
assessed at values that are significantly lower than the assessments of single-family
homes of comparable value. There is a real possibility that properties, including twofamily
homes, may be converted into condominium ownership to avail themselves of
this favorable tax treatment. If that occurs, the tax burden will be shifted to the other
taxpayers of the Town. Section 581(1)(c) of the Real Property Tax Law allows municipal
corporations to adopt a local law that prevents properties that are not condominiums
from being converted to condominium ownership and receiving the benefit of the
favorable assessment treatment provided by Real Property Tax Law § 581. By this law,
the Town is availing itself of the power given to it by § 581(1)(c) of the Real Property
Tax Law to prevent converted condominium units (defined in § 195-46, below) from
being assessed in accordance with the provisions of § 581(1)(a) of the Real Property Tax
Law or § 339-y of the Real Property Law.
§ 195-46. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONVERTED CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A dwelling unit in condominium form of
ownership that prior to May 1, 2019, was assessed as a dwelling unit in other than
condominium form of ownership and has not been previously subject to the provisions
of § 581(1)(a) of the Real Property Tax Law or § 339-y of the Real Property Law.
§ 195-47. Assessment of converted condominium units.
A converted condominium unit shall not be assessed in accordance with the provisions
of § 581(1)(a) of the Real Property Tax Law or § 339-y of the Real Property Law, but
shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of the Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 195-45 TAXATION § 195-47
195:33

Chapter 198
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes individuals, copartnerships, corporations and incorporated and
joint-stock associations.
PRIVATE LIVERY — Any motor-driven vehicle for the transportation for hire of
passengers which does not operate over a fixed route, pursuant to permission granted
under the provisions of the Transportation Corporations Law, and which solicits
patronage from a central office on the basis of a flat rate or a fixed or hourly charge and
which is designed to carry not more than seven passengers.
STREET — Every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways, bridle paths and
footpaths.
TAXICAB — Any motor-driven vehicle for the transportation for hire of passengers
which does not operate over a fixed route, pursuant to permission granted under the
provisions of the Transportation Corporations Law, and which solicits patronage from a
central office and/or on the public streets and which, when not carrying a passenger for
hire, stands upon the public streets or elsewhere, either soliciting business or waiting for
business, and which is designed to carry not more than seven passengers.
VEHICLE —Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon the street.
§ 198-2. License application; investigation; issuance.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab or other vehicle for hire upon the streets of the
Town of Mamaroneck outside of incorporated villages unless the driver has first
obtained a taxicab driver's license.
B. Applications for such taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the Town Clerk on
forms provided by him, and such applications shall be verified under oath and
contain the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, date of birth and social
security number.
(2) A history of his employment.
(3) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any
felony or misdemeanor.
§ 195-47 TAXICABS § 198-2
198:1
§ 198-3. License fees. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
The fee payable to the Town Clerk for each taxicab license and private livery license is
as set forth in § A250-1.
§ 198-4. Denial of license.
The Town Clerk may deny or revoke license to any person who, in the Clerk's judgment,
shall be incapable of properly conducting the trade or business for which the license is
desired or has been issued. No license shall be issued to any applicant who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the Clerk, renders the
applicant unsuitable to carry on the trade or occupation involved.
§ 198-5. Revocation.
§ 198-6. Appeals.
If the Town Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the applicant may, within 10 days
of notification by the Clerk, appeal to the Town Board. The Town Board shall review the
appeal and, within 20 days of receipt of the appeal, make written findings which shall be
forwarded to the applicant and filed in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 198-7. Expiration of licenses; replacement fee. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
If a license or badge issued in accordance with this chapter is lost, the holder thereof may
obtain a new license or badge upon application to the Town Clerk and the payment to
the Town Clerk of the fee set forth in § A250-1.
C. The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a
taxicab driver's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic
and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application, for
the consideration of the Town Clerk.
D. Upon approval of the application for a taxicab driver's license, the Town Clerk shall
issue a license to the applicant, as provided in § 137 of the Town Law, which shall
bear the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. Such license
shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year, and a license for every
calendar year thereafter shall be issued to the applicant unless the license for the
preceding year has been revoked.
A. All licenses shall have endorsed thereon the statement "This license is revocable."
B. Notice of a hearing and the reason or reasons for the same, in writing, shall be
served upon the person named in the application or license by mailing the same to
the address given in the application at least three days prior to such hearing.
C. When a license shall be revoked, no refund of unearned portion of the license fee
shall be made.
§ 198-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 198-8
198:2
§ 198-8. Transferability.
Such licenses may be transferred by the owner to a purchaser of his taxicab or private
livery; other licenses issued or granted under this chapter shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable, and no owner of a licensed taxicab or private livery may delegate his
license privilege to any lessee or the deferred payment purchaser of his vehicle.
§ 198-9. Display of badge and license.
§ 198-10. Display of number on vehicle.
No person shall operate or drive a taxicab, carriage or other vehicle used for the
transportation of passengers for hire within said unincorporated portion of the Town
of Mamaroneck unless such taxicab, carriage or other vehicle shall have a distinctive
number corresponding to that on the license issued hereunder conspicuously displayed
so that the same may be readily seen day or night from a distance of not less than 50 feet.
§ 198-11. Serving public.
No person driving a licensed vehicle shall refuse to transport passengers on request
unless said vehicle is full.
§ 198-12. Schedule of fares.
No greater rate of fare than that stated below shall be charged for transportation between
any two points in the unincorporated portion of the Town of Mamaroneck by any
licensed vehicle:
A. Every person shall, while driving a licensed vehicle, conspicuously wear on his
outer garment a shield or metal badge bearing his license number, which shield or
badge shall be issued by the Town Clerk.
B. Every driver licensed shall post his taxicab driver's license in such a place as to be
in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab.
A. From 6:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., between the railroad station and any point south of the
Rockingstone in the Woods of Larchmont or south of Forest Avenue in Chatsworth
Heights or south of Fernwood Road and Sheldrake Creek in the Larchmont Gardens
or west of Weaver Street and Boston Post Road in Howell Park:
(1) Seventy-five cents for one passenger.
(2) One dollar and twenty-five cents for two passengers.
(3) Twenty-five cents for each additional passenger.
B. From 8:30 p.m. to 1:30 a.m., between any two points mentioned in Subsection A
hereof:
(1) One dollar for one passenger.
(2) Fifty cents for each additional passenger.
§ 198-8 TAXICABS § 198-12
198:3
§ 198-13. Penalties for offenses.
C. From 1:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., $1.50 for one passenger; $0.50 for each additional
passenger.
D. From 6:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., between any two points within the unincorporated
portion of the Town but beyond the distances enumerated in Subsection A hereof:
(1) One dollar and fifty cents for one passenger.
(2) Fifty cents for each additional passenger.
E. From 8:30 p.m. to 1:30 a.m., $2 for one passenger; $0.50 for each additional
passenger.
F. From 1:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., $2 for one passenger; $1 for each additional passenger.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, as the same may be from
time to time amended, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year or by a fine of not
more than $500, or both.
B. Additional penalties.
(1) Violations of § 198-2 shall subject the offender, for each offense, to a civil
penalty not to exceed $50.
(2) The penalty for violation as above provided shall be in addition to any fine
provided for in § 198-13A.
(3) Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
be a separate and distinct violation of said several provisions of this chapter
and shall render every person liable for a separate penalty for each such
violation.
§ 198-12 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 198-13
198:4
Chapter 202
TENANT PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Discrimination — See Ch. 86.
§ 202-1. Tenant Emergency Protection Act adopted.
The Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck does hereby adopt the New York State
Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974,52 which Act shall be applicable to all classes
of housing accommodations which come within the purview of said Act.
52. Editor's Note: See § 8621 et seq. of the Unconsolidated Laws.
§ 198-13 TENANT PROTECTION § 202-1
202:1

Chapter 207
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 5.
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 207-1. Findings; purpose. [Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 207-2. Cutting or destruction of trees restricted; exceptions. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. The destruction or damage to shade, ornamental and evergreen trees and plants and
the indiscriminate and excessive cutting of these trees in subdivisions and on
private property causes barren and unsightly conditions, creates increased surface
drainage problems, increases municipal costs to control drainage, impairs the
stability and value of improved and unimproved real property and causes
deterioration to the community which adversely affects the health, safety,
environment, ecosystems and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Mamaroneck. This chapter seeks to correct these conditions.
B. "Environmental Planner" means the person serving in that capacity. If the position
of Environmental Planner is vacant, or if the Environmental Planner is unable to
perform the tasks of that position, the Town Board may appoint another Town
employee or a consultant to perform the tasks required to be performed under this
chapter.
A. No person, firm or corporation or individual connected with such firm or
corporation shall either purposely or negligently cut down, kill or otherwise destroy
or commit any act which will lead to the eventual destruction of any tree exceeding
six inches in diameter at a height of four feet measured from the ground on any
private property unless he is in the possession of a permit to do so issued by the
Environmental Planner pursuant to § 207-4. Permits issued for any other purpose
by the Town shall not be valid for this purpose. A lot of 20,000 square feet or less
substantially developed with improvements and a structure or structures situated
thereon shall be exempt from this section.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any property owner applying
for subdivision or site plan approval whose plans would require the removal of any
trees on said property shall make application to the Planning Board of the Town of
Mamaroneck, which shall have sole jurisdiction regarding the proposed removal of
§ 202-1 TREES § 207-2
207:1
§ 207-3. Additional duties of Environmental Planner. [Amended 11-28-1990 by
L.L. No. 6-1990; 9-25-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991; 5-15-1996 by L.L. No. 12-1996;
4-22-2003 by L.L. No. 12-2003; 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
In addition to its other duties as provided for in this chapter, the Environmental Planner
shall advise the Town Board in its selection, purchases, placement, and planting of trees
and shrubs on municipal property and shall maintain an inventory and management plan
for the continued maintenance and improvement of municipal plantings.
§ 207-4. Criteria for removal of trees. [Amended 5-18-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
such trees. The Planning Board may grant or deny such application on such terms
and conditions as it may- prescribe, it being understood that there must, in any
event, be full compliance with Chapter 190, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter
177, Site Plan -Review, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck. In the event
that a property owner, subsequent to the filing of a final plat or site plan, shall
require the removal of any trees which deviates from the plans approved by the
Planning Board, application must be made to the Environmental Planner and all the
requirements of this chapter shall be applicable.
A. Permits for the removal of trees may be granted under the following circumstances:
(1) If the presence of trees would cause hardship or endanger the public or the
person or property of the owner.
(2) On property to be occupied by buildings or structures, within a distance of 10
feet around the perimeter of such building or structure, depending upon tree
species and conditions to be determined by the Environmental Planner.
[Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(3) If the trees substantially interfere with a permitted use of the property, and the
removal of the trees shall be performed in a selective manner.
(4) If the property shall have an approved cut or fill of land deemed by the
Environmental Planner to be injurious or dangerous to the trees. [Amended
3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(5) Where the trees to be removed are dead or so substantially diseased that, in the
opinion of the Environmental Planner, the tree constitutes a potential danger.
[Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, if the Environmental Planner
determines that a tree is hazardous to life or property, it may grant a permit for the
immediate removal of such tree without having to follow the procedures or
requirements set forth in Subsections A, B, C, F and G of § 207-6 of the Code or
§ 207-10 of the Code. [Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
C. The determination of the Environmental Planner shall be final and shall depend
upon the species of the tree, the degree of injury and the likelihood of the survival
of the tree and consideration of the general welfare and the overall environment of
the area, except that it shall be subject to such review as is authorized by § 207-6H.
[Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 207-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 207-5
207:2
§ 207-5. Qualifications for issuance of permits. [Amended 5-18-2005 by L.L. No.
8-2005; 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
Starting in 2018, at least once every five years, the Environmental Planner shall take
a course, at the Town's expense, from an organization whose educational purposes
include dendrology (the science of trees). Such course must include an introduction in
determining the health of trees. Anyone hired to replace the then current Environmental
Planner shall take such a course by no later than December 31 of the year following the
year of that person's appointment and thereafter shall take such course at least once every
five years.
§ 207-6. Tree removal permit procedure; bond. [Amended 2-6-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991; 9-5-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011; 3-15-2017 by
L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. All applications for permits hereunder shall be made in writing and verified under
oath upon forms prescribed by the Environmental Planner and approved by the
Town Board of the Town of Mamaroneck. The fee for each application is as set
forth in § A250-1 and is payable upon submission of the application.
B. The applicant shall submit plans showing existing and proposed contours at twofoot
intervals on a map or plan, at a scale no smaller than one inch equaling 50 feet.
Where trees are to be removed or destroyed, existing trees, specifying types and
sizes, shall be shown and the reasons for removing or destroying said trees shall be
set forth. The plans shall provide for new trees to be planted and shall specify their
location and type to replace the existing trees in kind. When the existing trees are
so large and mature that they cannot be replaced, the Environmental Planner may
require planting of multiple trees instead. On substantially wooded lots (lots
containing 30 or more trees per acre meeting the requirements of § 207-2A), the
Environmental Planner shall have the discretion of waiving the requirement of
replacement of each tree in kind or payment of a fee.
C. The Environmental Planner may require additional information such as the design
of walls, disposition and design of storm drainage and any other information
pertinent to the individual circumstances.
D. Where extensive tree cutting is planned, the Environmental Planner may require the
applicant to pay for an Inspector to be assigned by the Environmental Planner to
supervise the orderly development of the land and ensure the protection of the trees.
E. The Environmental Planner shall require that the applicant or applicant's
representative who shall be performing the work shall furnish the Town with a
performance bond as approved by the Counsel to the Town in an amount sufficient
to cover 90% of the planting and restoration work to be completed in accordance
with the plans accompanying the application. The remaining 10% of the cost of
restoration and replanting shall be in cash, deposited in a special tree preservation
escrow account. The total amount of the bond and cash deposit shall reflect all
restoration and protection costs and shall be in accordance with each set of
individual circumstances. Upon completion of all planting and restoration work to
the satisfaction of the Environmental Planner, the performance bond shall be
canceled and replaced with a maintenance bond to be approved by the Counsel to
§ 207-5 TREES § 207-6
207:3
§ 207-7. Tree removal; restoration.
the Town and to run for a term of two years. The ten-percent cash in escrow shall
remain on deposit with the Town until the maintenance bond is canceled.
F. The Environmental Planner, within 20 days from the date the application is
submitted in final form, shall approve or disapprove the application for permit. No
trees shall be cut pursuant to a validly issued permit for a period of 10 days from
the date of the issuance of said permit. The failure to act upon the application for
permit within said 20 days shall be deemed a granting of automatic approval by the
Environmental Planner of the application for permit.
G. All decisions or determinations made by the Environmental Planner approving
applications pursuant to this chapter shall be sent to property owners within a twohundred-
fifty-foot radius of the area in question and to the Planning Board.
H. Any person, firm, organization or corporation entitled to receive notice of a
decision or determination made by the Environmental Planner has the right to
appeal that decision or determination to the Board of Appeals, which may affirm,
annul or modify that decision or determination. Notice of that appeal must be in
writing, must be accompanied by the appellant's reasons for annulling or modifying
the Environmental Planner's decision or determination and must be received by the
Environmental Planner no later than the 14th day after the notice of a decision or
determination was mailed to the appellant. The Environmental Planner's decision
and determination shall be stayed until the Board of Appeals decides the appeal or
the appeal is dismissed or withdrawn. The decision of the Board of Appeals on that
appeal shall be filed with the Environmental Planner.
I. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals, may apply to the
Supreme Court of the State of New York for review of that decision by a proceeding
brought under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding
must be instituted within 30 days after the decision of the Board of Appeals is filed
with the Environmental Planner.
J. The Environmental Planner may revoke any permit if the work is not proceeding
according to permit.
K. If an applicant is required to obtain a building permit for construction on the
applicant’s property and if the proposed construction calls for trees on the
applicant’s property to be cut down and if the applicant satisfies the criteria for a
permit to remove certain trees so that the proposed construction can proceed, the
permit to remove those trees shall not be issued until a building permit for the
applicant’s proposed construction is issued.
A. All persons who remove or cause to be removed trees with or without a permit, as
required, shall restore the area by backfilling all holes and by creating an acceptable
grade and covering, subject to approval by the Environmental Planner. Any tree
damaged during construction or development of the property shall be either
replaced in kind or, where existing trees are so large and mature that they cannot be
replaced, the Environmental Planner may require the planting of multiple trees
instead. Minor tree damage shall be repaired in accordance with accepted tree
§ 207-6 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 207-7
207:4
§ 207-8. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector or the Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration until all tree planting,
tree dressing and associated restoration work shall be completed to the satisfaction of
the Environmental Planner except that, where a certificate of occupancy is applied for
between October 31 and April 1, the permit holder shall submit an agreement, in writing,
to the Town signed by the permit holder to ensure compliance with all planting and
restoration work to the satisfaction of the Environmental Planner on or before the first
day of May next following the making of the agreement. The escrow cash deposit and
the bond obtained by the permit holder shall continue in full force and effect until
the planting and restoration work has been completed. Should the permit holder fail to
complete the restoration work on or before May 1 next following the execution of the
agreement, the Environmental Planner shall have the right to declare said performance
surgery practice. [Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
B. Tree stumps shall be removed, not cut flush. After the planting of trees, removal of
all debris in the disturbed area shall be made immediately. The property where such
planting is done must be left in a neat and orderly condition with good and
acceptable planting and tree surgery practice. On substantially developed lots, the
Environmental Planner shall have the discretion, when it is not reasonably feasible
to maneuver stump removal equipment to the location of a stump or where the
stump is in close proximity to existing structures, to modify the provisions of this
subsection with regard to stump removal. [Amended 2-6-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
C. All trees which fail to survive for a period of two calendar years following planting
shall be replaced by the permit holder at no expense to the Town or the owner of
the land, if other than the holder of the permit. Said replacement shall be within 60
days following written demand for such replacement from the Environmental
Planner or within an extended period of time as may be specified. Should the permit
holder fail to replace the trees pursuant to demand within the required period of
time, the Environmental Planner shall have the right to declare the maintenance
bond in default and apply the escrow cash deposit and the proceeds of the bond to
replace the required trees. [Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
D. All tree planting, tree dressing and associated restoration work must be
substantially completed within six months from the date of issuance of the permit
except that the permit may be extended by the Environmental Planner, which shall
have the sole discretion to grant such an extension. Under all circumstances, the
performance bond obtained by the permit holder shall continue in full force and
effect until there has been full compliance and approval of all restoration work by
the Environmental Planner. In the event that planting and restoration work has not
been substantially completed within six months and no permit extension has been
applied for or granted, the Environmental Planner shall have the right to consider
the site abandoned and declare the performance bond in default and may apply the
escrow deposit and the proceeds of the bond to perform all required planting and
restoration work. By accepting a permit, the holder thereby agrees to this procedure
and grants unconditional access to the land for such restoration purposes.
[Amended 3-15-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 207-7 TREES § 207-8
207:5
bond in default and apply the escrow cash deposit and the proceeds of the bond to restore
the land.
§ 207-9. Enforcement. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative of the Town of Mamaroneck shall
enforce this chapter.
§ 207-10. Removal of trees on Town-owned land.
§ 207-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. No department, agency, commission or authority in the Town of Mamaroneck,
employee of the Town of Mamaroneck or any firm or individual retained by the
Town shall propose to or shall cut down, kill or otherwise destroy more than five
trees, each exceeding six inches in diameter at a height of four feet measured from
the ground, within an area of 2,500 square feet, or any single tree exceeding 18
inches in diameter at a height of four feet measured from the ground on Town
property, with the exception of Town highways within the Town of Mamaroneck,
without first filing a statement with the Town Board.
(1) The statement required hereunder shall be made, in writing, to the Town Board
on a form approved by the Town Board. Such statement shall specify the
particular type of work to be performed, the exact location, a general
description of the tree or trees that shall be removed and a sketch plan, if
appropriate and required, together with the reasons for the removal of said tree
or trees.
(2) Upon filing said statement with the Town Board, notification shall be sent to
owners of record of land within a radius of 250 feet from the tree or trees that
are to be removed. In addition thereto, notice of the proposed removal of said
tree or trees shall be published in the official newspaper of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
(3) The Town Board shall be stayed from making any decision or determination
for a period of 10 days from the date of publication. In the event that any
person, firm, organization or corporation aggrieved, affected or interested in
the removal of said tree or trees shall file an objection with the Town Board,
in writing, five days prior to the Town Board meeting, said Town Board shall
not make any decision or determination until its next regular or special Town
Board meeting following the filing of said objection.
B. All contracts entered into by the Town with firms or individuals for work to be
performed on Town-owned land, excluding Town highways, shall contain a
provision that there shall be complete compliance with § 207-10A of this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of an offense, the fine for which shall not exceed $1,000. [Amended
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 207-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 207-11
207:6
B. Civil penalty. In addition thereto, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty enforceable and
collectible by the Town in the amount of $100 each and every day that the violation
continues, for each and every tree. In addition thereto, the violator will be required
to replace each and every tree so taken down in accordance with § 207-7.
§ 207-11 TREES § 207-11
207:7

Chapter 216
(RESERVED)
§ 207-11 (RESERVED) § 207-11
216:1

Chapter 219
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire safety zones — See Ch. 108.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 198.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 226.
§ 207-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 207-11
219:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 219-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 219-2. (Reserved)
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
C. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE —The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the absence of a
curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A commercially available, mass-produced vehicle
originally equipped by the manufacturer with an electric propulsion system or a
vehicle retrofitted with an electric propulsion system, provided the owner of the
vehicle can provide supporting documentation of such retrofit. Electric vehicles
include both 1) battery electric vehicles which have batteries that are recharged by
connecting the vehicle to an external power source; and 2) plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles, which have batteries that be can be recharged by connecting the vehicle
to an external power source or by an onboard internal-combustion engine and
generator.[Added 1-22-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Lincoln's
Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
INSIGNIA — The emblem issued by the Town Clerk to a permit holder.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated or driven upon a public highway
which is propelled by any power other than muscular power.
PERSON — An individual, or a firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — A street located within the unincorporated section of the
Town of Mamaroneck that meets the definition of a public highway contained in
New York State Vehicle and Traffic § 134.
SCHOOL DAYS — Monday through Friday, September 1 to June 30.
SCHOOL TIMES — 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
§ 219-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-2
219:3

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 219-3. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following described
intersections.
Forest Avenue and Murray Avenue
Forest Avenue and Weaver Street
Harmon Drive and Weaver Street
Murray Avenue and Myrtle Boulevard (2 separate signals)
Myrtle Boulevard and Weaver Street
North Chatsworth Avenue and Myrtle Boulevard
Palmer Avenue and Richbell Road
Palmer Avenue at Weaver Street
§ 219-4. Speed limits.
A. The maximum speed at which motor vehicles may proceed on or along any public
highways shall be 30 miles per hour, except on or along those public highways or
parts of public highways described below:
Name of Public
Highway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Dillon Road 25 Entire length
Fernwood Road 15 From 47 Fernwood Road to Weaver
Street
Forest Avenue 15 From Sheldrake Avenue north to end
of road
Harmon Drive 25 From Weaver Street to next posted
speed limit sign
Hillcrest Avenue 10 Along curve between Judson Street
and ending where the road
straightens
Huguenot Drive 20 From North Chatsworth Avenue to
next posted speed limit
Murray Avenue 25 Entire length except in school zone
where it is 20 mph
Myrtle Boulevard 25 From North Chatsworth Avenue to
Lakeside Drive
§ 219-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-4
219:5
§ 219-5. School zone speed limits.
The maximum speed at which a motor vehicle may proceed on school days during school
times. The school zones are as follows:
Name of Public Highway
Direction of
Travel Designated School Zone
Murray Avenue Both From the north end of the school
building for a distance of 300 feet
toward Weaver Street and from the
south end of the school building for a
distance of 300 feet toward Colonial
Avenue
Palmer Avenue Both From the north end of the entrance to
the school grounds for a distance of
300 feet toward Richbell Road and
from the south end of the entrance to
the school grounds for a distance of
300 feet toward Weaver Street
Weaver Street Both From the north end of the entrance to
the school grounds for a distance of
300 feet toward East Garden Road
and from the south end of the entrance
to the school grounds for a distance of
300 feet toward Myrtle Boulevard
§ 219-6. One-way public highways.
The public highways or parts of public highways described below are one-way public
highways in the direction indicated:
Name of Public
Highway Direction of Travel Limits
Alden Road South From Copley Road to Boston Post
Road
Daymon Terrace South From Forest Avenue to Colonial
Avenue
Edgewater Place South From Locust Terrace to Dillon Road
Elkan Road Around roundabout
Name of Public
Highway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Old White Plains Road 15 Along curve north of Bruce Road
and ending where the road
straightens
§ 219-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-6
219:6
Name of Public
Highway Direction of Travel Limits
Locust Terrace East From Parkland Avenue to
Edgewater Place
McKenna Place North then west From Jason Lane to Rockland
Avenue
New Jefferson East From Madison Avenue to North
Chatsworth Avenue
New Jefferson West From North Chatsworth Avenue to
Madison Avenue
Old Hommocks Road North From Hommocks Road to Boston
Post Road
Parkland Ave North From Dillon Road to Locust Terrace
Plymouth Road West From Weaver Street to Winthrop
Avenue
Vine Street East From Murray Avenue to Myrtle
Boulevard
Washington Square West To Madison Avenue
Windsor Street South From Myrtle Boulevard to Harmon
Drive
Winthrop Avenue South From Plymouth Road to Boston Post
Road
§ 219-7. U-turns.
(Reserved)
§ 219-8. Prohibited turns.
No motor vehicle shall make a turn of the kind described below during the times and at
the locations shown below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours/ Days
At Intersection
With
Boston Post
Road [Added
11-6-2019 by
L.L. No.
12-2019]
No left turn All Exiting the parking
lot of 1262 Boston
Post Road
Boston Post
Road
No left turn All Exiting the parking
lot of 1265 Boston
Post Road
Boston Post
Road
No left turn All Exiting the parking
lot of 1340 Boston
Post Road
§ 219-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-8
219:7
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours/ Days
At Intersection
With
Bryson Street East No left turn During school
times on
school days
Murray Avenue
Edgewood
Avenue
East No left turn All Weaver Street
Heather Lane West No left turn During school
times on
school days,
and on
Saturday from
5:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m. and
on Sunday
from 8:00 a.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Weaver Street
Myrtle
Boulevard
East No left turn 4:30 p.m. to
7:30 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Preston Street
Myrtle
Boulevard
East No left Turn 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
North Chatsworth
Avenue
Old Hommocks
Road
North No left turn All Boston Post Road
§ 219-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No motor vehicle shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red Signal
Onto Hours
Alden Road East Boston Post Road All
Boston Post Road North Hommocks Road All
Boston Post Road South Weaver Street All
Cooper Lane South Weaver Street All
Forest Avenue East Murray Avenue All
§ 219-8 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-9
219:8
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red Signal
Onto Hours
Forest Avenue West Weaver Street All
Harmon Drive West Weaver Street All
Hommocks Road West Boston Post Road All
Myrtle Boulevard East Weaver Street All
North Chatsworth North Myrtle Boulevard
When prohibited by
traffic signal control
Palmer Avenue Both Weaver Street All
Palmer Avenue East Richbell Road
During school times
on school days
Richbell Road North Palmer Avenue
During school times
on school days
Weaver Street Both Palmer Avenue All
Weaver Street East Boston Post Road All
Weaver Street North Harmon Drive All
Weaver Street North Myrtle Boulevard All
Weaver Street South Forest Avenue All
Weaver Street South Myrtle Boulevard
During school times
on school days
§ 219-10. Through public highways.
The public highways or parts of public highways described below are hereby designated
as through public highways. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each public
highway intersecting the through public highway.
Name of Through
Public Highway
Name of Entrance
of Public Highway
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
(Reserved)
§ 219-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby designated as stop intersections and stop
signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Avon Road North Fenimore Road
Avon Road North Mohegan Road
Avon Road South Mohegan Road
Avon Road South Rockland Avenue
Baldwin Avenue East Myrtle Boulevard
§ 219-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-11
219:9
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Barnard Road North Huguenot Drive
Birch Road East North Chatsworth Avenue
Birchfield Road North Forest Avenue
Blossom Terrace South Palmer Avenue
Bonnie Briar Lane West Weaver Street
Bonnie Way East Weaver Street
Boulder Road South Forest Avenue
Briarcliff Road West Weaver Street
Bryson Street East Murray Avenue
Bryson Street West North Chatsworth Avenue
Burton Road North Palmer Avenue
Byron Lane East Weaver Street
Byron Lane West Orsini Drive
Cabot Road North Myrtle Boulevard
Cargill Park Road North Palmer Avenue
Carleon Avenue North Palmer Avenue
Clover Road North Fernwood Road
Clover Road South Fernwood Road
Clover Road South West Garden Road
Colonial Avenue East Weaver Street
Colonial Avenue West Murray Avenue
Country Road West Fenimore Road
Crescent Road North Briarcliff Road
Dante Street East Weaver Street
Dante Street West Orsini Drive
Daymon Terrace South Colonial Avenue
Daymon Terrace South Senate Place
Dimitri Place West Orsini Drive
Dundee Road North Avon Road
Dundee Road South Avon Road
Dundee Road West Rockland Avenue
Durham Road North Fenimore Road
Eagle Knolls Road West Hommocks Road
East Brookside Drive West Briarcliff Road
East Drive North Murray Avenue
East Garden Road Both Ellsworth Road
§ 219-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-11
219:10
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
East Garden Road South East Brookside Drive
East Hickory Grove
Drive
East Rocky Road
East Hickory Grove
Drive
West West Brookside Drive
Echo Lane East Murray Avenue
Echo Lane West North Chatsworth Avenue
Edgewood Avenue Both Murray Avenue
Edgewood Avenue Both Preston Street
Edgewood Avenue East Judson Street
Edgewood Avenue East Weaver Street
Edgewood Avenue West North Chatsworth Avenue
Elkan Road North Palmer Avenue
Ellsworth Road South East Hickory Grove Drive
Emerson Road North Maple Hill Drive
Emerson Road South Edgewood Avenue
Eton Road North Rockland Avenue
Eton Road South Little Falls Road
Falls Road East Lakeside Drive
Fenbrook Drive South Fenimore Road
Fern Road East North Chatsworth Avenue
Fernwood Road Both Clover Road
Fernwood Road East West Brookside Drive
Forest Avenue Both Vine Road
Forest Avenue North Rockland Avenue
Garit Lane South Palmer Avenue
Gate House Land South Old White Plains Road
Glen Eagles Drive East South Drive
Glen Eagles Drive South All Vine Road
Glenn Road Both North Chatsworth Avenue
Glenn Road Both Valley Road
Glenn Road East Murray Avenue
Harmon Drive Both Revere Road
Harmony Drive East Alden Road
Hawthorne Road North Palmer Avenue
Hawthorne Road South Howell Avenue
§ 219-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-11
219:11
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Heather Lane West Weaver Street
Hillcrest Avenue East Weaver Street
Hillside Road West North Chatsworth Avenue
Homer Avenue West Murray Avenue
Hommocks Road Both Eagle Knolls Road
Howell Avenue East Hawthorne Road
Howell Avenue West Meadow Place
Huguenot Drive Both Rochelle Road
Huguenot Drive East Lafayette Road
Huguenot Drive East Lafayette Road
Huguenot Drive North Mountain Avenue
Jason Lane South Rockland Avenue
Jefferson Street North North Chatsworth Avenue
Jefferson Street South Madison Avenue
Lafayette Road North North Chatsworth Avenue
Lakeside Drive Both Falls Road
Lansdowne Drive West Weaver Street
Laurel Avenue East Weaver Street
Leafy Lane West Murray Avenue
Leaving Central School North Palmer Avenue
Little Farms Road North Ellsworth Road
Locust Ridge Road East Glen Eagles Drive South
Maple Hill Drive East Weaver Street
Maple Hill Drive West Murray Avenue
Maplewood Street East Murray Avenue
Marbourne Drive North Stonewall Lane
Marbourne Drive South Gatehouse Lane
Mardon Road North West Garden Road
Mardon Road South Cooper Lane
Maxwell Avenue
[Added 2-3-2021 by
L.L. No. 2-2021]
East Madison Avenue
McKenna Place South Rockland Avenue
Meadow Place North Howell Avenue
Mohegan Road Both Avon Road
Mohegan Road North Fenimore Road
§ 219-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-11
219:12
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Mountain Avenue Both Huguenot Drive
Mountain Avenue East North Chatsworth Avenue
Mountain Avenue East Rockingstone Avenue
Murray Avenue Both Maple Hill Drive
Murray Avenue North Weaver Street
Nancy Lane South Palmer Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
Both Bryson Street
North Chatsworth
Avenue
Both Glenn Road
North Chatsworth
Avenue
North Forest Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South Rockingstone Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
West Rockingstone Avenue
Old Hommocks Road North Boston Post Road
Orchard Road West Weaver Street
Orsini Drive South Maple Hill Drive
Plymouth Road East At the curve along Plymouth Road
And Winthrop Road
Plymouth Road South Boston Post Road
Preston Street North Edgewood Avenue
Preston Street South Myrtle Boulevard
Revere Road South Harmon Drive
Rochelle Road East North Chatsworth Avenue
Rockingstone Avenue North Forest Avenue
Rockingstone Avenue North North Chatsworth Avenue
Rockingstone Avenue South Mountain Avenue
Rockland Avenue South Weaver Street
Rockland Avenue West Avon Road
Rockland Avenue West Crest Drive
Rocky Road North East Hickory Grove Drive
Salem Drive North Split Tree Road
Senate Place South Daymon Terrace
Sheldrake Avenue Both Holly Place
Sheldrake Avenue North Rockland Avenue
§ 219-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-11
219:13
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Sheldrake Avenue South Forest Avenue
Stoneyside Drive North Rockland Avenue
Stoneyside Drive South Ellsworth Road
Stratford Road East Oakdale Road
Stratford Road South Highland Road
Thompson Street North Myrtle Boulevard
Thruway Ramp North Madison Avenue
Valley Road Both Glenn Road
Valley Road North Forest Avenue
Valley Road West Rockingstone Avenue
Villa Lane South Forest Avenue
Vine Road Both Glen Eagles Drive South
Vine Road Both Vine Place
Vine Road South Forest Avenue
Vine Street West Myrtle Boulevard
Washington Square South Madison Avenue
Weaver Street South Palmer Avenue
West Garden Road East West Brookside Drive
West Garden Road West Clover Street
West Garden Road West Weaver Street
Wildwood Road East Rockingstone Avenue
Winged Foot Drive East Dundee Road
Winged Foot Drive North Fenimore Road
Winged Foot Drive North Hidden Green Lane
Winged Foot Drive South Briar Del Circle
Winged Foot Drive South Rockland Avenue
Wood Street West Myrtle Boulevard
York Road West Ridgeway Road
§ 219-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby designated as yield intersections and yield
signs shall be installed as follows:
§ 219-11 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-12
219:14
Name of Public Highway Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Country Lane [Added
12-4-2019 by L.L. No.
13-2019]
West Country Road
Fifth Avenue North Madison Avenue
Forest Avenue East Daymon Terrace
Glenn Road West Rockingstone Avenue
Howell Avenue West Carleon Avenue
Murray Avenue North Weaver Street
Seton Road East Rockingstone Avenue
§ 219-13. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated below are hereby excluded from the public
highways or parts of public highways described below, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on these sections of such public highways:
Name of Public
Highway
Weight Limit
(tons)
Direction of
Travel Location
East Hickory Grove
Drive
11 Both For entire length
Harmon Drive 5 Both For entire length
Myrtle Boulevard 11 Both From Weaver Street to
Lakeside Drive
Myrtle Boulevard 11 Both For entire length
Rockland Avenue 11 Both For entire length
Rocky Road 11 Both For entire length
§ 219-14. Violation.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and
may be subject to a fine established by the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Laws,
except that violation of § 219-13 shall be subject to a fine established by § 219-88 of this
chapter.
§ 219-15. (Reserved)
§ 219-16. (Reserved)
§ 219-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-16
219:15

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 219-17. Application.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when directed by a Police Officer or an
official traffic control device.
§ 219-18. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. No motor vehicle shall be parked at any time upon any of the public highways or
parts of public highways described below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Alden Road South East side from Boston Post Road for a
distance of 10 feet toward Copley
Road
Alden Road South West side from Boston Post Road for
a distance of 23 feet toward from
Copley Road
Alden Road South West side from Copley Road for a
distance of 32 feet toward Boston Post
Road
Baldwin Avenue For a distance of 40 feet in each
direction from the western most point
of the cul-de-sac
Blossom Terrace East South side from the point of the righthand
turn for a distance of 60 feet
Blossom Terrace North East side from Palmer Avenue for a
distance of 80 feet
Blossom Terrace South West side for entire length from
Palmer Avenue toward Blossom
Terrace's intersection with itself
Boston Post Road East South side between the eastern
boundary line of the Village of
Larchmont to the boundary line
between the unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck and the Village of
Mamaroneck
Boston Post Road West North side from the boundary line
between the Village of Mamaroneck
and the unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck to the point 102 feet
west of Alden Road
§ 219-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-18
219:17
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Bryson Street West North side from Murray Avenue a
distance of 15 towards North
Chatsworth Avenue
Burton Road North East side from Palmer Avenue for a
distance of 240 feet
Burton Road South West side between the driveways of 6
Burton Road and 8 Burton Road
Byron Place South West side for entire length
Cabot Road Both From Myrtle Boulevard for a distance
of 25 feet toward the dead end
Cabot Road North East side from the dead end for a
distance of 85 feet toward Myrtle
Boulevard
Chester Place South West side between Dillon Road and
Moran Place
Colonial Avenue East South side from Murray Avenue for a
distance of 30 feet toward Weaver
Street
Cooper Lane North East side from Weaver Street to the
telephone pole in front of 28 Cooper
Lane
Cooper Lane South West side from Mardon Road to
Weaver Street
Copley Road South West side from 3 Copley Road to
Alden Road
Dillon Road North East side from the corner of
Edgewater Place for a distance of 30
feet toward Boston Post Road
Dillon Road South West side for entire length
Dundee Road East South side from Rockland Avenue to
where the driveway of 8 Dundee Road
meets the roadbed of Dundee Road
Dundee Road West North side from Winged Foot Drive a
distance of 30 feet toward Mohegan
Road
East Brookside Drive East For entire length of the side running
along the brook
Edgewood Avenue Both Both sides for a distance of 20 feet
from North Chatsworth Avenue
toward Murray Avenue
§ 219-18 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-18
219:18
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Edgewood Avenue East South side from Overlook Terrace to
Murray Avenue
Edgewood Avenue West North side a distance of 20 feet from
Murray Avenue toward North
Chatsworth Avenue
Edgewood Avenue West South side from Weaver Street to
Judson Street
Elkan Road North East side for a distance of 67 feet from
Palmer Avenue toward the cul-de-sac
Elkan Road South West side for a distance of 94 feet
from Palmer Avenue toward the culde-
sac
Fenimore Road Both Both sides for entire length
Fifth Avenue Both Entire length
Forest Avenue Both Both sides between Murray Avenue
and Weaver Street
Forest Avenue East South side for a distance of 130 feet
from Weaver Street toward Rockland
Avenue
Forest Avenue South West side at the curve for a distance of
71 feet toward Weaver Street
Forest Avenue West North side from Sheldrake Avenue to
Weaver Street
Heather Lane West North side for entire length
Hillcrest Avenue East East from Judson Street to Weaver
Street
Hommocks Road Both Both sides from Boston Post Road to
Old Hommocks Road
Hommocks Road North East side from Eagle Knolls Road to
Old Hommocks Road
Lakeside Drive Both Side not bordering Gardens Lake from
dead end to dead end
Leafy Lane East South side from Murray Avenue for a
distance of 64 feet toward dead end
Leafy Lane West North side from Murray Avenue for a
distance of 82 feet toward dead end
Lester Place All North side for entire length
Locust Terrace East North side from Parkland Avenue to
Edgewater Place
§ 219-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-18
219:19
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Madison Avenue North East side from the driveway to the
parking lot for Block 134 ("Carlton
House") for a distance of 40 feet
toward New Jefferson Avenue
Madison Avenue North East side from the point where Myrtle
Boulevard ends and Madison Avenue
begins to Washington Square
Madison Avenue South West side from Fifth Avenue to the
entrance to I-95
Maple Hill Drive
[Added 6-19-2019 by
L.L. No. 7-2019]
Both For a distance of 30 feet from its
intersection with Murray Avenue
Maple Street Both Both sides for a distance of 40 feet
around the cul-de-sac
Maxwell Avenue East South side for entire length
Moran Place West North side from Chester Place for a
distance of 300 feet toward Emerson
Avenue
Murray Avenue North East side from Colonial Avenue for a
distance of 19 feet toward Homer
Avenue
Murray Avenue North East side from Colonial Avenue for a
distance of 48 feet towards Forest
Avenue
Murray Avenue South West side from Bryson Street for a
distance of 23 feet toward Glenn Road
Myrtle Boulevard Both Both sides from Lakeside Drive to
Weaver Street opposite each center
median
Myrtle Boulevard East South side from North Chatsworth
Avenue to Weaver Street
Myrtle Boulevard West North side from Preston Street to
North Chatsworth Avenue
§ 219-18 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-18
219:20
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
North Chatsworth
Avenue
North (a) East side for a distance of 6 feet
north of the point where the north side
of the driveway for the property
known as 40 North Chatsworth
Avenue meets the roadbed of North
Chatsworth Avenue
(b) East side for a distance of 6 feet
south of the point where the south side
of the driveway for the property
known as 40 North Chatsworth
Avenue meets the roadbed of North
Chatsworth Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South West side from Huguenot Drive for a
distance of 60 feet toward Rochelle
Road
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South West side from Lafayette Road to the
driveway entrance to 35 North
Chatsworth Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South West side from Rochelle Road for a
distance of 40 feet toward Lafayette
Road
Old Hommocks Road North East side for entire length
Old White Plains Road Both Both sides for entire length
Palmer Avenue East South side for a distance of 15 feet
west from the point where the western
side of the driveway for 1294 Palmer
Avenue meets the roadbed of Palmer
Avenue
Palmer Avenue East South side for a distance of 18 feet
east from the eastern side of the
driveway for 1298 Palmer Avenue at
the point where that driveway meets
the roadbed of Palmer Avenue
Palmer Avenue East South side for a distance of 25 feet
from the western side of the driveway
of 4 Carleon Avenue
Palmer Avenue East South side from Burton Road for a
distance of 80 feet toward Elkan Road
Palmer Avenue East South side from Carleon Avenue for a
distance of 30 feet toward Weaver
Street
§ 219-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-18
219:21
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Palmer Avenue East South side from Elkan Road for a
distance of 40 feet toward Weaver
Street
Palmer Avenue East South side from Elkan Road for a
distance of 83 feet toward Richbell
Road
Palmer Avenue West From the boundary line between the
unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck
and the Village of Larchmont for a
distance of 70 feet east
Palmer Avenue West North side from Blossom Terrace for a
distance of 49 feet toward Richbell
Road
Palmer Avenue West North side from Blossom Terrace to
Weaver Street
Palmer Avenue West North side from the point on the north
side of Palmer Avenue which is 150
feet east from the boundary line
between the unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck and the Village of
Larchmont for a distance of 175 feet
east
Plymouth Road West South side from Weaver Street to
Winthrop Avenue
Rockland Avenue Both Both sides for a distance of 30 feet
from Weaver Street
Rockland Avenue Both Both sides from Eton Road to Winged
Foot Drive
Sackett Drive Both From December 1 to March 31, on
both sides between the point where
Sackett Drive terminates at Weaver
Street and the point where Althea
Lane terminates at Sackett Drive
Senate Place West South side for entire length
Taylor Place North East side from Myrtle Boulevard to
the dead end
Washington Square West North side from Madison Avenue for
a distance of 20 feet toward North
Chatsworth Avenue
Washington Square West North side from North Chatsworth
Avenue for a distance of 20 feet
toward Madison Avenue
§ 219-18 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-18
219:22
§ 219-19. No stopping or standing.
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Weaver Street Both Both sides for entire length
West Brookside Drive South West side for entire length alongside
the Brook
Winged Foot Drive North East side beginning at Dundee Road
for a distance of 55 feet toward
Fenimore Road
Winged Foot Drive North East side beginning at Rockland
Avenue for a distance of 115 feet
toward Fenimore Road
Winged Foot Drive South West side beginning at Rockland
Avenue for a distance of 110 feet
toward Fenimore Road
Winthrop Avenue South East side from the corner of Plymouth
Road for a distance of 20 feet
Winthrop Avenue South West side from Plymouth Road to
Boston Post Road
Wood Street North East side for entire length
B. No motor vehicle shall be parked in front of or within three feet of a public or
private driveway on the north side of Palmer Avenue between Richbell Road and
Blossom Terrace. [Added 6-19-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
C. No motor vehicle shall be parked between the pavement on East Brookside Drive
and the pavement on West Brookside Drive and the brook for the entire length
alongside the brook. [Added 3-3-2021 by L.L. No. 4-2021]
A. No motor vehicle shall stop upon any of the public highways or parts of public
highways described below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Hommocks Road Both From Boston Post Road to Old
Hommocks Road
Weaver Street North East side between Heather Lane and
Cooper Lane
Weaver Street South West side from Maple Hill Drive to
Edgewood Avenue
B. No motor vehicle shall stand upon any of the public highways or parts of public
highways described below:
§ 219-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-19
219:23
§ 219-20. Parking prohibited certain times. [Amended 11-6-2019 by L.L. No.
11-2019]
No motor vehicle shall be parked, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the public
highways or parts of public highways described below, between the hours specified
below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
All roads in
unincorporated
Town of
Mamaroneck
All 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
All On public
highways,
except those
public highways
designated in
§ 219-21
Alden Road South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Tuesday West side from
Boston Post
Road to Copley
Road
Burton Road North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesday East side from
the driveway
entrance of the
southernmost
parking garage
to the beginning
of the section
where parking is
prohibited at all
times
Burton Road South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Thursday West side from
Palmer Avenue
to the beginning
of the section
where parking is
prohibited at all
times
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Cooper Lane Both From Weaver Street to Mardon Road
Daymon Terrace South East side from Senate Place for a
distance of 15 feet toward Forest
Avenue
Senate Place West South side for entire length
§ 219-19 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-20
219:24
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Colonial Avenue West 7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
School days,
except holidays
North side from
the driveway of
the home at 85
Colonial Avenue
to Daymon
Terrace
Colonial Avenue West 7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
School days,
except holidays
North side from
Murray Avenue
to Daymon
Terrace
Copley Road North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Tuesday From Alden
Road to the
southern
property line of
10 Copley Road
Daymon Terrace South School times School days East side from
Senate Place to
Colonial Avenue
Dillon Road North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Tuesday East side from
Boston Post
Road to
Edgewater Place
Echo Lane North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
East side from
Murray Avenue
to Hillcrest Road
Echo Lane South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
West side from
Hillside Road to
Murray Avenue
Edgewood
Avenue
East 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from
Murray Avenue
to Judson Street
Edgewood
Avenue
West 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side from
Murray Avenue
to Judson Street
France Place North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
East side for its
entire length
France Place South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
West side for its
entire length
§ 219-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-20
219:25
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Hillside Road East 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side for its
entire length
Hillside Road West 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side for its
entire length
Huguenot Drive South, then east 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side from
North
Chatsworth
Avenue to
Barnard Road
Huguenot Drive West, then
north
10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from
North
Chatsworth
Avenue to
Barnard Road
Laurel Avenue East 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side for its
entire length
Laurel Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side for its
entire length
Lester Place Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesday South side for its
entire length
Maple Hill Drive East 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from
Murray Avenue
to Orsini Drive
Maple Hill Drive West 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side from
Murray Avenue
to Orsini Drive
Mountain
Avenue
East 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side for its
entire length
within the Town
of Mamaroneck
Mountain
Avenue
West 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side for its
entire length
within the Town
of Mamaroneck
Murray Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
School days East side for a
distance of 150
feet north from
Forest Avenue
§ 219-20 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-20
219:26
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Murray Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Second Friday
of each month
East side from
Leafy Lane to
Myrtle
Boulevard
Murray Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
School days West side
commencing at a
point 365 feet
north from
Bryson Street for
a distance of 140
feet toward
Forest Avenue to
a point ending
245 feet from
Forest Avenue
Murray Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
School days West side from
Bryson Street for
a distance of 198
feet toward
Forest Avenue
Murray Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
School days West side from
Forest Avenue
for a distance of
175 feet toward
Bryson Street
Murray Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
First Friday of
each month
West side from
Leafy Lane to
Myrtle
Boulevard
New Jefferson
Street
North 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Second
Tuesday of
each month
East side for its
entire length
New Jefferson
Street
South 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
First Tuesday
of each month
West side for its
entire length
Normandy Road
[Added
2-5-2020 by
L.L. No.
2-2020]
East 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side for its
entire length
§ 219-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-20
219:27
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Normandy Road
[Added
2-5-2020 by
L.L. No.
2-2020]
West 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side for its
entire length
North
Chatsworth
Avenue
North 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
First Thursday
of each month
East side from
Myrtle
Boulevard to the
northern
boundary of 40
North
Chatsworth
Avenue
North
Chatsworth
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
That section of
the east side
from the point
where the WS
Residential Area
(as defined in
§ 219-62) ends
to Echo Lane
where parking is
permitted at
other times
North
Chatsworth
Avenue
South 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Second
Thursday of
each month
West side from
the northern
boundary of 35
North
Chatsworth
Avenue to
Myrtle
Boulevard
North
Chatsworth
Avenue
South 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
That section of
the west side
from Birch Road
to the point
where the WS
Residential Area
(as defined in
§ 219-62) begins
where parking is
permitted at
other times
§ 219-20 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-20
219:28
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Overlook
Terrace
South, then east,
then north
9:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
West and south
sides for its
entire length
Overlook
Terrace
South, then
west, then north
12:00 noon to
1:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
East and north
sides for its
entire length
Palmer Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from
the driveway
entrance to
Mamaroneck
High School for
a distance of 90
feet toward
Richbell Road
Preston Street North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
East side for its
entire length
Preston Street South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
West side for its
entire length
Richbell Road North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesday East side from
Palmer Avenue
to the boundary
line of the
Village of
Mamaroneck
Richbell Road South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Thursday West side from
Palmer Avenue
to the boundary
line of the
Village of
Mamaroneck
Rochelle Road East 10:00 p.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from
Huguenot Drive
to France Place
Rochelle Road West 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
North side from
Huguenot Drive
to France Place
Rockingstone
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
From North
Chatsworth
Avenue to
Valley Road
§ 219-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-20
219:29
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Hours Days Location
Rockingstone
Avenue
South 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
From Seton
Road to North
Chatsworth
Avenue
Senate Place North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
School days East side for its
entire length
Sheldrake
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
from 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
School days East side from
Forest Avenue to
Holly Place
Thompson Street North 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
East side for its
entire length
Thompson Street South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
West side for its
entire length
Valley Road North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Friday, except
holidays
East side from
Rockingstone
Avenue to Birch
Street
Valley Road South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Thursday,
except holidays
West side from
Rockingstone
Avenue to Forest
Avenue
Washington
Square
South 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Second
Monday of
each month
East side for its
entire length
Washington
Square
South 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
First Monday
of each month
West side for its
entire length
§ 219-21. Parking allowed from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
A motor vehicle may be parked between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the
following public highways or on parts of public highways described below, except on
those sections of those public highways where parking is prohibited at all times:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Alden Road South West side from Harmony Drive to the
point where parking is prohibited at all
times
Baldwin Avenue East South side, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
§ 219-20 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-21
219:30
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Burton Road Both Both sides, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
Cabot Road North East side, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
Carroll Place North East side for entire length
Copley Road North East side from Alden Road for a distance
of 150 feet toward Kenmare Road
Dillon Road North East side from Parkland Avenue to
Edgewater Place
Garit Lane [Repealed
9-22-2021 by L.L. No.
12-2021]
Laurel Avenue East South side from Thompson Place to the
dead end
Lester Place Both South side for entire length
Locust Terrace East South side from Parkland Avenue to
Edgewater Place
Murray Avenue Both Both sides from Myrtle Boulevard to the
northern boundary of the Murray
Avenue Bridge
New Jefferson Both Along the entire median
North Chatsworth
Avenue
North East side from Myrtle Boulevard to 40
North Chatsworth Avenue
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South West side from the driveway of 35 North
Chatsworth to Myrtle Boulevard
Palmer Avenue East South side from the driveway entrance to
Central School to the boundary line
between the Village of Mamaroneck and
the unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
Palmer Avenue West North side from Blossom Terrace to
Richbell Road, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
Plymouth Road West South side from Winthrop Avenue for a
distance of 50 feet toward Weaver
Street, except where parking is
prohibited at all times
Preston Street Both Both sides between Edgewood Avenue
and Myrtle Boulevard
§ 219-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-21
219:31
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Richbell Road Both Both sides from Palmer Avenue to the
Village of Mamaroneck boundary line
Rockridge Road Both East side for entire length
Thompson Street North East side for entire length
§ 219-22. Time limit parking.
No motor vehicle shall be parked for longer than the maximum time permitted, upon any
of the public highways or parts of public highways described below:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction
of Travel
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours/Days Location
Baldwin Avenue East 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side, exclusive
of paid parking spaces
Boston Post Road East 3 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
South side from 2533
Boston Post Road
between the boundary
line of the
unincorporated Town
of Mamaroneck and
Village of Larchmont
Byron Place North 3 All/all East side for entire
length
Cabot Road Both 2 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Both sides for entire
length
Carleon Avenue Both 3 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Friday
Both sides from Palmer
Avenue to Howell
Avenue
Hawthorne Road Both 3 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Both sides for entire
length
Hommocks Road South 1 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
West side from Old
Hommocks Road to the
driveway of the service
entrance to the
Hommocks Ice Rink
§ 219-21 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-22
219:32
Name of Public
Highway
Direction
of Travel
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours/Days Location
Howell Avenue Both 3 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Both sides from
Carleon Avenue to
Hawthorne Road
Lafayette Road Both 2 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Both side for entire
length
Maple Street Both 2 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
Both sides for entire
length, except on that
section as defined in
§ 291-18 where no
parking is allowed
anytime
Murray Avenue North 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except on the
second Friday of
each month
when parking is
prohibited
between the
hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
East side from Myrtle
Boulevard to Leafy
Lane
Murray Avenue South 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except on the
first Friday of
each month
when parking is
prohibited
between the
hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
West side from Myrtle
Boulevard to Leafy
Lane
§ 219-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-22
219:33
Name of Public
Highway
Direction
of Travel
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours/Days Location
New Jefferson North 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except on the
second Tuesday
of each month
when parking is
prohibited
between the
hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
West side for entire
length
New Jefferson South 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except on the
first Tuesday of
each month
when parking is
prohibited 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
East side for entire
length
North Chatsworth
Avenue
North 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except for
the first
Thursday of each
month when
parking is
prohibited 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
East side from Myrtle
Boulevard to 40 North
Chatsworth Avenue
§ 219-22 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-22
219:34
Name of Public
Highway
Direction
of Travel
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours/Days Location
North Chatsworth
Avenue
South 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except for
the second
Thursday of each
month when
parking is
prohibited 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
West side from 35
North Chatsworth to
Myrtle Boulevard
Palmer Avenue Both 3 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From the boundary line
between the Village of
Larchmont and the
unincorporated Town
of Mamaroneck to
Weaver Street
Taylor Place South 3 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From the dead end to
Myrtle Boulevard
Washington
Square
West 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except for
the first Monday
of each month
when parking is
prohibited
between the
hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
North side for entire
length
§ 219-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-22
219:35
Name of Public
Highway
Direction
of Travel
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours/Days Location
Washington
Square
West 3 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
and except the
second Monday
of each month
when parking is
prohibited
between the
hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00
a.m.
South side for entire
length
Wood Street South 2 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.
West side for entire
length
§ 219-23. Idling restricted.
§ 219-24. Parking in wrong direction.
Except where angle parking is authorized, or except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic, or to comply with the law or the directions of a police officer or an
official traffic-control device, every motor vehicle stopped, parked or standing wholly
upon a public highway shall be so stopped or parked or shall stand parallel to the curb
or edge of the public highway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its
wheels within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the public highway.
A. No person shall allow, cause or permit the engine of any motor vehicle to run for
more than five consecutive minutes while parking, standing, or stopping on public
or private property in the unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck.
B. This section shall not apply to public utility companies, the United States of
America, the State of New York, the County of Westchester, the unincorporated
Town of Mamaroneck, the Mamaroneck Union Free School District or the Villages
of Larchmont, Mamaroneck or Scarsdale. This section also shall not apply to any
independent contractor engaged by any of the entities described in the preceding
sentence while such independent contractor is carrying out a business activity for
which it was engaged by one or more of these entities.
C. This section shall not apply when the temperature in the unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck is 40° F. or less.
D. This section shall not apply in situations where a motor vehicle is exempt from the
requirements of Subpart 217-3 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules, and
Regulations.
§ 219-22 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-25
219:36
§ 219-25. Angle parking.
No motor vehicle shall be parked upon any of the public highways or parts thereof
described below, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall lines.
On all public highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now or hereafter shall
be authorized, all motor vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with their front wheels
nearest the curb.
Name of Public
Highway Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 219-26. Designated parking for emergency personnel.
(Reserved)
§ 219-27. Loading zones.
The locations described below are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Time
Allowed For
Loading
(minutes) Location
Alden Road South 10 East side from the midpoint to the
entrance of Alden House for 20
feet
Maxwell Avenue North 30 East side between the point that is
130 feet south of the point where
the easterly side of Maxwell
Avenue terminates at the southerly
side of Madison Avenue and the
point that is 199 feet south of the
point where the easterly side of
Maxwell Avenue terminates at the
southerly side of Madison Avenue
§ 219-28. Taxi stands.
The locations described below are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Public Highway Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 219-29. Bus stops.
A. The locations described below are hereby designated as bus stops:
§ 219-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-29
219:37
§ 219-30. Parking without a license plate.
No motor vehicle shall be parked on a public highway unless a valid identification plate
assigned by a commissioner of motor vehicles or other official of the jurisdiction where
such motor vehicle is registered is displayed in accordance with the provisions of that
jurisdiction.
§ 219-31. Parking of unregistered motor vehicle.
No motor vehicle shall be parked upon a public highway unless a valid registration
issued by a commissioner of motor vehicles of other official of the jurisdiction where
such motor vehicle is registered is displayed in accordance with the provisions of that
jurisdiction.
§ 219-32. Parking of uninspected motor vehicle.
No motor vehicle shall be parked on a public highway unless a valid certificate of
inspection issued by an inspector authorized to issue such certificate by the jurisdiction
where that motor vehicle was inspected is displayed in accordance with the provisions
of that jurisdiction.
§ 219-33. No double parking.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or to comply with the law or
the directions of a police officer or an official traffic-control device, no motor vehicle
shall be stopped, parked or shall stand, on the roadway side of any vehicle that is
stopped, is standing or is parked at the edge or curb of a public highway.
§ 219-34. No parking on sidewalk.
No motor vehicle shall stand, stop or park on a sidewalk.
Name of Public
Highway
Direction of
Travel Location
Murray Avenue Both Near West Drive
Murray Avenue North Near Forest Avenue
Murray Avenue Both Near Edgewood Avenue
Murray Avenue Both Near Glenn Road
Murray Avenue Both Near Myrtle Boulevard
Myrtle Boulevard North Near North Chatsworth Avenue
Myrtle Boulevard West Near Byron Place
Palmer Avenue East Near Carleon Avenue
Palmer Avenue Both Near Richbell Road
Palmer Avenue Both Near Weaver Street
B. No motor vehicle shall be parked in a designated bus stop.
§ 219-29 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-35
219:38
§ 219-35. Blocking driveway.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in front of a public or private driveway.
§ 219-36. Parking in fire safety zone or in front of fire hydrant prohibited.
No motor vehicle, except emergency vehicles, shall park in a fire safety zone, designated
in § 108-2, or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
§ 219-37. Abandoned motor vehicles.
§ 219-38. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-39. School dropoff zones.
Except within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, a motor vehicle shall be allowed to stand on
the east side of Murray Avenue School, during school times on school days, for the sole
purpose of discharging and receiving students of the Murray Avenue School.
§ 219-40. Parking for electric vehicles only. [Added 1-22-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
A. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned motor vehicle if left
unattended:
(1) With no identification plates affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any
public highway or other public place;
(2) For more than 48 hours, after the parking of such motor vehicle shall have
become illegal; or
(3) For more than 96 hours on property of another, if left without permission of
the owner of that property.
B. Any motor vehicle deemed to be abandoned under § 219-37 shall be removed by
the Town in accordance with this chapter and with New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law, Article 33, § 1224(2), Abandoned Vehicles.
C. An abandoned vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law, Article 33, § 1224(2), Abandoned Vehicles.
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle other than an electric vehicle within the
parking spaces designated by the Town Administrator as parking exclusively for
electric vehicles on the streets described below:
Baldwin Avenue
Myrtle Boulevard
B. No person shall park a motor vehicle other than an electric vehicle within the
parking spaces designated by the Town Administrator as parking exclusively for
electric vehicles in the parking lot for the Hommocks Ice Rink.
§ 219-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-40
219:39
C. No person shall park a motor vehicle other than an electric vehicle within the
parking spaces designated by the Town Administrator as parking exclusively for
electric vehicles in the parking lot for the Town Center. In addition to being subject
to a fine, any motor vehicle other than an electric vehicle that is parked within the
parking spaces designated by the Town Administrator as parking for electric
vehicles only in the parking lot for the Town Center shall be subject to being towed
pursuant to Article VI of this chapter.
D. From time to time, by resolution, the Town Board shall establish the fee for
charging an electric vehicle which is parked in a parking space designated by the
Town Administrator as parking exclusively for electric vehicles parking. [Added
2-5-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
§ 219-40 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-40
219:40
ARTICLE IV
Paid Parking
PART I
Parking Lots
§ 219-41. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
PARKING LOTS — Any Town-administered off-street space where motor vehicles
may be parked for a fee.
PERMIT — A permit to park in a specific parking lot.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this article.
§ 219-42. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using any of the parking lots
designated in § 219-43.
§ 219-43. Designation of parking lots
Parking lots are designated as follows:
§ 219-44. Fees, days, times and methods of payment.
From time to time by resolution or local law, the Town Board shall establish the fee,
days, times and methods of payment for permitted use of the parking lots.
§ 219-45. Special permit parking areas.
From time to time, the Town Administrator, Superintendent of Highways or Chief of
Police, may designate certain areas within the parking lots for such parking as the needs
A. Lot A (formerly Lot 1) is the parking lot situated at Myrtle Boulevard and Vine
Street.
B. Lot B (formerly Lot 3) is the parking lot and deck situated at Myrtle Boulevard and
North Chatsworth Avenue.
C. Lot C (formerly Lot 4) is the parking lot situated on Myrtle Boulevard which is
shared with the occupants of 178 Myrtle Boulevard.
D. Lot D (formerly Lot 5) is the six parking spaces located off of Myrtle Boulevard,
near Madison Avenue.
E. Lot E (formerly Lot 6) is the six numbered spaces on Vine Street.
F. Lot F (formerly Lot 7) is the employee parking spaces on Maxwell Avenue.
G. Lot G (formerly Lot 8) is Byron Place near Madison Avenue.
§ 219-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-45
219:41
of the community may require.
§ 219-46. Permit requirements.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in any parking lot unless the Town Clerk shall have
issued a permit allowing the motor vehicle to be parked in a particular parking lot and
the permit holder shall have attached the insignia to the motor vehicle in accordance with
the instructions given to the permit holder by the Town Clerk.
§ 219-47. Permit application.
§ 219-48. Issuance of permits.
A. There shall be five types of permits for parking in the parking lots: daytime meter
parking permits, daytime non-meter parking permits, overnight parking permits,
twenty-four-hour parking permits, and area business parking permits.
B. Application for a permit shall be made to the Town Clerk upon such form as
prescribed by the Town Clerk.
C. Except for semiannual permits, each permit shall be effective for a twelve-month
period from the effective date established by the Town Board, or for semiannual
permits, shall be effective for a six-month period from the effective date set forth
by the Town Board.
D. The Town Board from time to time by resolution or local law may create such other
types of parking permits or create such other rules for parking in the parking lots as
it may determine to be necessary.
A. The Town Clerk may only issue permits to residents of the Town. At the time of
application, the applicant must submit proof of such residency in a form satisfactory
to the Town Clerk.
B. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of the number of each permit issued, the date it
is issued, the name and address of the person to whom it is issued, the numbers,
words or letters appearing on the license plate of the motor vehicle or vehicles for
which the permit is issued and the letter designation of the parking lot for which
that permit is issued. The Town Clerk shall maintain a record of all permit fees
collected.
C. The Town Clerk shall not issue a twenty-four-hour permit to a person if another
person in the applicant's household already is the holder of a twenty-four-hour
permit. The preceding sentence shall not apply to persons who held permits issued
prior to April 17, 2002. Such permits may be renewed even if two or more permit
holders are members of the same household. For the purpose of this subsection, the
term "household" shall mean one or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
D. Each permit shall entitle only the motor vehicle or vehicles listed in the permit
application to be parked in the parking lot for which such permit is issued. A
daytime meter permit or a daytime non-meter permit shall authorize either one of
two motor vehicles to be parked in the parking lot for which such permit is issued,
§ 219-45 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-48
219:42
§ 219-49. Attachment of insignia.
The Town Clerk, upon issuing a permit, shall issue an insignia to the permit holder and
instruct the permit holder where the insignia is required to be placed within the motor
vehicle. The type, size and form of the insignia shall be determined from time to time
by the Town Clerk; however, the insignia shall bear the permit number assigned, the
numbers, words or letters appearing on the license plate of the motor vehicle or vehicles
for which the permit is issued, the words "Town of Mamaroneck," the parking lot for
which the permit is issued and the expiration date of the permit.
§ 219-50. Renewal or denial of permit.
A permit may be renewed if an application to renew is made and the required fee paid
no later than a date specified annually by the Town Clerk, which date shall be prior to
the expiration date of such permit. The Town Clerk may refuse to renew any permit for
which the required fee is not paid on or before the last day specified for payment. The
Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a permit to any person whose prior usage of any permit
has been deemed by the Town Board to be an abuse of the privileges granted by such
permit.
§ 219-51. Transfer of ownership.
and the insignia associated with that permit shall contain the numbers, words or
letters appearing on the license plate of each motor vehicle specified on the permit
application. At the permit holder's discretion, the insignia can be moved from one
motor vehicle to the other at any time; however, under no circumstances can both
motor vehicles specified on the permit application be parked at the same time in the
same parking lot, except at times when parking in such parking lot is unrestricted.
E. The Town Clerk shall revoke a permit if the Town Clerk, acting reasonably,
determines that such permit was issued based upon false information or was
otherwise issued or used improperly or the insignia is altered. The Town Clerk shall
mail written notice of the revocation to the person to whom such permit was issued
at the address for such person that appears on the application for the permit being
revoked. The revocation shall be effective on the third business day after the notice
is mailed. The permit holder shall return the permit to the Town Clerk's office. The
failure to do so shall be a violation of this section. A revoked permit may be
reinstated by curing the underlying basis for the revocation and the payment of a
fee that is triple the amount of the fee for the permit.
A. Permits cannot be transferred between permit holders except as provided in
§ 219-48D.
B. Upon the transfer of title of a motor vehicle for which a permit has been issued, the
insignia shall be removed and returned to the Town Clerk's Office. Upon proper
application and payment of a required fee, a replacement insignia shall be issued
for the unexpired term of the original permit. Under no circumstances shall the fee
for the unexpired term be refunded.
§ 219-48 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-52
219:43
§ 219-52. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-53. (Reserved)
§ 219-54. (Reserved)
§ 219-52 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-54
219:44
PART II
Other Paid Parking
§ 219-55. Public highway parking.
The Town Board designates the following public highways, or portions thereof
("Designated Public Highways"), as places where during certain times of the day,
payment is required for the right to park a motor vehicle:
Both sides of Myrtle Boulevard between North Chatsworth Avenue and Madison
Avenue
Both sides of Madison Avenue between Fifth Avenue and Myrtle Boulevard
The 11 parking spaces on Maxwell Avenue, situated closest to Madison Avenue
The eight parking spaces on the south side of Baldwin Avenue beginning at the corner
with Myrtle Boulevard
§ 219-56. Cost, days, times and method of payment.
From time to time, by resolution, the Town Board shall establish the exact location,
number of spaces, cost for parking, and the time of day, when payment is required for
parking on designated public highways.
§ 219-57. Tampering with parking control devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, willfully break
or destroy any device used in connection with the payment for parking on designated
public highways, or in designated parking lots.
§ 219-58. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-59. (Reserved)
§ 219-60. (Reserved)
§ 219-55 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-60
219:45

PART III
Residential Parking System
§ 219-61. Permit parking on Lester Place.
§ 219-62. Permit parking on Washington Square, New Jefferson Street, North
Chatsworth Avenue and Murray Avenue.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
CAREGIVER — A person who either:
CONTRACTOR — A person whose motor vehicle displays an insignia indicating
that he/she/it is a home improvement contractor licensed by the County of
Westchester and who is performing work on a property located on Lester Place
either for a Lester Place resident, one of the entities named in § 219-63L, or the
owner or the managing agent of one of the multifamily buildings on Lester Place.
ELIGIBLE PERSON — A Lester Place resident, a caregiver or an entity whose
principal owner is a Lester Place resident.
LESTER PLACE (LP) RESIDENT — A person who resides on Lester Place.
LP RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT—The permit issued by the Town Clerk for a
motor vehicle owned or leased by an eligible person that allows that motor vehicle
to be parked on that section of Lester Place that lies within the zoning district
known as the R-7.5 District. When reference is made to an LP resident parking
permit being "issued," that reference includes both the issuance of the original LP
resident parking permit for a particular motor vehicle and all renewals thereof.
PUBLIC PARKING SPACES — Those parking spaces where a motor vehicle can
be legally parked on Lester Place, whether or not it has an LP resident parking
permit.
Provides assistance with the activities of daily living to a Lester Place resident
(defined below) whose doctor certifies, in writing, that the Lester Place
resident requires such assistance for more than three hours per day; or
(1)
Cares for a Lester Place resident's child whose parent certifies, in writing, that
the applicant for the LP resident parking permit (defined below) takes care of
the Lester Place resident's child for more than three hours per day.
(2)
B. Fifteen percent of the total number of parking spaces that lie within that section of
Lester Place that is situated within the zoning district known as the R-7.5 District
shall be public parking spaces. The Superintendent of Highways shall establish the
location of the public parking spaces.
C. Except in the parking spaces designated by the Superintendent of Highways
pursuant to § 219-61B, and except as provided in § 219-63L, only a motor vehicle
to which an LP resident parking permit has been issued shall be permitted to park
on that section of Lester Place that lies within the zoning district known as the R-7.5
District.
§ 219-61 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-62
219:47
§ 219-63. Sale and issuance of resident parking permits.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
AREA RESIDENT — A person who resides within the WS residential area
(defined below) or who resides on the section of Myrtle Boulevard that lies between
North Chatsworth Avenue and Madison Avenue. A person who is employed by an
entity that maintains a place of business on this section of Myrtle Boulevard but
who does not reside on this section of Myrtle Boulevard is not an "area resident."
CAREGIVER — A person who between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
(prevailing time) either:
CONTRACTOR — A person whose motor vehicle displays an insignia indicating
that he/she/it is a home improvement contractor licensed by the County of
Westchester and who is performing work on a property located within the WS
residential area (defined below) either for an area resident, or one of the entities
named in § 219-63L, or the owner or the managing agent of one of the multifamily
buildings within the WS residential area.
ELIGIBLE PERSON — An area resident or caregiver or an entity whose principal
owner is an area resident.
WS RESIDENTIAL AREA — Washington Square, New Jefferson Street, the
section of North Chatsworth Avenue between Myrtle Boulevard and the northern
boundaries of the lots on the opposite side of the public highway improved with
the buildings known by the postal addresses of 35 North Chatsworth Avenue and
40 North Chatsworth Avenue and the section of Murray Avenue between Myrtle
Boulevard and Leafy Lane.
WS RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT — The permit issued by the Town Clerk for
a motor vehicle owned or leased by an eligible person that allows that motor vehicle
to be parked on a public highway within the WS residential area for a period of
time longer than motor vehicles not having such a permit are allowed to park on a
public highway within the WS residential area. When reference is made to a WS
resident parking permit being "issued," that reference includes both the issuance
of the original WS resident parking permit for a particular motor vehicle and all
renewals thereof.
Provides assistance with the activities of daily living to an area resident whose
doctor certifies, in writing, that the area resident requires such assistance for
more than three hours per day; or
(1)
Cares for an area resident's child whose parent certifies, in writing, that the
applicant for the WS resident parking permit (defined below) takes care of the
area resident's child for more than three hours per day.
(2)
A. In this section, the term "resident parking permit" shall refer to both LP resident
parking permits and WS resident parking permits.
B. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of the number of each resident parking permit
issued, the date it is issued, the name and address of the person to whom it is issued
and the numbers, words or letters appearing on the license plate of the motor vehicle
§ 219-62 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-63
219:48
for which a resident parking permit is issued. The Town Clerk shall maintain a
record of all permit fees collected. The Town Clerk shall not issue a resident
parking permit for a motor vehicle:
(1) Unless the owner or lessee of that motor vehicle demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Town Clerk, acting reasonably, that such owner or lessee is
an eligible person;
(2) For which the Town Clerk has issued a parking permit that allows that motor
vehicle to be parked in any of the Town's parking lots; or
(3) That has or is required to have a commercial license plate.
C. The Town Clerk shall not issue a resident parking permit for any motor vehicle
which has three or more outstanding and unpaid parking violations against it for
parking violations that occurred within the unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck.
D. The Town Clerk shall collect the amount shown in § A250-1A for each resident
parking permit, which shall be valid until the last day of October in the first October
after the permit is issued. [Amended 11-4-2020 by L.L. No. 9-2020]
E. The fees collected from the sale of resident parking permits and replacement
resident parking permits shall be credited to the General Fund - Part Town.
F. The Town Clerk shall revoke a resident parking permit if the Town Clerk, acting
reasonably, determines that such permit was issued based upon false information or
was otherwise issued or used improperly or the insignia was wrongfully altered.
The Town Clerk also shall revoke a permit if, after such permit is issued, the
number of outstanding and unpaid parking violations against a motor vehicle for
which such permit had been issued for parking violations that occurred within the
unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck reaches three or more. The Town Clerk shall
mail written notice of the revocation to the person to whom such permit was issued
at the address for such person that appears on the application for the resident
parking permit being revoked. The revocation shall be effective on the third
business day after the notice is mailed. The eligible person shall remove a revoked
resident parking permit from the motor vehicle and return it to the Town Clerk's
Office. The failure to do so shall be a violation of this section. A revoked resident
parking permit may be reinstated by curing the underlying basis for the revocation
and the payment of a fee that is triple the amount of the fee for a resident parking
permit, except where WS resident parking permit has been issued other than April,
May, June, July or August, as shown in § A250-1A.
G. The insignia for a resident parking permit shall be affixed at such location(s) on the
motor vehicle as the Town Clerk may determine. An eligible person's failure to
affix a resident parking permit in the location determined by the Town Clerk shall
be a violation of this section.
H. An eligible person shall be guilty of violating this section if the resident parking
permit insignia issued to the motor vehicle owned or leased by the eligible person
is affixed to another motor vehicle.
I. Resident parking permits are not transferable. If title to a motor vehicle to which a
§ 219-63 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-63
219:49
§ 219-64. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article other than § 219-63M shall be guilty
of a violation and shall be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-65. (Reserved)
§ 219-66. (Reserved)
resident parking permit has been issued is transferred or if such motor vehicle is
returned to the company from which it was leased, the permit for that motor vehicle
no longer shall be valid and the eligible person shall remove the resident parking
insignia from the motor vehicle and destroy it. The failure to do so shall be a
violation of this section.
J. If an eligible person replaces a motor vehicle to which a resident parking permit
had been issued with another motor vehicle that he/she owns or leases, the Town
Clerk shall issue a replacement resident parking insignia; provided that on the date
that the replacement resident parking permit is issued, the motor vehicle is eligible
for a resident parking permit. A replacement resident parking permit shall expire on
the same day as the day on which the resident parking permit that it is replacing
would have expired if that permit were not replaced. The Town Clerk shall collect
the amount established by § A250-1A for each replacement resident parking permit
issued.
K. An eligible person shall remove the resident parking permit insignia from the motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person immediately if that person ceases to be an
eligible person. The failure to do so shall be a violation of this section.
L. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles registered pursuant to § 404-a of the
New York Vehicle and Traffic Law or to motor vehicles owned or operated by
public utility companies, the United States of America, the State of New York, the
County of Westchester, the Unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck, the
Mamaroneck Union Free School District, the Village of Larchmont, Village of
Mamaroneck or contractors.
M. It shall be a violation of this section for a person to supply false information in
connection with an application for a resident parking permit or a replacement
resident parking permit. Such a violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $300 and not more than $500. For the twenty-four-month period following the
date on which a person is convicted of supplying false information in connection
with an application for a resident parking permit, the Town Clerk shall not issue
such a permit for any motor vehicle owned or leased by that person.
§ 219-63 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-66
219:50
ARTICLE V
Accessible Parking
§ 219-67. Spaces designated.
§ 219-68. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-69. (Reserved)
§ 219-70. (Reserved)
A. Accessible parking spaces shall be created and suitably marked in the following
locations:
Name of Public
Highway Side Location
Copley Road North Located 100 feet from Alden Road
Daymon Terrace West In front of the Daymon Terrace
entrance to the Murray Avenue
School
Murray Avenue West In front of 14 North Chatsworth
Avenue, 245 feet north of Myrtle
Boulevard
Myrtle Boulevard West In front of 172 Myrtle Boulevard, 220
feet southwest from North
Chatsworth Avenue
North Chatsworth Avenue North In front of 16 North Chatsworth
Avenue, 260 feet northwest of Myrtle
Boulevard
North Chatsworth Avenue South In front of 21 North Chatsworth
Avenue, 260 feet northwest of Myrtle
Boulevard
Washington Square East 25 feet north of entrance to 2
Washington Square
Washington Square West 25 feet from North Chatsworth
Avenue
Washington Square West In front of 1 Washington Square, 200
feet southwest from North
Chatsworth Avenue
B. Accessible parking spaces shall be created and suitably marked in Parking Lot B.
C. No motor vehicle shall park in any accessible parking space on the public highway
or in any Town parking lot without an accessible parking permit.
§ 219-67 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-70
219:51

ARTICLE VI
Towing Of Motor Vehicles
PART I
Removal and Storage of Motor Vehicles
§ 219-71. Authority to tow and impound vehicles.
§ 219-72. Removal of motor vehicles.
A. In addition to any other penalties or fines imposed for the violation of any law, rule
or regulation, this article shall apply to motor vehicles parked in any fire safety zone
designated in § 108-2, or which:
(1) Either violate any provision of any municipal, state or county ordinance, law,
rule or regulation or have three or more outstanding and unpaid parking
violations issued against them for parking violations that occurred in the
unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck; and
(2) Are located:
(a) On any property owned by, leased by or in the possession and control of
the Town;
(b) On any public highway or private road located in the unincorporated
Town of Mamaroneck, whether or not open to public travel, paved or
unpaved;
(c) In any public parking lot located in the Unincorporated Town of
Mamaroneck; or
(d) In any parking area of an office building, office building complex, place
of public assembly, shopping center, private apartment house complex,
private condominium complex or cooperative apartment complex located
in the unincorporated Town of Mamaroneck whose owner or the person
in general charge of the operation and control of such area has made a
written request to the Town pursuant to New York Vehicle and Traffic
Law § 1660-a.
(3) For the purpose of this article, "outstanding and unpaid parking violations" do
not include parking tickets which, by their terms, are not yet required to be
paid or parking tickets which are outstanding and unpaid because the owner or
lessee of the motor vehicle has pleaded "not guilty" to such ticket and there
has not yet been an adjudication of such ticket.
A. A police officer is authorized to provide for the removal of any motor vehicle
meeting the description contained in § 219-71 to an impound yard or storage facility
maintained by a company or individual with which the Town has entered into a
contract to tow, impound or store motor vehicles.
B. If the removed motor vehicle is registered with the State of New York, the Police
Department shall advise the owner of the place where the motor vehicle may be
§ 219-71 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-72
219:53
§ 219-73. Identification required.
No removed motor vehicle shall be released to anyone other than its registered owner,
that owner's representative or the motor vehicle's lessee. Such person must establish his
or her identity and, in the case of a person other than the registered owner or lessee,
must establish that he or she has the registered owner's or the motor vehicle's lessee's
permission to take possession of such motor vehicle. No removed motor vehicle shall be
released unless the person to whom it is released has signed a receipt therefor.
§ 219-74. Amounts to be paid before release of motor vehicle.
Before a removed motor vehicle is released, proof that the following items have been
paid in full must be exhibited to the person in charge of the impound yard or storage
facility to which the motor vehicle was removed:
§ 219-75. Penalties for offenses.
The owner or lessee of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to this article shall be guilty
of a violation and shall be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
That fine shall be in addition to the amounts required to be paid pursuant to § 219-74,
Subsections A, B, and C.
§ 219-76. (Reserved)
§ 219-77. (Reserved)
recovered and the conditions under which it will be released by sending a certified
letter with such advice to the motor vehicle's registered owner or lessee, at the
address shown for him, her or it on the records of the New York State Department
of Motor Vehicles. Such letter shall be mailed no later than the first business
day after a motor vehicle has been removed. If the removed motor vehicle is not
registered with the State of New York, the Police Department shall use its best
efforts to advise the owner of the place where the motor vehicle may be recovered
and the conditions under which it will be released. The Police Department's failure
to comply with this section shall not entitle the owner or the lessee to recover the
removed motor vehicle without paying the amounts required to be paid pursuant to
§ 219-74.
A. All sums due to the Town for any outstanding and unpaid violations of this chapter
or the NY State Vehicle & Traffic Law that occurred within the unincorporated
Town of Mamaroneck, including penalties and interest, if any;
B. The cost of towing;
C. The cost of storage for each day or portion of a day that such motor vehicle is so
stored; and
D. The fine established in § 219-88.
§ 219-72 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-77
219:54
PART II
Towing Companies
§ 219-78. Contracts with towing companies.
A. The Town Administrator is authorized to enter into contracts on behalf of the Town
with one or more companies to tow, impound and store any motor vehicle which:
(1) Is parked where or during times when stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited in the parking lots owned by the Town or on a public highway;
(2) Is parked in a parking lot owned by the Town or on a public highway during a
storm, flood, fire or other public emergency if the Police Department or the
Highway Department determines that it is in the Town's best interest to remove
such motor vehicle;
(3) Is parked unattended in a parking lot owned by the Town or on a public
highway if the Police Department or the Highway Department determines that
such motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; or
(4) Satisfies the elements of § 219-71.
B. Each such contract shall specify that the company performing the service shall
charge the owner or the lessee of a motor vehicle a reasonable amount for towing,
impounding and storing that motor vehicle. The Town shall not be liable to the
company for payment of any fees whatsoever. It is not mandatory that such
contracts provide for the company to pay a fee to the Town; however, at the Town
Administrator's discretion, he/she may request proposals for such contracts that
would require each company that submits a proposal to designate, either by a fixed
sum or by a percentage of revenue collected, the amount that it would pay to the
Town during the term of such contract.
C. Each company which enters into a contract with the Town to tow, impound and
store motor vehicles shall supply proof satisfactory to the Town Administrator that
the company is insured against personal injury and for property damage in an
amount per occurrence that is satisfactory to the Town Administrator and that it
possesses all of the licenses required to tow, impound and store motor vehicles.
Unless waived by the Town Administrator, each such insurance policy shall
provide that the Town is an "additional insured" under that policy. On or before the
expiration or termination date of any insurance policy or license which a company
is required to maintain pursuant to this section, that company will supply the Town
Administrator with proof that such insurance policy has been renewed or replaced
by an insurance policy which is satisfactory to the Town Administrator and that
such license(s) have been renewed. From time to time, the Town Administrator may
request each such company to produce proof that the required insurance policy and/
or licenses are in full force and effect and that the Town is an "additional insured"
on the insurance policy.
D. Each company which enters into a contract with the Town to tow, impound and
store motor vehicles shall act in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations concerning the towing, impounding and storage of motor vehicles.
§ 219-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-79
219:55
§ 219-79. (Reserved)
§ 219-80. (Reserved)
§ 219-79 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-80
219:56
ARTICLE VII
Snow Emergencies
§ 219-81. Snow emergency public highways
§ 219-82. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the fine for such violation contained in § 219-88.
§ 219-83. (Reserved)
§ 219-84. (Reserved)
A. The Town Supervisor, or whoever may be acting in his or her absence, is authorized
to declare a snow emergency.
B. The following public highways are snow emergency public highways upon which
there will be no parking at any time during a declared snow emergency:
Avon Road
Boston Post Road
Fenimore Road
Fifth Avenue
Forest Avenue
Griffen Avenue
Madison Avenue
Murray Avenue
Myrtle Boulevard
North Chatsworth Avenue
Old White Plains Road
Palmer Avenue
Richbell Road
Rockingstone Avenue
Rockland Avenue
Weaver Street
C. Any motor vehicle parked on a designated snow emergency public highway during
a snow emergency is subject to being towed.
§ 219-81 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-84
219:57

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 219-85. (Reserved)
§ 219-86. (Reserved)
§ 219-85 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-86
219:59

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement And Fines
§ 219-87. Enforcement.
§ 219-88. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every police officer, Code Enforcement Officer and Parking Enforcement Officer
shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Town Board
hereby is authorized to delegate to persons other than officers named in this section
the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter other than those set forth in
§ 219-88 shall be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined in an amount not to exceed $25. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
a separate offense.
A. Fines for violating the sections of this chapter listed below are: [Amended
1-22-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
Infraction Fine Code
Paid parking infraction - parking lots $25 § 219-44
Paid parking infraction - public highway $25 § 219-56
Improper display of parking lot permit
insignia
$25 § 219-49
Improper display of residential parking
permit insignia
$25 § 219-63
Parking in parking lots without a permit $50 § 219-46
Parking prohibited certain times $25 § 219-20
Parking prohibited at all times $50 § 219-18,
§ 219-40A, B and
C
Parking in a bus stop $50 § 219-29
Stopping or standing where prohibited $25 § 219-19
Idling restricted $50 § 219-23
Parking on Lester Place without a
residential parking permit
$25 § 219-61
Time limited parking other than in the WS
resident area
$25 § 219-22
Time limited parking in WS resident area $50 § 219-22
Parking in a fire safety zone or blocking a
fire hydrant
$100 § 219-36
Parking in loading zone $25 § 219-27
§ 219-87 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-88
219:61
Infraction Fine Code
Trucks over certain weight excluded $250 § 219-13
Parking on a snow emergency public
highway during an emergency
$100 § 219-81
Parking in accessible parking space without
a permit
$100 § 219-67
Parking where limited to emergency
personnel
$100 § 219-26
All other infractions of Chapter 219 $25 § 219-87
Towing of motor vehicle $250 § 219-75
Parking in the wrong direction $25 § 219-24
Parking without a license plate $50 § 219-30
Unregistered motor vehicle $50 § 219-31
Uninspected motor vehicle $50 § 219-32
Blocking a driveway $25 § 219-35
Parking on a sidewalk $25 § 219-34
Abandoned vehicle $50 § 219-37
Double parking $50 § 219-33
B. The above fines must be paid no later than 30 days from the date on which the
summons or appearance ticket is issued ("issuance date").
C. The amount of the fine, if paid more than 30 days after the issuance date, shall be:
(1) Double the amount of the fine, if payment is made after the 30th day, but
before 61st day, after the issuance date.
(2) Double the amount of the fine computed pursuant to § 219-88C(1) if payment
is made on or after the 61st day, but before 91st day after the issuance date.
(3) Double the amount of the fine computed pursuant to § 219-88C(2) if payment
is made on or after the 91st day after the issuance date.
§ 219-88 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 219-88
219:62
Chapter 226
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 226-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for purposes of this
chapter, have the meanings indicated:
DUNE BUGGY — Every four-wheel motor vehicle designed specifically for all-terrain
operation, exclusive of snowmobiles.
GO-CART — Every four-wheel motor vehicle, with a motor which produces not more
than 50 horsepower, designed for use as a miniature racing car.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor.
MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE — Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with
a motor which produces not more than five horsepower, and every bicycle with a motor
attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is propelled by any power other than
muscular power.
§ 226-2. Operation of certain vehicles restricted.
Within the Town of Mamaroneck, no dune buggy, go-cart, motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle shall be operated:
§ 226-3. Impoundment of vehicles.
If a motor vehicle is operated in violation of § 226-2 of this chapter, any police officer
shall, upon the written complaint of any resident of the Town or upon said police
A. On any private property, including privately owned driveways and sidewalks,
without the permission of an owner of such property.
B. On private property in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the safety of any person or the property of any person.
C. Except by or under the supervision of an employee of the Town of Mamaroneck,
Union Free School District No. 1 or other state or local government or authority in
the course of his employment on any Town or publicly owned land, including any
park, recreation area, school ground, ballpark, storage facility, garage area or
sidewalk, which is not a portion of a public highway or any other public way.
§ 219-88 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 226-3
226:1
officer witnessing such violation, impound the particular motor vehicle involved in such
violation and store the same with the Police Department.
§ 226-4. Recovery of impounded vehicles; fine and storage fee; disposal.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 226-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the care, custody and
control of any child under the age of 16 years to permit such child to operate a motor
vehicle in violation of this chapter.
§ 226-6. Conflict with state law.
Should any section or portion of this chapter be in conflict with the laws of the State of
New York, then, in that instance, said laws of the State of New York shall prevail.
§ 226-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
Any child, operator or parent who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $250 or to imprisonment
for any term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. If the Town impounds a motor vehicle pursuant to this chapter, the owner may
redeem the same from the Police Department upon the payment of the fine, plus the
storage fee for each day or fraction thereof that the vehicle is stored by the Police
Department, which are as set forth in § A250-1. The fine and storage fee shall
become the property of the Town 30 days after the payment of the same unless,
before such time, the owner of said vehicle makes an application to the Town Court
requesting a hearing concerning said violation. If, after said hearing, the Town
Court decides said vehicle was used in violation of this chapter, the fine and storage
fee shall become Town property. If the Town Court finds that said motor vehicle
was not used in violation of this chapter, said fine and storage fee shall be returned
to the owner of said motor vehicle. [Amended 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
B. If an impounded motor vehicle is not redeemed within 60 days from the time it is
impounded, the Police Department shall mail a notice to the owner thereof by
certified mail, return receipt requested, advising him that the Town, after 30 days
from the date of said notice, shall sell said motor vehicle at public auction and retain
that portion of the proceeds therefrom needed for the payment of the
aforementioned fine and storage fee. Any surplus moneys remaining after the
payment of said fine and storage fee shall be returned to the former owner of said
motor vehicle.
§ 226-3 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 226-7
226:2
Chapter 231
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
§ 226-7 WATER § 226-7
231:1

ARTICLE I
Water Restrictions During Times of Emergency
[Adopted 4-17-2002 by L.L. No. 6-200253 ]
§ 231-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-6-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
§ 231-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. In 1966, the Town Board realized that in times of drought or other circumstances
where there may be a shortage of water, it might be necessary to prohibit and/or
restrict the use of water within the Town. Accordingly, it added Chapter 231,
entitled "Water," to the Code of the entire unincorporated area Town of
Mamaroneck. Since 1966, other governmental units, such as the County of
Westchester, have undertaken a greater role when drought conditions warrant the
imposition of restrictions or prohibitions on the use of water. Accordingly in 2002,
the Town Board updated Chapter 231 to take into account the greater involvement
of other governmental units in the regulation of water usage.
B. In 2011, the Town Board recognized that in addition to droughts that impact the
entire unincorporated area of the Town, local problems, such as low water pressure
in limited areas or ruptures of pipes, may overtax the water supply only in limited
areas. The Town Board therefore is amending Chapter 231 to allow the Supervisor
to impose restrictions on portions of the unincorporated areas of the Town in
situations where Town-wide restrictions are not necessary. The Supervisor will
continue to have the power to impose restrictions on water usage throughout the
unincorporated area of the Town if such restrictions are warranted.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
B. Terms defined. For the purposes of this article, the following phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
EMERGENCY — A period of time when either:
In the judgment of the Supervisor:
The unrestricted use of water may result in the Town not being able to
supply water adequately during certain hours of the day or on certain
days; or
(a)
The reservoirs supplying water to the Town are at dangerously low levels
so that the Town may not be able to supply an adequate quantity of water
to the Town in the future to the entire unincorporated area of the Town or
to one or more sections thereof; or
(b)
(1)
(2) Any unit of government having jurisdiction over such matters (other than the
53. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Water Conservation, adopted 5-4-1966 by L.L. No. 1-1966
(Ch. 87 of the 1975 Code).
§ 231-1 WATER § 231-2
231:3
§ 231-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons while they are within the Town.
§ 231-4. Restrictions during emergency. [Amended 4-6-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
If conditions warrant it, the Supervisor may immediately declare the existence of an
emergency and immediately impose prohibitions and/or restrictions on the use of water
by any person within either the entire unincorporated area of the Town or within one or
more sections of the unincorporated area of the Town as defined by the Supervisor, for
any or all of the following purposes:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS — The persons described in § 34-2 of the
Code.[Amended 9-22-2004 by L.L. No. 12-2004]
PERSON — An individual, or a firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind. "Person" shall not include the Town or
any employee or official of the Town or any of its agencies, authorities, boards,
committees, commissions or departments when such employees or officials are
acting in their official capacities.
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT RESTRICTIONS — Any restrictions and/or
prohibitions on the use of water within the Town of Mamaroneck imposed by any
unit of government (other than the Town of Mamaroneck) having jurisdiction over
such matters.
RESTRICTIONS — The restrictions or prohibitions imposed by the Supervisor on
the use of water within the Town pursuant to § 231-4 of the Code of the Town of
Mamaroneck.
TOWN — The unincorporated section of the Town of Mamaroneck.
Town of Mamaroneck) shall have imposed restrictions and/or prohibitions on
the use of water within the Town. An emergency shall be deemed to continue
until the Supervisor or the unit of government that declared an emergency, as
the case may be, declares that the emergency is over. [Amended 4-6-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011]
A. The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground
covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation.
B. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other type of mobile equipment.
C. The watering, sprinkling or irrigation of golf courses.
D. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches or other
outdoor surfaces.
E. The washing of the exteriors of buildings.
F. The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and machinery.
G. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of
water.
§ 231-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 231-4
231:4
§ 231-5. Exemptions.
For good cause, the Supervisor may exempt any person from the § 231-4 restrictions
and, if so empowered by the unit of government that imposed them, from the regional
government restrictions.
§ 231-6. Enforcement.
§ 231-7. Penalties for offenses.
H. The operation of swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and
recirculatory system.
I. The escape of water through defective plumbing, which shall mean knowingly
allowing plumbing to remain in a state of disrepair.
J. The operation of all or certain types of air-conditioning or refrigeration machines
or equipment.
A. The Supervisor shall cause the § 231-4 restrictions to be published in the Town's
official newspaper and posted on the Town's official Web site. Such restrictions
shall go into effect on the earlier of the day on which they are published in the
Town's official newspaper or posted on the Town's official Web site.
B. Every enforcement officer shall have the power to issue warnings, summonses,
notices of violations or court appearance tickets for any violation of either the
§ 231-4 restrictions or any violation of the regional government restrictions.
C. The Supervisor also shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article
by ordering water service to be discontinued to a particular person or location.
A. Any person violating any of the § 231-4 restrictions shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding
$250. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense.
B. Any person violating any of the regional government restrictions shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount that
is the greater of the fine authorized under § 231-7A or the fine or fines that may be
imposed for a violation of a regional government restriction. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as a separate offense.
§ 231-4 WATER § 231-7
231:5

Chapter 233
WATERFOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 58. Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
§ 233-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Prohibition Against Feeding Waterfowl."
§ 233-2. Purpose.
§ 233-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
FEEDING — The placing of any food substance on Town property within 100 feet of
any waterfowl.
WATERFOWL—Canada Geese, ducks and other fowl commonly found in and around
bodies of water.
§ 233-4. Feeding prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed waterfowl on any publicly owned land.
A. The Town Board finds that the increase in the population of waterfowl in the Town
has caused conditions within the Town which are disturbing to Town residents in
their homes and in public places. The substantial number of waterfowl in the Town
and particularly on Town property, which is reserved for public use, has caused an
excessive amount of droppings to accumulate. Further, the large numbers of
waterfowl have become aggressive in their actions towards individuals and
particularly small children. All of this has resulted in the inability of the residents
of the Town to fully enjoy and utilize Town conservation and recreation facilities.
Further, because of the increasing population of waterfowl, these conditions have
begun to affect private property as well.
B. The Board finds, based upon extensive investigation, the feeding of waterfowl by
humans tends to increase the number of waterfowl in areas where the feeding has
taken place and interferes with the animal's natural feeding, growth and migratory
processes. It provides additional sources of food for the waterfowl not found
naturally and allows relatively small areas to support increasingly large numbers of
waterfowl. The Board further finds that this situation adversely affects the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 231-7 WATERFOWL § 233-5
233:1
§ 233-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered an offense punishable as follows:
A. For the first offense, a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $200.
B. For the second and any subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 and/or imprisonment of up to 15 days.
§ 233-5 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 233-5
233:2
Chapter 234
WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coastal Zone Management Commission — See Ch. 8.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 234-1. Statutory authority; intent; purpose.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACTION [AMENDED 1-1-1998 BY L.L. NO. 1-1998] — Any activity, funding or
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal
Resources Act of the State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive Law).54
B. This chapter is intended to provide a framework for agencies of the Town of
Mamaroneck to consider the policies and purposes contained in the Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program when reviewing applications for actions or
direct agency actions and to assure to the maximum extent practicable that such
actions are consistent with said policies and purposes.
C. It is the intention of the Town of Mamaroneck that the preservation, enhancement
and utilization of the natural and man-made resources of the Town of
Mamaroneck's unique coastal area take place in a coordinated and comprehensive
manner to ensure the proper balance between natural resources and the need to
accommodate population growth and economic development. Accordingly, it is the
purpose of this chapter to achieve a balance permitting the beneficial use of coastal
resources while preventing loss of living marine resources and wildlife; diminution
of open space areas or public access to the waterfront; erosion of shoreline;
impairment of scenic beauty; losses due to flooding, erosion and sedimentation; or
permanent adverse changes to ecological systems.
D. The purpose of this chapter is to recognize modifications in the regulations adopted
by the State of New York for implementation of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act55 and the need to modify this consistency law in view of these changes.
[Added 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
54. Editor's Note: The title of this Act was amended by L. 1986, c. 366, to read "Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal Areas
and Inland Waterways."
55. Editor's Note: See § 8-0101 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 233-5 WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION § 234-2
234:1
permit undertaken by or subject to the approval of an agency of the Town of
Mamaroneck other than the following:
Maintenance or repair involving no substantial changes in an existing structure or
facility.
A.
Replacement, rehabilitation or reconstruction of a structure or facility, in kind, on
the same site, including upgrading buildings to meet building or fire codes.
B.
Agricultural farm management practices, including construction, maintenance and
repair of farm buildings and structures, and land use changes consistent with
generally accepted principles of farming.
C.
D. Repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of new travel lanes.
Street openings and right-of-way openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance
of existing utility facilities.
E.
F. Maintenance of existing landscaping or natural growth.
Extension of utility distribution facilities, including gas, electric, telephone, cable,
water and sewer connections to render service in approved subdivisions or in
connection with any action on this list.
G.
H. Granting of individual setback and lot line variances.
Granting of an area variance(s) for a single-family, two-family or three-family
residence.
I.
Public or private best forest management (silvicultural) practices on less than 10
acres of land, but not including waste disposal, land clearing not directly related to
forest management clear-cutting or the application of herbicides or pesticides.
J.
Minor temporary uses of land having negligible or no permanent impact on the
environment.
K.
L. Installation of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and highways.
Mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, natural resources, land uses and
ownership patterns.
M.
Information collection, including basic data collection and research, water quality
and pollution studies, traffic counts, engineering studies, surveys, subsurface
investigations and soil studies that do not commit the agency to undertake, fund or
approve any Type I or unlisted action.
N.
Official acts of a ministerial nature involving no exercise of discretion, including
building permits where issuance is predicated solely on the applicant's compliance
or noncompliance with the relevant local building or preservation code(s).
O.
Routine or continuing agency administration and management, not including new
programs or major reordering of priorities that may affect the environment.
P.
Conducting concurrent environmental, engineering, economic, feasibility and other
studies and preliminary planning and budgetary processes necessary to the
Q.
§ 234-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 234-2
234:2
ADVISORY OPINION — An opinion rendered by the Coastal Zone Management
Commission to any agency or department of the Town on a matter which is an action as
defined by this chapter.[Added 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
AGENCY — Any department, board, commission, public authority or other agency of
the Town of Mamaroneck which has jurisdiction by law to approve or directly undertake
a given action.
COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION OR COMMISSION—The Town
formulation of a proposal for action, provided that those activities do not commit
the agency to commence, engage in or approve such actions.
R. Collective bargaining activities.
Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement systems or
refinancing existing debt.
S.
Inspections and licensing activities relating to the qualifications of individuals or
businesses to engage in their business or profession.
T.
Purchase or sale of furnishings, equipment or supplies, including surplus
government property, other than the following: land, radioactive material,
pesticides, herbicides or other hazardous materials.
U.
License, lease and permit renewals, or transfers of ownership thereof, where there
will be no material change in permit conditions or the scope of permitted activities.
V.
Adoption of regulations, policies, procedures and local legislative decisions in
connection with any action on this list.
W.
Engaging in review of any part of an application to determine compliance with
technical requirements, provided that no such determination entitles or permits the
project sponsor to commence the action unless and until all requirements of this
chapter have been fulfilled.
X.
Civil or criminal enforcement proceedings, whether administrative or judicial,
including a particular course of action specifically required to be undertaken
pursuant to a judgment or order, or the exercise of prosecutorial discretion.
Y.
Z. Adoption of a moratorium on land development or construction.
AA. Interpreting an existing code, rule or regulation.
BB. Designation of local landmarks or their inclusion within historic districts.
Emergency actions that are immediately necessary on a limited and temporary
basis for the protection or preservation of life, health, property or natural resources,
provided that such actions are directly related to the emergency and are performed
to cause the least change or disturbance, practicable under the circumstances, to the
environment. Any decision to fund, approve or directly undertake other activities
after the emergency has expired is fully subject to the review procedures of this
chapter.
CC.
DD. Applications for area variances for signs located on existing structures.
§ 234-2 WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION § 234-2
234:3
of Mamaroneck-Village of Larchmont Coastal Zone Management Commission
established by Local Law No. 4-1986.56[Amended 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
DIRECT ACTION — An action planned and proposed for implementation by the
municipality or any public or quasi-public agency. "Direct actions" include but are not
limited to capital projects, procedure-making, policy-making and zoning.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM OR LWRP — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Town of Mamaroneck and the Village of
Larchmont, adopted in 1986 pursuant to Article 42 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York and as amended from time to time.
§ 234-3. Review of actions required. [Amended 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 234-4. Action by Coastal Zone Management Commission.
A. When an agency or department of the Town shall undertaken, fund or approve any
activity defined as an action within the meaning of this chapter, it shall submit any
such proposed activity to the Commission for an advisory opinion, provided that
such activity relates to construction, reconstruction, improvement or renovation of
any land or structure.
B. An application to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration for approval of a plan for a proposed direct action shall be
accompanied by a full environmental assessment form (EAF) and a coastal
assessment form (CAF). [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. The Chairman of the Commission shall determine if the application or direct action
description and any supporting material submitted constitutes a full statement for
the purpose of determining consistency with the LWRP. The Chairman may request
other material the Commission believes is necessary for a complete review.
[Amended 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
B. Commission's opinion to be rendered. [Amended 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
(1) The Commission, within 30 days of its receipt of the complete application,
shall render an opinion, in writing, to the referring agency covering the
following questions:
(a) Whether the proposed action is inconsistent with one or more of the
policies of the LWRP.
(b) Whether the proposed action will advance one or more of said policies.
(c) If either of the questions posed in Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) is answered
in the affirmative, the manner in which and the extent to which the
inconsistency and/or advancement is likely to result.
(d) If the questions posed in Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) are both answered in
56. Editor's Note: See Ch. 8, Coastal Zone Management Commission.
§ 234-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 234-4
234:4
§ 234-5. Determination of inconsistency.
the affirmative, whether and to what extent the inconsistency outweighs
or is outweighed by the advancement when measured by the purposes of
the LWRP.
(2) The Commission may also, in its discretion, suggest ways in which the
purposes of the proposed action might be accomplished in a manner that would
result in less hindrance or no hindrance to the policies and purposes of the
LWRP and/or in greater advancement of them.
A. Determination.
(1) If the Commission finds, in its opinion rendered under § 234-4B, that the
proposed action will substantially hinder the achievement of or be
substantially inconsistent with one or more policies of the LWRP, the referring
agency shall, as soon as possible upon receiving the Commission's opinion and
before commencing or permitting such action, issue a written statement either
accepting the Commission's opinion with regard to such inconsistency or
setting it aside, in whole or in part.
(2) Acceptance of inconsistency.
(a) If any part of the finding of inconsistency is accepted, the proposed action
may not be undertaken unless and until the referring agency determines
with respect to the proposed action or any revision thereof which may be
devised by it or presented to it in a revised application that:
[1] No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action to be
taken in a manner which would not substantially hinder the
achievement of such policy or policies; and
[2] The action taken will minimize all adverse effects on such policy or
policies to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) In the case of a direct action, the determination must further include a
finding that the action will result in an overriding public benefit.
(3) A determination by the referring agency, under Subsection A(2)(a)[1] and [2]
and, where applicable, Subsection A(2)(b), shall constitute a determination
that the action is consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the
approved LWRP as required by the Executive Law, Article 42.
B. In making any determination under Subsection A, the referring agency shall take
the opinion of the Commission fully into account and make it part of the public
record of its proceedings. Where the referring agency acts contrary to the opinion
of the Commission, it shall so notify the Commission, in writing, and shall state its
reasons therefor in its determination and in its notice to the Commission.
[Amended 1-1-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 234-4 WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION § 234-5
234:5

Chapter 240
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 77.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 92.
Fire limits — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 110.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 173.
Signs — See Ch. 175.
Site plan review — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 190.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 192.
Trees — See Ch. 207.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 234.
§ 234-5 ZONING § 234-5
240:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 240-1. Short title. [Amended 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Town of Mamaroneck Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 240-2. Purpose.
There is hereby established a Comprehensive Zoning Plan for the unincorporated part
of the Town of Mamaroneck, New York (hereinafter referred to as the "Town"), which
plan is set forth in the text, map and schedules which constitute this chapter. Said plan is
adopted for the purposes set forth in Article 16, Chapter 62, of the Consolidated Laws of
the State of New York,57 and more particularly for the protection and promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare, as follows:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with a
Comprehensive Plan of land use and population density that represents the most
beneficial and convenient relationships among the residential, commercial and
public areas within the Town, considering the suitability of the various uses in each
area and the potential for such uses as indicated by existing conditions and trends
in population, having regard for the use of land, building development and
economic activity, with such conditions and trends being considered both within
the Town and in relation to adjoining areas.
B. To provide adequate light, air and privacy; to secure safety from fire and other
danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population.
C. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the
Town and to ensure that all developments shall be orderly and beneficial.
D. To protect and conserve the value of buildings in the various districts established
by this chapter.
E. To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings throughout
the Town to the Comprehensive Zoning Plan set forth in this chapter and to
minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
F. To promote the most beneficial relation between the uses of land and buildings and
the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard to the
avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and convenient
traffic access appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings throughout the
Town.
G. To aid in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of
public facilities and services and for private enterprise by effective use of land or
building in building development, investment and other economic activity relating
to uses of land and buildings throughout the Town. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L.
57. Editor's Note: See § 261 et seq. of the Town Law.
§ 240-1 ZONING § 240-2
240:3
§ 240-3. Word usage.
All words used in the present tense include the future tense; all words in the plural
number include the singular number; and all words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The
word "lot" includes the word "plot," the word "building" includes the word "structure"
and the word "shall" is mandatory and directory. The word "person" includes any
legal entity as well as an individual. The word "use" shall be deemed also to include
"designed, intended or arranged to be used." Unless otherwise specified, all distances
shall be measured horizontally. The word "Town" means the unincorporated part of the
Town of Mamaroneck; the term "Town Board" means the Town Board of said Town; the
term "Board of Appeals" means the Board of Appeals of said Town; the term "Planning
Board" means the "Town Planning Board" of said Town.
§ 240-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALTER — To change or rearrange the structural parts or the exit facilities of a building
or structure, including an extension on a side or increase in height, or the moving from
one location or position to another.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade
level of principal buildings and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches,
parapets, steps and terraces.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building wholly or partly underground and extending
no more than five feet above the finished grade.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of a main building on the same lot.
BUILDING, LENGTH — The horizontal distance between the furthermost walls of a
building, measured along or parallel to the axis of its greatest dimension.
BUILDING, MAIN—A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the
lot on which said building is situated.
CAFETERIA — An establishment engaged in preparing and serving a full line of food
and beverages primarily through the use of a service line where the customer serves
himself or is served from displayed selections and, where table or booth seating facilities
are available, some limited waitperson service may be provided.[Added 3-4-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998]
CELLULAR TELEPHONE FACILITY — All facilities, equipment, apparatus and
devices used for cellular telephone communications.[Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No.
No. 14-1996]
H. To limit development to an amount commensurate with the availability and
capacity of public facilities and services.
§ 240-2 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-4
240:4
3-1995]
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to members and their
guests for recreational, athletic or social purposes which are not conducted primarily
for gain, provided that there are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities except as required generally for the membership and purposes of
such club.
CO-BRANDING — The expansion of an existing fast-food establishment use, as
defined, or portion thereof which is not incidental or subordinate to the principal use,
but rather co-exists as a similar principal use on the same lot and within the same
building.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment of not more than 2,000 square
feet offering a wide variety of goods and merchandise for sale to the public, whose
principal products include food, beverages, candy and cigarettes, and where most
products are sold for consumption upon leaving the establishment. The term
"convenience store" shall not be considered to include supermarket or grocery
store.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
COURT — An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two or more sides by such
building or buildings.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of a building.
COURT, OUTER — A court extending to a street line or opening upon any front, side
or rear yard.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
DELICATESSEN — An establishment which prepares and sells food and beverages
ordered from a counter or display case where the patron selects from a variety of
ingredients (meats, fish, salads, etc.) which are assembled, as requested by the patron,
and/or are available separately for purchase by weight or quantity, and in which tables,
chairs or counters for the consumption of food on the premises are not provided.[Added
3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
DISTRICT—The term "residence district" shall mean any district prefixed by "R." The
term "business district" shall mean any district prefixed by "B." The term "light industry
district" shall mean any district prefixed by "LI," and the term "office building district"
shall mean any district prefixed by "OB" as set forth in § 240-5.[Amended 7-17-1996
by L.L. No. 14-1996]
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as living quarters for one or
more families; the term shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, rooming house or
tourist home.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY—A detached building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling units
only.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping
§ 240-4 ZONING § 240-4
240:5
facilities for one family.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit.[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
ready-to-consume food and beverages, generally served in disposable or prepackaged
containers or wrappers, in which patrons usually select their orders from a posted menu
offering a limited number of specialized items such as but not limited to hamburgers,
chicken, fish and chips, pizza, tacos and hot dogs; these items are prepared according to
standardized procedures for consumption either on or off the premises in a facility where
a substantial portion of the sales to the public is by drive-in or stand-up service and
primary cleanup is generally performed by the customer. The term "fast-food restaurant"
shall not be considered to include restaurant, delicatessen, take-out establishment,
bakery or ice cream/confectionary store[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998].
FENCE — A structure, including a wall, enclosing a yard or portion of a yard, used to
prevent or impede entrance and/or to mark a boundary.[Added 2-7-1996 by L.L. No.
3-1996]
FLOOR AREA RATIO[Amended 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003] —
FOOD COURT — A retail establishment in which space is leased and/or operated by
more than one fast-food restaurant, take-out establishment or ice cream/confectionary
store, as defined in this section, in which a common seating area is shared by lessees,
and where customers order from and are served by individual personnel identified with
the various product lines at individual counters.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
FOOD-RELATED RETAIL—Any retail business primarily engaged in the sale of food
products, whether consumed on or off premises.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
FRONTAGE — The extent of a building or of land along a street.
FRONT SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the minimum front yard dimension for the district in which located.
GARAGE, PRIVATE—An accessory building or part of a main building used only for
FLOOR AREA RATIO FOR A LOT WHOSE PRINCIPAL USE IS A ONE- OR
A TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — The ratio of the aggregate floor area of all of
the buildings on a lot to the area of the lot on which the buildings are located.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence the following shall be excluded from the
calculation of floor area:
(1) The aggregate floor area of any basement area, regardless of its use; and
The aggregate floor area of the portion of a floor lying under a roof where the
distance between that portion of the floor and the ceiling above it is five feet
or less.
(2)
A.
FLOOR AREA RATIO FOR A LOT WHOSE PRINCIPAL USE IS NOT A ONEOR
A TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — The ratio of the aggregate floor area of all
of the buildings on a lot, exclusive of attic and basement areas used only for storage
or services incidental to the operation or maintenance of the buildings, to the area
of the lot on which the buildings are located.
B.
§ 240-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-4
240:6
the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof used for the storage, care, repair
or painting of motor vehicles for remuneration, including any sale of motor vehicle
accessories, fuels and lubricants, or where motor vehicles are kept for hire.
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon, or any
building or part thereof that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle
accessories and which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, minor
repairing or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not including painting or body work.
GRADE, FINISHED — The finished grade at any point along the wall of a building is
the elevation of the completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads adjoining the wall at
that point.
GROCERY STORE—A retail store of not more than 5,000 square feet selling a limited
assortment of food-related products and sundries.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The vertical distance to the level of the
highest point of the roof's surface, if the roof is flat or inclines not more than one inch
vertical to one foot horizontal, or to the mean point between the eaves and the highest
point of the roof, if of any other type, or to the highest point of the structure, if it has no
roof, measured as follows:
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling
and carried on only by the residents thereof, which use is clearly incidental or secondary
to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character
thereof. The conducting of a clinic, hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor, hairdressing
establishment, tearoom, tourist home, rooming house, animal hospital or any similar use
shall not be deemed to be a "home occupation."
HOSPITAL — Unless otherwise specified, the term "hospital" shall be deemed to
include sanitarium, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home and any other place for
the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments, but not including contagious
diseases except, incidentally, alcoholism, drug addiction, epilepsy or mental diseases.
HOUSE TRAILER — Any portable or mobile vehicle used or designed to be used for
living or sleeping purposes. The term "trailer" shall include such a vehicle if mounted on
temporary or permanent foundations, with or without the wheels in place.
ICE CREAM/CONFECTIONARY STORE — An establishment primarily engaged in
the rapid retail sale of ice cream, frozen yogurt and/or other confectionary desserts
If the building adjoins the front property line or is not more than 10 feet distant
therefrom: measured at the center of the front wall of the building from the
established grade of the curb; or, if no grade has been officially established,
measured from the elevation of the existing curb; or, if no grade has been officially
established and no curb exists, measured from the average level of the finished
ground surface across the front of the building.
A.
If the building is more than 10 feet from the front property line: measured from the
average level of the finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Where the finished ground surface is made by filling, the level of such finished
grade, for the purpose of this definition, shall not be deemed to be more than three
feet above the established grade of the curb.
B.
§ 240-4 ZONING § 240-4
240:7
and beverages from a counter or display case where the food is sold primarily for
consumption off the premises and where the floor area devoted to customer seating
has 12 or fewer seats and complies with the area requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.58 The term "ice cream parlor" shall not be
considered to include fast-food restaurant or delicatessen.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No.
4-1998]
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the parking of one truck for
loading or unloading of goods, not less than 15 feet wide, 40 feet long and 14 feet high,
and having direct usable access to a street or alley, except that where one such "loading
space" has been provided, any additional "loading space" lying alongside, contiguous to
and not separated from such first "loading space" need not be wider than 12 feet.
LOT—A parcel of land, not divided by streets, occupied or to be occupied by a building
or buildings and accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required
under the provisions of this chapter, and having its principal frontage on a street or on
such other means of access as may be deemed, in accordance with the provision of law,
to be adequate as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a building on such
land.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut on streets or public
places. Any other lot is an interior lot. That portion of a "corner lot" in excess of 100 feet
from the widest street on which such lot abuts shall be considered an interior lot.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line or lines separating the lot from the street or
streets.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width of a lot, measured at right angles to its depth.
LUNCHEONETTE — An establishment engaged in offering ready-to-consume and
made-to-order food that is prepared on premises and served at a sit-down counter, and/
or limited table service may also be provided. The menu is usually limited to breakfast
and/or lunch, and a limited assortment of sundries may be offered at the counter for
sale.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon payment of a
charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by
the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include but is not limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, electronic bowling machines,
electronic baseball, football, hockey or basketball machines, video machines, any and
all air-propelled machines, pool tables, shooting galleries and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto, under whatever name they may be indicated, whether or not
electronically operated.[Added 12-7-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988]
58. Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 240-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-4
240:8
MOTEL — A series of attached, semidetached or detached dormitory units, without
kitchen facilities, having a private outside entrance for each unit, provided with an
automobile parking space convenient to each unit and providing lodging, with or without
meals and other incidental services, for a transient clientele exclusively.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or of land that does not conform to
the regulations as to use in the district in which it is situated, which use was lawful at the
time this chapter or amendments thereto became effective.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care and instruction
to five or more children under six years of age and registered by the State Education
Department.
PARKING AREA — An off-street area containing one or more parking spaces, with
passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto. In general, there shall be an average of
about 350 square feet of parking area per parking space.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for parking of one motor vehicle
on a transient basis having dimensions of not less than nine feet by 20 feet exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto and having
direct usable street access to a street or alley, except that 90% of parking spaces
appurtenant to multifamily uses containing three or more dwelling units shall have
a minimum dimension of not less than eight and one-half by eighteen (8 1/2 x 18)
feet.[Amended 10-23-1991 by L.L. No. 14-1991]
PRIVATE TRANSMISSION TOWER — A wireless communication facility, not used
commercially.[Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
PUBLIC UTILITY — Persons, firms or corporations supplying gas, electricity, water,
power, transportation or telephone service (excluding cellular telephone service) to the
general public.[Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY—The machinery and equipment, including pipes, lines,
wires and/or other conductors or conduits, materials, apparatus, tools, vehicles, supplies
and storage facilities, used by public utilities.[Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
RESTAURANT — An establishment which prepares and serves food and beverages
selected by patrons from a full menu, served by a waitperson, and consumed on the
premises, and which has permanent seating facilities and counters or tables adequate to
accommodate all customers served. To the extent that food is separately ordered and
taken out, this latter function shall be considered accessory to the primary restaurant
use. The term "restaurant" shall not be considered to include fast-food establishment,
delicatessen, take-out food establishment, bakery or ice cream/confectionary store as
described elsewhere in this section.[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
RETAINING WALL — A structure which holds or secures in place rock and/or
earth.[Added 2-7-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building or portion thereof containing more than two and
fewer than 10 rooms without kitchen facilities that are used, rented or hired out to
be occupied or that are occupied for sleeping purposes for compensation, whether the
compensation shall be paid directly or indirectly. The term "rooming house" shall be
deemed to include a lodging house and boardinghouse, but not tourist home, motel or
multifamily dwelling.
§ 240-4 ZONING § 240-4
240:9
SIGN OR SIGNS — Any material or structure or part thereof composed of lettered or
pictorial matter or upon which lettered or pictorial matter is placed which is used outside
of or on the exterior of any building for display of an advertisement, announcement,
notice, directional matter or name and includes signs, billboards, signboards, illuminated
signs or ground signs but does not include signs erected and maintained pursuant to and
in the discharge of any governmental function.[Amended 4-7-1963]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between
the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall be counted as a "story" if the
ceiling is more than five feet above the level from which the height of the building is
measured or if it is used for business purposes or for dwelling purposes by other than a
janitor or watchman and his family.
STORY, HALF — A story with at least two opposite exterior sides meeting a sloping
roof not more than two feet above the floor of such story.
STREET—An existing state, county or Town highway, a street shown on a subdivision
plat approved by the Town Planning Board under §§ 276 and 277 of the Town Law or
a street on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the
appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to approve
plats.
STREET LINE — The line separating the street from the property abutting such street.
STRUCTURE—Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including but not
limited to signs, swimming pools and tennis courts.
SUPERMARKET — A retail store of more than 5,000 square feet selling a complete
assortment of food and food preparation materials, household items and other retail
items. "Supermarkets" may contain accessory pharmacies, delicatessens, meat and fish
markets, bakeries and florists within the principal use structure.[Added 3-4-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998]
TAKE-OUT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; BAKERY — An establishment which
prepares and sells food and beverages served in disposable containers, ordered by
telephone, or from a counter or display case, where the patron selects from a fixed
menu consisting primarily of freshly prepared foods, beverages or baked goods, which
foodstuffs are sold primarily for consumption off the premises but may also include
customer seating, provided that the area devoted to such seating is clearly accessory to
the main business, has 12 or fewer seats and complies with the area requirements of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.59[Added 3-4-1998 by L.L.
No. 4-1998]
USABLE OPEN SPACE —A portion of the ground area of a lot which is available and
accessible to all occupants of the building or buildings on said lot for outdoor recreation
use, which area is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces, is at least 25 feet in
minimum dimension and has no more than 10% of its area with a grade of more than
5%.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or
59. Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 240-4 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-4
240:10
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use"
or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a lot or a building and located on the same lot therewith and limited to
the uses specifically listed in the schedule of permitted uses for the zoning district in
which it is located.
YARD — An open space of uniform width or depth on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings and
the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
for certain features specified in § 240-50. In measuring a "yard," as hereinafter provided,
the line of a building shall be deemed to mean a line parallel to the nearest lot line, drawn
from a point of a building or the point of a group of buildings nearest to such lot line,
exclusive of certain features specified in the aforesaid section as not to be considered in
measuring yard dimensions or as being permitted to extend into any front, side or rear
yard, respectively, and the measurement shall be taken at right angles from said line of
the building to the nearest lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the
building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of
such yards, to the front and rear lot line, as the case may be.
§ 240-4 ZONING § 240-4
240:11

ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 240-5. Establishment. [Amended 7-16-1986 by L.L. No. 9-1986; 4-4-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990; 5-8-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994; 11-5-2003
by L.L. No. 22-2003; 9-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
The Town of Mamaroneck is hereby divided into the following classes of districts:
R-50 One-Family Residence District (50,000 square feet)
R-30 One-Family Residence District (30,000 square feet)
R-20 One-Family Residence District (20,000 square feet)
R-15 One-Family Residence District (15,000 square feet)
R-10 One-Family Residence District (10,000 square feet)
R-7.5 One-Family Residence District (7,500 square feet)
R-6 One-Family Residence District (6,000 square feet)
R-2F Two-Family Residence District
R-GA Garden Apartment District
R-A Attached Residence District
R-TA Tower Apartment District
B-R Business-Residential District
LI Light Industrial District
UR Urban Renewal District
SB-R Service Business-Residential District
B-MUB Business-Mixed Use Business District
R Recreation District
§ 240-6. Zoning Map.60
Said districts are bounded and defined as shown on a sectional map entitled "Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Mamaroneck, New York," adopted June 29, 1959, and
certified by the Town Clerk, which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made
a part of this chapter.
§ 240-7. Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow streets, rights-of-way, watercourses
or lot lines or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary
lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map.
60. Editor's Note: For amendments to the Zoning Map subsequent to its adoption, consult copies on file at the Town
Clerk's office.
§ 240-5 ZONING § 240-7
240:13
§ 240-8. Divided properties.
Where a lot in one ownership of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter or
any amendment thereto is divided by one or more district boundary lines, the Board of
Appeals may permit the extension of a use or structure which is a permitted use in one
portion of said lot into the portion in which it is not a permitted use, provided that:
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as following approximately streets, rightsof-
way or watercourses, the center lines thereof shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
C. The zoning classification of any water area within the Town inshore from the mean
low-tide line on the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to be the same as
the classification of the adjoining land area, and the zoning classification of any
area extending outward from the shore beyond said mean low-tide line shall be
R-30.
D. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines,
such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
E. In unsubdivided property or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of
any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on said map,
shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon.
F. If the district classification of any land is in question, it shall be deemed to be in the
adjoining district which appears first in § 240-5.
A. The lot has frontage on a street in the district in which such use is permitted;
B. The extension does not come within 100 feet of the street in the other district; and
C. Conditions and safeguards are attached to such permit to protect existing or
prospective development in the latter district.
§ 240-7 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-8
240:14
ARTICLE III
Regulations Applicable in All Districts
§ 240-9. Applicability.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared
to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, morals, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. This chapter shall not be deemed to affect in
any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or land or upon the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration
or enlargement of buildings than is imposed by other ordinances, rules, regulations,
licenses, certificates or other authorizations or by easements or covenants or agreements,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Except as hereinafter provided, the following
general regulations shall apply.
§ 240-10. Conformance required.
No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged nor shall any land or
building be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformity with this chapter for the district in which such building or land is
located. Any use not specifically permitted by this chapter is prohibited.
§ 240-11. Number of main buildings on a lot.
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot, as herein defined. There
shall be not more than one main building and its accessory buildings on one lot except
for nonresidential buildings and multifamily dwellings in districts where such uses are
permitted.
§ 240-12. Yards and open spaces.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of these regulations shall be included as any part of the yard or
open space for any other building; no yard or any other open space on one lot shall be
considered as a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
§ 240-13. Subdividing lots.
Should a lot be hereafter formed from the part of a lot already occupied by a building,
such separation shall be effected in such manner as not to impair conformity with any
of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building and all yards
and other required spaces in connection therewith, and no permit shall be issued for
the erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless it complies with all the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-14. Irregularly shaped lots.
Where a question exists as to the proper application of any of the regulations of this
chapter to a particular lot or parcel because of peculiar or irregular shape of the lot or
parcel, the Board of Appeals shall determine how such regulations shall be applied.
§ 240-9 ZONING § 240-15
240:15
§ 240-15. Required street frontage.
No permit shall be issued for any structure unless the lot upon which the structure is to
be built has a frontage of at least the minimum width prescribed for the zone in which
located on a street or highway, as defined in § 280-a of the Town Law, which street
or highway shall have been suitably improved or a bond posted therefor, as provided
in said law, except where the Planning Board has approved a lesser width as part of a
subdivision plan, as authorized by § 240-16.
§ 240-16. Zoning modifications.
§ 240-17. Flood-hazard areas. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
In areas adjacent to flood-hazard areas, all buildings and structures shall be erected in
compliance with this chapter and Chapter 110, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 240-18. Usable open space.
Included in every lot hereafter developed, in whole or in part, for residence, there shall
be provided at least the area of usable open space as defined herein and as specified in
Articles IV through VII for each dwelling unit.
§ 240-19. Accessory uses.
All accessory uses shall be located on the same lot with the principal uses to which they
are accessory.
§ 240-19.1. Public utility and cellular telephone facility. [Added 2-15-1995 by L.L.
No. 3-1995]
A. Simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat, and pursuant to § 278 of the
Town Law, the Planning Board is authorized to modify the zoning regulations with
respect to lot area and dimensions where, for reasons of topography, shape or
dimensions of the area to be subdivided, such modification would permit a better
subdivision layout, provided that the average size of all lots shown on the
subdivision plat shall be equal to or greater than the required minimum area, that no
more than 20% of the lots shown on the plats shall have less than 80% of the
minimum area specified in Articles IV through VII, and further provided that no lot
shall have a width at any point or a street line frontage of less than 25 feet.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. Each approved modification of the zoning regulations shall be noted specifically on
the plat, and a copy of the plat shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Upon the filing
of said plat in the office of the County Clerk, the approved modifications shall be
recorded as a part of this chapter.
A. Required conformity. No cellular telephone facility shall hereinafter be used,
erected, moved, reconstructed, changed or altered unless in conformity with the
following specific regulations.
B. Exceptions. Exceptions to these regulations are limited to private transmission
towers that are new uses accessory to residential uses, so long as the height of any
§ 240-15 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-19.1
240:16
such use does not exceed other height limitations provided for in this chapter or
the elevation of the surrounding neighboring treeline, whichever is greater, and
approved uses existing prior to the effective date of these regulations.
C. Site plan.
(1) An applicant seeking approval for a telecommunications tower or antenna is
required to submit a site plan in conformance with applicable site plan
submission requirements, except to the extent that Chapter 177, Site Plan
Review, may otherwise provide for a waiver of any such requirements. The
site plan shall show all existing and proposed structures and improvements and
shall include documentation on the proposed intent and capacity of the use, as
well as justification for the height of any tower or antenna.
(2) The Planning Board shall require that the site plan submission include a
completed visual environmental assessment form (visual EAF) and, if
applicable, a landscape plan addressing other standards listed in this section,
with particular attention to visibility from key viewpoints identified in the
visual EAF, existing treelines and proposed elevations.
(3) A safety analysis described in Subsection E below shall be required.
(4) A report shall be submitted, prepared by a licensed professional engineer
which, in the case of a tower, describes the tower height and design, including
a cross section of the structure; demonstrates the tower's compliance with
applicable structural standards; and describes the tower's capacity, including
the number and type of antennas it can accommodate. In the case of an antenna
mounted on an existing structure, the report shall indicate the existing
structure's suitability to accept the antenna and the proposed method of
affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures and
couplings and the precise point of attachment shall be indicated.
D. Shared use.
(1) The shared use of existing towers and antenna facilities shall be preferred to
the construction of new such facilities. The applicant shall submit an adequate
report inventorying existing towers and antenna sites within a reasonable
distance from the proposed site outlining opportunities for shared use as an
alternative to the proposed use. The applicant must demonstrate that the
proposed tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an existing approved
tower or facility due to one or more of the following reasons:
(a) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing
and approved towers and facilities, considering existing and planned use
for those facilities.
(b) The planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with
other existing or planned equipment which cannot be reasonably
prevented.
(c) Existing or approved towers or facilities do not have space on which
proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and
§ 240-19.1 ZONING § 240-19.1
240:17
reasonably.
(d) Other reasons make it impracticable to place the equipment proposed by
the applicant on existing and approved towers or facilities.
(2) Approval of a proposed antenna to share an existing tower or facility shall be
conditioned upon the applicant's agreement to pay all costs of adapting an
existing facility to a new shared use. These costs can include structural
reinforcement, preventing transmission or receiver interference, additional site
screening and other changes required to accommodate shared use.
E. Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) threshold. The applicant shall
submit a safety analysis of the electromagnetic environment surrounding the
proposed site. The safety analysis shall be prepared by a qualified electromagnetic
engineering specialist or health professional qualified to produce such analysis. The
safety analysis must demonstrate that the nonionizing electromagnetic radiation
(NIER) emanating from the antenna not exceed threshold levels (550 milliwatts per
centimeter square). The analysis shall indicate the horizontal and radial distance
from the NIER source to the nearest property line and the nearest residential
structure. The study shall then provide the ambient NIER levels in the frequency
range of the proposed source measured at the two points identified above. The
calculated NIER level at any one of the two points listed above shall not exceed
one-fourth (1/4) of the threshold level.
F. Setbacks. Antennas or sources of NIER situated in the Recreation District shall be
setback from the nearest neighboring residential property by a distance not less than
1,200 feet. Antennas or sources of NIER situated in the LI District shall comply
with the existing setbacks applicable to that zone. All related accessory facilities
and structures, including but not limited to equipment sheds, parking areas, anchors,
bases and pads, shall comply with the existing setbacks and dimensional regulations
established for accessory uses in the appropriate zone, except for the height of the
cellular telephone tower.
G. Inspection. Towers shall be inspected annually for structural integrity and
continued compliance with the thresholds in Subsection E by a licensed
professional engineer. A copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the
Town Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration indicating repairs made. [Amended 3-15-1995 by L.L. No.
4-1995; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
H. Visibility. All towers and antennas shall be sited to have the least possible practical
visual effect on the environment. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless
otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal, state or
local authority. Towers shall be a galvanized finish or painted grey above the
surrounding treeline and grey or green below the treeline.
I. Screening. Where a cellular telephone facility abuts residential, parkland or other
open space, the following vegetative screening shall be provided. One row of native
evergreen shrubs or trees capable of forming a continuous hedge at least five feet in
height within two years of planting shall be provided to effectively screen the tower
base and accessory facilities. Additional screening may be required to screen
portions of the tower from nearby residential property or important views.
§ 240-19.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-19.1
240:18
§ 240-20. Schedule of regulations.
The schedule of regulations, Articles IV through VII, which defines the use of land
and buildings, the height of buildings, the yards and other open spaces to be provided
contiguous to or in connection with buildings, the area of lots, off-street parking space,
loading space and all other matters contained herein as indicated for the various districts
by this chapter, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
regulations listed for each district as designated, reading from left to right across the
schedule, are subject to all other provisions of this chapter and, unless otherwise
indicated, shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements in every instance of their
application. Only those uses specifically listed as being permitted shall be permitted.
§ 240-19.1 ZONING § 240-20
240:19

ARTICLE IV
Residence Districts: Permitted Uses
§ 240-21. One-Family Residence Districts: R-50, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10 and R-7.5
[Amended 1-5-1960; 4-17-1963; 7-16-1986 by L.L. No. 9-1986]
A. Principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Churches and other places of worship.
(3) Public elementary and high schools.
(4) Water supply facilities.
B. Special uses (subject to conformance with additional standards as provided in
Article IX).
(1) Parochial and private elementary and high schools which meet the same site
standards of the State Education Department as a public school.
(2) Nursery schools.
(3) Nonprofit membership clubs.
(4) Public utility substations serving the local area only and where it can be shown
that it cannot be located in a nonresidential district.
(5) Playground, park, parkway, library, firehouse, police station or other
municipal use, not including incinerators or dumps. [Amended 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 14-1996]
C. Accessory uses (when located on the same lot with the principal uses to which they
are accessory).
(1) Professional office of a physician, dentist, chiropractor, architect, engineer or
similar professional person, when conducted in a dwelling by the inhabitant
thereof, with not more than one nonresident employee or associate in any
dwelling.
(2) Keeping of not more than two nontransient persons as roomers or boarders in
any dwelling, provided that no sign is displayed and no separate cooking
facilities shall be maintained in connection with such accessory use.
(3) Private garden house, garage, toolhouse, playhouse, family swimming pool (as
permitted by Chapter 106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction), tennis
courts, greenhouse or similar private accessory use not used for commercial or
public purposes.
(4) Off-street parking in accordance with §§ 240-75 through 240-78.
(5) Parish house, rectory, Sunday-school rooms.
(6) Signs as provided in Chapter 175, Signs.
§ 240-21 ZONING § 240-21
240:21
§ 240-21.1. Recreation District: R. [Added 7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994]
(7) Tennis courts are permitted when constructed in conformity with the
following: [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(a) Tennis courts must be in the rear one-third (1/3) of the property.
(b) No court may be erected closer than 15 feet to the property line.
(c) Drainage of the court surface must be performed to the satisfaction of the
Building and Engineering Department.
(d) No exterior lighting will be permitted which directs or allows light to
bleed onto adjacent residential properties.
(e) No fencing shall be higher than eight feet without approval of the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
(8) Within an enclosed garage, one commercial vehicle may be stored. Said
vehicle may not exceed 220 inches in length nor have a gross vehicle weight
in excess of 5,000 pounds. Motor homes, RV's or trailers or boats and their
trailers may not be stored in a front yard area or within 10 feet of any structure
other than a garage. [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
A. Principal uses.
(1) Private recreation facilities, including golf, tennis and/or swimming clubs,
along with clubhouses with accessory restaurants and catering facilities, used
in conjunction with a recreational facility.
(2) Other uses similar to those listed in the preceding subsection, provided that the
Planning Board makes specific findings that the use is in full conformity with
the purposes and intent of this zone district and all general and special
requirements of the district and that the use has no greater impact upon open
space, traffic and drainage than any of the specifically enumerated uses.
B. Special permit uses; requirements.
(1) Special permit uses.
(a) Public playground or park, including golf, tennis and/or swimming clubs.
This provision shall apply to the Town in addition to any other municipal
government or authority.
(2) Special permit requirements.
(a) Special permits shall be issued by the Planning Board, provided that there
is a finding that all general and special conditions are met.
(b) The Planning Board shall require that no special permit be issued until a
traffic study is conducted which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the proposed use shall not adversely impact upon
traffic in the surrounding area to a greater degree than any other principal
use permitted in the zone.
§ 240-21 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-21.1
240:22
(3) Cellular telephone facility. [Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
C. Accessory uses (when located on the same lot with the principal uses to which they
are accessory).
(1) Off-street parking in accordance with §§ 240-75 through 240-78.
(2) Cabanas, lockers, snack bars and/or pro shops.
(3) Maintenance sheds and/or garages.
(4) Signs as provided in Article XIV of the Building Code.61
(5) Playing fields and courts for baseball, volleyball, basketball and similar sports.
(6) Playgrounds and picnic areas.
(7) No more than one residence for caretakers and staff of a recreational facility
consisting of no more than 10 sleeping rooms or three dwelling units.
(8) Cross-country skiing, sledding, ice skating and similar winter sports; however,
winter sports using mechanized or motorized equipment is prohibited.
(9) Child-care facility limited to children of members or guests of the recreational
facility and used only while the members or guests are using the recreational
facilities.
D. Special requirements.
(1) The Planning Board shall review the design of all site plans of properties
located in this district:
(a) So as to preserve to the maximum extent possible wetlands, wetland
control areas, flood hazard areas, designated critical environmental areas
and other unique natural features, including but not limited to the highest
crest of hills, natural rock outcroppings and major tree belts.
(b) To ensure that no construction takes place on areas which have slopes
greater than 25% prior to any disturbance of the natural contours of the
property or on wetland control areas. A slope shall be computed by taking
a percentage in which the vertical distance is the numerator and the
horizontal distance is the denominator calculated by measuring the
vertical rise using two-foot contours, in a thirty-foot horizontal length.
(c) To minimize cut and fill; roads should follow natural topography
wherever possible.
(2) There shall be maintained a minimum of 20% of the area of a parcel as a
permanent open space. For the purposes of this section, permanent open space
shall be an area exclusive of fairways, tees, greens or other areas of active
recreational use, which shall be kept undisturbed and in its natural state,
including areas designated as wetlands.
61. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 175, Signs.
§ 240-21.1 ZONING § 240-22
240:23
§ 240-22. One-Family Residence District: R-6.
§ 240-23. Two-Family Residence District: R-2F.
§ 240-24. Garden Apartment District: R-GA.
§ 240-25. Business - Mixed Use Business District: B-MUB. [Added 4-4-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990; amended 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998; 5-25-2005 by L.L. No.
9-2005]
A. Principal uses.
(1) The same as § 240-21A above.
(2) Railways, not including switching, storage or freight yards or sidings.
B. Special uses. The same as § 240-21B above.
C. Accessory uses. The same as § 240-21C above.
A. Principal uses.
(1) The same as § 240-21A above.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
B. Special uses. The same as § 240-21B above.
C. Accessory uses. The same as § 240-21C above.
A. Principal uses.
(1) All principal uses permitted and regulated in § 240-23 above.
(2) Dwellings for more than two families.
B. Special uses. The same as § 240-21B above.
C. Accessory uses. The same as § 240-21C above.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-MUB Zone is to permit a mixture of business and
residential uses on large parcels.
B. Procedure.
(1) Special provisions for mixed-use development shall be permitted only upon
application to and approval by the Town Board of a zoning amendment in
accordance with the procedures set forth below as well as those set forth in
§ 240-92 in areas designated on the Zoning Map as B-MUB.
(2) Submission. In addition to any requirements for submission set forth in
§ 240-92 or other applicable local laws, the application shall include the
following:
(a) A description of the proposed development plan, including the type and
§ 240-22 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-25
240:24
floor area of each use proposed, number of parking spaces,
interrelationship of uses and such other information as is necessary to
provide a complete understanding of the proposal.
(b) A preliminary site plan showing the location and height of all buildings,
the design and layout of parking areas and driveways, a general
landscaping plan and any other pertinent data.
(3) The approval of an amendment to this chapter to allow special provision for
mixed use shall not act as a waiver of the requirements of obtaining a special
permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsection F.
C. Principal uses. The principal uses shall be the same as the principal uses in the
Business (B) District.
D. The special permit uses shall be as follows:
(1) (Reserved)
(2) Radio, television and other electronic transmission structures and towers.
(3) Motels and hotels.
(4) Veterinary hospital, boarding and care of small pets.
(5) Undertaking and funeral homes.
(6) Newspaper printing and publishing.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) Nursery use for the sale of plants, trees, shrubbery, nursery stock, seeds,
nursery supplies, fertilizers, soil conditioners, garden hand tools and
accessories and gardener's masonry and incidental supplies (fruits, vegetables
and food not permitted). The land area shall be 60,000 square feet or more if
used for nursery business purposes.
(9) Restaurants, as defined in this chapter.
(10) Mixed-use developments, including the following uses, separately or in
combination, subject to the standards set forth below in Subsection E:
(a) Multifamily dwellings.
(b) Business and professional offices.
(c) Retail stores and personal service establishments.
E. Special provisions for mixed-use development. Uses proposed under the provisions
of Subsection D(10) above shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Area and bulk requirements.
(a) Minimum site area shall be 80,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum height shall be seven floors, excluding covered parking and
§ 240-25 ZONING § 240-25
240:25
service area and lobby, up to a maximum height of 87 feet. The height
shall be calculated from the average street grade of the site at the curb of
the front yard. [Amended 6-21-2006 by L.L. No. 13-2006]
(c) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses (excluding
structured parking) shall be 0.16. [Amended 11-5-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
(d) Yards: All setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet, except the minimum
setback from a public street, other than Madison Avenue, shall be 15 feet.
The minimum setback from Madison Avenue shall be 120 feet for
commercial uses and 170 feet for residential uses.
(e) Maximum building coverage shall be 60%. [Amended 11-5-2008 by
L.L. No. 9-2008]
(2) Residential density.
(a) The minimum gross site area per dwelling unit shall be 595 square feet.
(b) There shall be no more than one three-bedroom dwelling unit for every
25 dwelling units. If the quotient derived from dividing the number of
dwelling units by 25 results in a number that is not a whole number, the
quotient shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, and that
whole number shall be the maximum number of three-bedroom dwelling
units permitted.
(c) There shall be at least one workforce housing unit for every 17 dwelling
units. If the quotient derived from dividing the number of dwelling units
by 17 results in a number that is not a whole number, the quotient shall
be rounded down to the nearest whole number, and that whole number
shall be the minimum number of workforce housing units required.
"Workforce housing units" shall mean dwelling units occupied
permanently by individuals or families whose household income does not
exceed 80% of the Westchester County area median income as
established from time to time by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
(3) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided on the site in the
following ratio:
Type of Use Minimum Requirements
Efficiency units 1.0 space per unit
1-bedroom units 1.25 spaces per unit
2-bedroom units 1.5 spaces per unit
3-bedroom units 2.0 spaces per unit
Retail/office 1.0 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
(4) Other requirements.
§ 240-25 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-25
240:26
(a) No residential uses shall be permitted on the ground floor or on any floor
below a nonresidential use, except that there may be one apartment for
maintenance personnel, but that apartment shall not share an entrance
with the nonresidential uses.
(b) Nonresidential uses shall not occupy more than 40% of the gross floor
area of all structures on the site.
(c) Design guidelines. The following guidelines shall be considered in
reviewing an application for a special permit and shall only be varied
upon a finding that the objectives of this section are better served by an
alternate plan.
[1] The total horizontal cross section of any buildings over 30 feet in
height shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
[2] Required front yards shall be landscaped and shall not be paved,
except for necessary access drives and walkways.
[3] The location and materials of buildings over 30 feet in height shall
be reviewed to evaluate their effect on views and sight lines from
adjacent residential districts and shall not substantially obstruct or
conflict with such view.
[4] Service areas and parking lots shall be screened from adjacent
residential districts by landscaping, walls or fences of a height and
design deemed necessary to protect adjacent residences.
[5] The mixed-use development shall undergo the review provided for
in § 240-47E of the Code, however, the referral to the Board of
Architectural Review mandated in § 240-47E(5) and (6) shall be
made by the Planning Board, instead of the Town Board, and the
Board of Architectural Review shall render its advisory opinion in
connection with the matters listed in § 240-47E(5) and (6) to the
Planning Board and not the Town Board.
F. Procedures for obtaining special permit.
(1) The Town Board shall issue special permits for mixed-use developments in the
B-MUB Zone. Articles IX and XIV of Chapter 240 of the Code shall not apply
to an application for a special permit made pursuant to this section of the Code.
(2) Application submission; public hearings.
(a) A person or entity seeking a special permit shall submit the application
for such permit to the Town Board. That application shall be
accompanied by all of the documents required by § 177-10 of the Code
for an application for site plan approval. The Town Board shall refer the
application for a special permit to the Planning Board for a written
advisory opinion thereon.
(b) The Town Board shall not issue such permit without first conducting a
public hearing on the application. Such public hearing shall not be held
§ 240-25 ZONING § 240-25
240:27
until the earlier of the Town Board's receipt of the Planning Board's
advisory opinion or the 60th day following the date that the referral is
received by the secretary of the Planning Board. An application for a
special permit shall not be considered as having been received by the
Town Board within the meaning of § 274-b(6) of the New York Town
Law until the later of the date on which all proceedings pursuant to
Article 8 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law have been
completed or the earliest date on which the Town Board may conduct a
public hearing with respect to the application for a special permit.
(3) Although the referral of the application for a special permit to the Planning
Board for an advisory opinion is not an application for site plan approval and
shall not be construed as such, the Planning Board shall treat the referral as if
it were an application for site plan approval and apply all of the provisions of
Chapter 177 of the Code to the referral, except that the Planning Board shall
have the discretion to decide whether or not to conduct a public hearing.
Accordingly, before rendering its advisory opinion to the Town Board, the
Planning Board shall refer the application for the special permit to the Board
of Architectural Review, the Coastal Zone Management Commission, the
Traffic Committee, the Town Engineer, the Building Inspector or the Director
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, the Fire
Department, the County Planning Department and the State Department of
Transportation (if the property for which a special permit is being sought has
frontage along a state highway) and all other local, state, county, regional and
federal agencies that would have jurisdiction if the referral from the Planning
Board were made in connection with a site plan application. Each of the bodies
or persons to whom the Planning Board refers the application for a special
permit shall review that application as if it were reviewing an application for
site plan approval. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(4) All written comments pertaining to the application for a special permit
submitted to the Planning Board or to any of the bodies or persons to whom
the Planning Board shall have referred such application shall accompany the
Planning Board's advisory opinion to the Town Board.
(5) If the Town Board grants a special permit, the person or entity to whom the
special permit shall have been issued may apply to the Building Inspector or
the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration for
a building permit without having to obtain site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 177 of the Code. The conditions contained in the special permit shall
be part of any building permit issued for a mixed-use development. [Amended
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
G. Criteria for deciding whether to grant a special permit pursuant to this section. In
determining whether to grant a special permit, the Town Board shall apply the
standards contained in § 240-62 of the Code, shall consider whether the person or
entity applying for such permit has offered to construct or fund improvements
which would ameliorate parking and traffic control in the Washington Square area
of the Town and shall attach such conditions and safeguards to the special permit
as are necessary to assure that all applicable standards and requirements will
continue to be met.
§ 240-25 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-26
240:28
§ 240-26. Attached Residence District: R-A.
§ 240-27. Tower Apartment District: R-TA.
§ 240-28. Fair and affordable housing.62 [Added 11-20-2013 by L.L. No. 6-2013]
A. Principal uses. The same as § 240-24A above.
B. Special uses. The same as § 240-21B above.
C. Accessory uses. The same as § 240-21C above.
A. Principal uses.
(1) The same as § 240-24A above.
(2) Professional office of a physician, dentist, chiropractor, architect, engineer or
similar professional person.
B. Special uses. The same as § 240-21B above.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) The same as § 240-21C above.
(2) Self-service laundry for use of the residents of an apartment building.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMI—The area median income for the County of Westchester as defined annually
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If
HUD ceases to publish the area median income for the County of Westchester,
statistics on the area median income for the County of Westchester shall be taken
from information developed by another reliable source, such as the County of
Westchester or the State of New York.
FAH—Refers to both for-purchase fair and affordable housing units and rental fair
and affordable housing units.
FOR-PURCHASE FAIR AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT (PFAHU) —
A dwelling whose annual cost of ownership, including common charges, mortgage
payments, taxes and insurance, does not exceed 33% of 80% of the AMI, adjusted
for the size of the family.
RENTAL FAIR AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT (RFAHU)—A dwelling
whose annual rent plus any utilities paid by the tenant does not exceed 30% of 60%
of the AMI, adjusted for the size of the family.
B. Required fair and affordable housing unit component.
(1) Calculation of required number.
62. Editor's Note: Former § 240-28, Office Building District: OB-1, as amended 4-17-1963, was repealed 11-5-2003 by L.L.
No. 22-2003.
§ 240-26 ZONING § 240-28
240:29
(a) The required number of FAHs in a development shall be calculated as
follows:
Number of Dwelling Units in
Development (including FAHs) Required FAHs
1 to 4 None
5 to 14 1
(b) If a development consists of 15 or more dwelling units, no fewer than
10% of those units shall be FAHs. If multiplying the number of dwelling
units by 10% results in a remainder of 0.5 or more, the number of FAHs
shall be the next higher whole number.
(2) The required FAHs shall be either PFAHUs or RFAHUs or a combination of
both.
(3) All FAHs shall be marketed in accordance with the Westchester County Fair
and Affordable Housing Affirmative Marketing Plan.
C. Maximum rent and sales price. The maximum gross sales price for a PFAHU and
the maximum monthly rent for a RFAHU shall be established in accordance with
HUD guidelines as published in the current edition of the "Westchester County
Area Median Income (AMI) Sales and Rent Limits" available from the County of
Westchester or as such guidelines may be revised from time to time.
D. Minimum period of affordability.
(1) PFAHUs must remain PFAHUs for at least 50 years from the date they are
first sold.
(2) RFAHUs must remain RFAHUs for at least 50 years from the date their initial
certificates of occupancy are issued.
E. Restrictive covenant. A property containing FAHs must be restricted so that the
terms of this section shall apply to such units for as long as they must remain FAHs
through a declaration of restrictive covenants in recordable form acceptable to the
counsel for the Town. Among other provisions, the covenants shall require that the
unit be the primary residence of the household selected to occupy the unit and shall
contain the resale and lease renewal requirements mandated by this section. No
certificate of occupancy (temporary or permanent) shall be issued for any of the
units in the development until the Town receives a copy of such covenant, as
recorded by the Westchester County Clerk.
F. Review process.
(1) Notwithstanding § 190-1 of the Code, the Town Board shall be the board with
the power to approve or disapprove subdivision plats for any such application
that proposes five or more FAHs in either single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings or a combination of both. In doing so, all of the procedures of
Chapter 190 of the Code shall be followed; however, in addition, the Town
Board shall refer the application to the Planning Board for a written advisory
opinion. The Town Board shall not conduct a public hearing on the application
§ 240-28 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-28
240:30
until the earlier of the Town Board's receipt of the Planning Board's advisory
opinion or the 60th day following the date that the secretary of the Planning
Board receives the referral.
(2) Although the referral made hereunder is for an advisory opinion, the Planning
Board shall apply all of the provisions of Chapter 190 of the Code to the
referral, except that the Planning Board shall have the discretion to decide
whether or not to conduct a public hearing. Accordingly, before rendering its
advisory opinion to the Town Board, the Planning Board shall refer the
application to the Board of Architectural Review, the Coastal Zone
Management Commission, the Traffic Committee, the Town Engineer, the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, the Fire Department, the County Planning Department
and the State Department of Transportation (if the property for which a
subdivision approval is being sought has frontage along a state highway) and
all other local, state, county, regional and federal agencies that would have
jurisdiction if the referral from the Planning Board were made in connection
with a subdivision which the Planning Board does have the power to approve
or disapprove. Each of the bodies to whom the Planning Board refers the
application shall review the application in the same manner as that body
reviews applications for subdivisions that the Planning Board has the power to
approve or disapprove. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(3) All written comments pertaining to the application submitted to the Planning
Board or to any of the bodies or persons to whom the Planning Board shall
have referred such application shall accompany the Planning Board's advisory
opinion to the Town Board.
(4) Any application for the approval of a subdivision plat that proposes four or
fewer FAHs in either single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings or a
combination of both shall be approved or disapproved by the Planning Board
pursuant to Chapter 190 of the Code.
(5) Notwithstanding § 177-4 of the Code, the Town Board shall be the board with
the power to approve or disapprove site plans with respect to any such
application that proposes 10 or more FAHs in one or more multifamily
buildings. In doing so, all of the procedures of Chapter 177 of the Code shall
be followed; however, in addition, the Town Board shall refer the application
to the Planning Board for a written advisory opinion. The Town Board shall
not conduct a public hearing on the application until the earlier of the Town
Board's receipt of the Planning Board's advisory opinion or the 60th day
following the date that the secretary of the Planning Board receives the
referral.
(6) Although the referral made hereunder is for an advisory opinion, the Planning
Board shall apply all of the provisions of Chapter 177 of the Code to the
referral, except that the Planning Board shall have the discretion to decide
whether or not to conduct a public hearing. Accordingly, before rendering its
advisory opinion to the Town Board, the Planning Board shall refer the
application to the Board of Architectural Review, the Coastal Zone
Management Commission, the Traffic Committee, the Town Engineer, the
§ 240-28 ZONING § 240-28
240:31
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, the Fire Department, the County Planning Department
and the State Department of Transportation (if the property for which a site
plan approval is being sought has frontage along a state highway) and all other
local, state, county, regional and federal agencies that would have jurisdiction
if the referral from the Planning Board were made in connection with a site
plan which the Planning Board does have the power to approve or disapprove.
Each of the bodies to whom the Planning Board refers the application shall
review the application in the same manner as that body reviews applications
for site plans that the Planning Board has the power to approve or disapprove.
[Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(7) An application for a site plan shall not be considered as having been received
by the Town Board within the meaning of § 274-b(6) of the New York Town
Law until the later of the date on which all proceedings pursuant to Article 8
of the New York Environmental Conservation Law have been completed or
the earliest date on which the Town Board may conduct a public hearing with
respect to the application.
(8) All written comments pertaining to the application submitted to the Planning
Board or to any of the bodies or persons to whom the Planning Board shall
have referred such application shall accompany the Planning Board's advisory
opinion to the Town Board.
(9) Any application for the approval of a site plan that proposes nine or fewer
FAHs in one or more multifamily buildings shall be approved or disapproved
by the Planning Board pursuant to Chapter 177 of the Code.
G. Unit appearance and integration.
(1) It is permissible to construct a single-family FAH on a lot located in the R-50,
R-30, R-20 or, R-15 Zoning District that does not meet the minimum lot size
for a single-family dwelling in the zoning district where the proposed
development is situated so long as the lot has at least 75% of the minimum lot
area required for a single-family dwelling in that zoning district. All other bulk
and dimensional requirements for such undersized lot shall comply with such
requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
(2) If the FAH is a single-family dwelling or part of a two-family dwelling located
in the R-2F, R-GA, R-A, R-TA or B-MUB Zoning District, it must meet the
bulk and dimensional requirements for a single-family dwelling in the R-6
Zoning District.
(3) As much as possible, all FAHs shall be indistinguishable in appearance, where
it is sited, and exterior design from the other freestanding dwellings in the
development. Interior finishes and furnishings may be reduced in quality and
cost to assist in lowering the cost of developing FAHs.
(4) FAHs shall be physically integrated into the design of multifamily structures
and shall be distributed among various sizes in the same proportion as all other
units in the development. The exterior appearance of the FAHs shall be
indistinguishable from the other units within the development. Interior finishes
§ 240-28 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-28
240:32
and furnishings may be reduced in quality and cost to assist in lowering the
cost of developing FAHs.
H. Minimum floor area.
(1) The minimum gross floor area for each FAH may be between 80% and 100%
of the average floor area of the housing units in the development which are not
FAHs but not less than the following:
Dwelling Unit
Minimum Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 450
1-bedroom 675
2-bedroom 750
3-bedroom 1,000 (including at least 1.5 baths)
4-bedroom 1,200 (including at least 1.5 baths)
(2) For the purposes of § 240-28I, no more than 1/3 of the square footage of paved
terraces or balconies may be counted toward minimum gross floor area.
I. Occupancy standards. The following occupancy schedule shall apply to FAHs:
Number of bedrooms Number of Persons
Efficiency Minimum: 1; maximum: 1
1 Minimum: 1; maximum: 3
2 Minimum: 2; maximum: 5
3 Minimum: 3; maximum: 7
4 Minimum: 4; maximum: 9
J. Affirmative marketing.
(1) During the period that a dwelling unit must be a PFAHU, it shall be sold and
resold only to natural persons and shall not be sold to anyone who is a member
of a household that has an annual income greater than 80% of the AMI.
(2) During the period that a dwelling unit must be an RFAHU, it shall only be
rented and rerented to natural persons and shall not be rented to anyone who is
a member of a household that has an annual income greater than 60% of the
AMI.
(3) Solicitation for the sale or the rental of FAHs shall be done in accordance with
the requirements, policies and protocols established in the Westchester County
Fair and Affordable Housing Affirmative Marketing Plan so as to ensure
outreach to racially and ethnically diverse households.
K. Resale requirements.
(1) During the period that a dwelling unit must be a PFAHU, the price at which it
may be sold after the initial sale shall not exceed the sum of:
§ 240-28 ZONING § 240-28
240:33
(a) The net purchase price (i.e., gross sales prices minus subsidies) paid for
the unit by the selling owner, increased by the percentage increase, if any,
in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical
Workers in the New York-Northern New Jersey Area, as published by the
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (the "Index") on any date
between i) the month that was two months earlier than the date on which
the seller acquired the unit and ii) the month that is two months earlier
than the month in which the seller contracts to sell the unit. If the Bureau
stops publishing this index and fails to designate a successor index, the
County of Westchester will designate a substitute index; and
(b) The cost of capital improvements made by the seller of the unit while said
seller of the unit owned the unit as evidenced by paid receipts depreciated
on a straight-line basis over a fifteen-year period from the date of
completion and such approval shall be requested for said major capital
improvement no later than the time the seller of the unit desires to include
it in the resale price.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the resale price shall not exceed an amount
that would make the annual cost of ownership, including common charges,
mortgage payments, taxes and insurance, exceed 33% of 80% of the AMI,
adjusted for the size of the family at the time of the resale.
L. Lease renewal requirements. Tenants of RFAHUs may sign leases for a term of no
more than two years. As long as the household to which the tenant belongs remains
eligible for housing pursuant to § 240-28 and has complied with the terms of the
lease, the tenant shall be offered renewal leases for a term of no more than two years
each. Renewal of a lease shall be subject to the conditions of federal, state or county
provisions that may be imposed by the terms of the original development funding
agreements for the development or to the provisions of other applicable local law.
If no such provisions are applicable and if the annual gross income of the household
to which the tenant belongs should subsequently exceed the maximum then
allowable, under this section, the tenant may complete the then current lease term
and shall be offered a rental unit which is not an RFAHU at the termination of the
lease term, if one is available. If no such dwelling unit is available at that time, the
tenant may be allowed to sign one additional one-year lease for the RFAHU but
shall not be offered a renewal of the lease beyond the expiration of that term.
M. Administrative and monitoring agency. The County of Westchester is designated as
the agency that will be responsible for administering the provisions of this section
and determining compliance therewith.
N. Expedited project review process.
(1) Preapplication meeting. An applicant for a development of FAHs ("applicant")
shall be entitled to attend at least one preapplication meeting at which
representatives from each municipal agency, board, commission and staff
expected to play a role in the review and approval of the development,
application and construction will attend. The purpose of the preapplication
meeting will be to expedite the development application review process
through the early identification of Issues, concerns, code compliance and
§ 240-28 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-28
240:34
coordination matters that may arise during the review and approval process.
(2) Meeting schedule and timeline. The Town's departments, agencies, authorities,
boards, commissions, councils, committees and staff shall endeavor to honor
the proposed meeting schedule and conceptual timeline established at the
preapplication to the extent possible during the review and approval process,
provided that the applicant demonstrates cooperation and adheres to the
schedule and conceptual timeline. Should the approval process extend beyond
one year, an applicant shall be entitled to at least one additional meeting per
year with the same departments, agencies, authorities, boards, commissions,
councils or committees to review any and all items discussed at previous
preapplication meetings.
§ 240-28 ZONING § 240-28
240:35

ARTICLE V
Business and Industrial Districts: Permitted Uses
§ 240-29. (Reserved)63
§ 240-30. Business-Residential District: B-R. [Amended 4-17-1963; 5-5-1976;
6-2-1976; 12-7-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 3-4-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998; 2-6-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002; 9-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Principal uses.
(1) Store for sale of goods at retail or performance of customary personal services
or service clearly incidental to retail sales, but no fabrication or manufacturing
except incidental to and on the same premises as such retail sales. The hours
of operation for all retail uses shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Indoor recreation or amusement establishments.
(4) Business or professional offices.
(5) Multifamily housing.
(6) Municipal uses.
(7) Public utility structures serving a local area.
(8) Places of worship.
B. Special permit uses, subject to conformance to additional standards as provided
herein and in Article IX (§§ 240-60 to 240-65).
(1) Educational facility.
(2) Radio, television and other electronic transmission structures and towers.
(3) Library.
(4) Veterinary hospital, boarding and care of small pets.
(5) Undertaking and funeral homes.
(6) Newspaper printing and publishing.
(7) Nursery use for the sale of plants, trees, shrubbery, nursery stock, seeds,
nursery supplies, fertilizers, soil conditioners, garden hand tools and
accessories and gardener's masonry and incidental supplies (fruits, vegetables
and food not permitted). The land area shall be 60,000 square feet or more if
used for nursery business purposes.
(8) Restaurants [see Subsection C(1) below].
63. Editor's Note: Former § 240-29, Office Building District: OB-2, was repealed 11-5-2003 by L.L. No. 22-2003.
§ 240-29 ZONING § 240-30
240:37
C. Except for food-related retail uses that satisfy the criteria of § 240-30E, the hours
of operation for all food-related retail uses listed below shall be limited to the hours
between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, unless federal or state law controls the hours
of operation for such use.
(1) Restaurants, as defined in this chapter.
(a) The minimum setback from a fully enclosed trash disposal area
associated with a food-related retail use and an adjacent residential
property line shall be 25 feet.
(2) Take-out food establishment, delicatessen or convenience store, as defined in
this chapter, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such use shall not be located within 300 feet of the lot line of any other
such use, or any legal and/or legal nonconforming food-related retail use,
within or outside the boundaries of the Town.
(b) Drive-through service shall be prohibited.
(c) Access to all food-related retail uses shall be via a major arterial.
(d) The minimum setback from a fully enclosed trash disposal area
associated with a food-related retail use and an adjacent residential
property line shall be 25 feet.
(e) Any proposal for a new or expanded business shall be required to go
through site plan approval if the action involves:
[1] An expansion of the building envelope; and/or
[2] An expansion of the parking area; and/or
[3] An increase in seating capacity; and/or
[4] A change in signage.
(f) When a proposal for a new and/or expanded stand-alone fast-food
restaurant, take-out food establishment, delicatessen and/or convenience
store requires either special permit and/or site plan approval, such
application shall also require Board of Architectural Review approval,
pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Town Code.
(g) A nonconforming fast-food establishment, as defined herein, which seeks
to convert to a co-branded fast-food establishment shall require a use
variance.
(3) Supermarket, subject to the following additional conditions:
(a) The minimum lot size for a supermarket shall be 3.5 acres.
(b) Such use shall not be located within 300 feet of the lot line of any other
such use.
(4) Grocery store.
§ 240-30 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-30
240:38
§ 240-31. Service Business District: SBR. [Added 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990;
amended 3-4-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998; 2-6-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002; 9-18-2013 by
L.L. No. 5-2013]
(a) Such use shall have a gross floor area of not more than 5,000 square feet.
(5) Ice cream/confectionary store.
(6) Cafeteria.
(7) Luncheonette.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Any accessory building or use customarily incident to a permitted use.
(2) Signs, exterior spotlighting or other illumination of buildings as permitted
under the provisions of Chapter 175, Signs.
(3) Home occupation.
E. Any food-related retail use which regularly conducted such business prior to April
14, 1998, shall not be required to limit its hours of operation to the hours between
6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight but can continue to operate such business during the
hours that it was conducting such business as of April 13, 1998; provided, however,
if such food-related retail use ceases to be a food-related retail use for a period of
one or more years, the hours of operation of any food-related retail use which may
commence operation at that site thereafter shall be limited to the hours between
6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, unless federal or state law controls the hours of
operation for such use.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Indoor recreation or amusement establishments.
(2) Business or professional offices.
(3) The sale or hire of new or used motor vehicles, but no used car lot except as
accessory to a new car dealer.
(4) Undertaking and funeral homes.
(5) Newspaper printing and publishing.
(6) Nursery use for the sale of plants, trees, shrubbery, nursery stock, seeds,
nursery supplies, fertilizers, soil conditioners, garden hand tools and
accessories and gardeners' incidental supplies (fruits, vegetables and food not
permitted).
(7) Restaurants, as defined in this chapter.
(a) Except for a restaurant which regularly conducted such business prior to
April 14, 1998, the hours of operation for all restaurants shall be limited
to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, unless federal or state
law controls the hours of operation for such use. Any restaurant which
§ 240-30 ZONING § 240-31
240:39
regularly conducted such business prior to April 14, 1998, shall not be
required to limit its hours of operation to the hours between 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight but can continue to operate such business during the
hours that it was conducting such business as of April 13, 1998; provided,
however, if such restaurant ceases to be a restaurant for a period of one or
more years, the hours of operation of any restaurant that may commence
operation at that site thereafter shall be limited to the hours between 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight, unless federal or state law controls the hours of
operation for such use.
(8) Luncheonette.
(9) Ice cream/confectionary store.
(10) Wholesale or storage businesses in enclosed buildings.
(11) Municipal uses.
(12) Public utility structure serving a local area.
B. Special uses.
(1) Stores for the sale of goods at retail or performance of customary personal
services or a service clearly incidental to retail sales, but no fabrication and/or
manufacturing except incidental to and on the same premises with such retail
sales.
(2) Gasoline filling stations and garages, including facilities for servicing and
repair.
(3) Multifamily housing.
(4) Radio, television or other electronic transmission structures.
(5) Veterinary hospital, boarding and care of small pets.
(6) Contractors' establishments.
(7) Automatic car-washing facilities as an adjunct to existing gasoline filling
stations and/or public garages.
(8) Fast-food restaurant, take-out food establishment, delicatessen or convenience
store, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such uses shall not be located within 300 feet of the lot line of each other
within or outside the boundaries of the Town.
(b) Drive-through service shall be prohibited.
(c) Access to all food-related retail uses shall be via a major arterial.
(d) The minimum setback from a fully enclosed trash disposal area
associated with a food-related retail use and an adjacent residential
property line shall be 25 feet.
§ 240-31 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-31
240:40
§ 240-32. Light Industry District: LI.
(e) Any proposal for a new or expanded business shall be required to go
through site plan approval if the action involves:
[1] An expansion of the building envelope; and/or
[2] An expansion of the parking area; and/or
[3] An increase in seating capacity; and/or
[4] A change in signage.
(f) When a proposal for a new and or expanded stand-alone take-out food
establishment, delicatessen and/or convenience store requires either
special permit and/or site plan approval, such application shall also
require Board of Architectural Review approval pursuant to Chapter 3 of
the Town Code. The Board of Architectural Review shall have the
authority to modify or omit standardized facades, signs, materials, colors
or other elements of the business's design and external appearance which
violate the provisions of the Town's Sign Ordinance,64 so as to achieve
the Town's land use and design objectives.
(g) An existing fast-food establishment, as defined herein, which seeks to
convert to a co-branded fast-food establishment shall require a special
permit.
(9) Supermarket.
(a) The minimum lot size for a supermarket shall be 3.5 acres.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Any accessory building or use customarily incident to a permitted use.
(2) Signs, exterior spotlighting or other illumination of buildings as permitted
under the provisions of Chapter 175, Signs.
(3) Home occupation.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Nonresidential uses as permitted in the Business District.
(2) Wholesale and storage business, provided that all storage is in buildings.
(3) Building, plumbing, electrical and similar contractor's establishments.
(4) Laundry and dry cleaning.
(5) Industrial uses, including the manufacture, fabrication, processing, converting,
altering, assembly or other handling of products, the operations of which are
conducted solely within a building, use electrical power solely and normally
64. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Signs.
§ 240-31 ZONING § 240-32
240:41
§ 240-32.1. Urban renewal areas. [Amended 5-8-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
In any area determined by the Town Board to be appropriate for designation under
Article XV of the General Municipal Law as an urban renewal area, one or more of
the following uses shall be permitted in accord with the provisions of an adopted urban
renewal plan.
are such that they will not cause or result in any:
(a) Dissemination of dust, smoke, observable gas or fumes, odor, noise,
vibration, radiation or interference with radio or television reception
beyond the limits of the building in which the use is located.
(b) Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard.
(c) Harmful discharge of waste materials.
(d) Unusual traffic hazard or congestion due to the type of vehicles required
in the use or due to the manner in which traffic enters or leaves the site of
the use.
(6) Cellular telephone facility. [Added 2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
B. Special uses.
(1) Radio, television and other electronic transmission structures. [Added
2-15-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
C. Accessory uses. The same as § 240-30C above.
A. Any permitted or special permit use in the Business District - B, in accord with the
construction requirements therefor set forth in § 240-45. [Amended 3-4-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998]
B. Multifamily dwellings as permitted in the Tower Apartment District - R-TA, in
accord with the construction requirements therefor set forth in § 240-43, except that
building height shall not exceed four stories or 44 feet and there shall be at least
1,750 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit on the site.
C. Affordable multifamily dwellings, where all units comply with the definition of
"affordable units" as adopted by resolution by the Town Board of the Town of
Mamaroneck, to be permitted in accord with construction requirements to the extent
they differ from those of the R-TA District, on sites designated on the Zoning Map.
§ 240-32 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-32.1
240:42
ARTICLE VI
Residence Districts: Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
§ 240-33. One-Family Residence District: R-50. [Added 7-16-1986 by L.L. No.
9-1986]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 50,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street line frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 150 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 50 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard should be provided
on each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards: 35 feet for each side yard.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(c) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(d) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 2,100.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,800.
(3) Two and one-half stories: 1,500.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking spaces. As required by § 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 240-33 ZONING § 240-33
240:43
§ 240-34. One-Family Residence District: R-30. [Amended 7-16-1986 by L.L. No.
9-1986]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street line frontage: 125 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 150 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 50 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 20 feet.
(b) Total of two: 50 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(c) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(d) Usable open space (in square feet per dwelling unit): 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 2,100.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,800.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 1,500.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: two and one-half (2 1/2).
§ 240-33 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-34
240:44
§ 240-35. One-Family Residence District: R-20.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street line frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 125 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 40 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 15 feet.
(b) Total of two: 40 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first floor area, in square feet.
§ 240-34 ZONING § 240-35
240:45
§ 240-36. One-Family Residence District: R-15.
(1) One story: 1,900.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,700.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 1,400.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 15,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street-line frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 40 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 10 feet.
(b) Total of two: 30 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
§ 240-35 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-36
240:46
§ 240-37. One-Family Residence District: R-10.
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first-floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 1,600.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,300.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 1,000.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street-line frontage: 85 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 10 feet.
(b) Total of two: 25 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
§ 240-36 ZONING § 240-37
240:47
§ 240-38. One-Family Residence District: R-7.5.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first-floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 1,400.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,100.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 900.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street-line frontage: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 10 feet.
§ 240-37 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-38
240:48
§ 240-39. One-Family Residence District: R-6.
(b) Total of two: 20 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first-floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 1,200.
(2) One and one-half stories: 1,000.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 800.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street-line frontage: 60 feet.
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
§ 240-38 ZONING § 240-39
240:49
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: eight feet.
(b) Total of two: 18 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear 1/3 of the lot may be placed at a minimum distance
of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory
building shall not be located nearer to the street line than the required
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first-floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 1,000.
(2) One and one-half stories: 800.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 700.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Maximum size. See § 240-59.1. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 240-39 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-39.1
240:50
§ 240-39.1. Recreation District: R. [Added 7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994]
§ 240-40. Two-Family Residence District: R-2F.
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 50 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street line frontage: 300 feet. Minimum lot
depth: 500 feet.
(3) Perimeter buffer area around the entire perimeter of the property, in which no
court, pool, field, green, fairway, tee or structure may be placed: no less than
40 feet in width. The Planning Board shall approve appropriate screening
within the buffer area so as to minimize visual, sound and other impacts on
adjacent property.
B. Yards, courts and open space.
(1) Minimum front yard: 150 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard should be provided
on each street. (See § 240-54.) No parking may be placed in any required front
yard.
(2) Minimum side yard: 75 feet for each side yard. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
(3) Principal and accessory uses are not permitted in required front yards.
(4) Accessory uses require a minimum forty-foot rear yard and forty-foot
minimum for each side yard.
C. Coverage.
(1) No principal buildings or combination of principal buildings on the site shall
have a coverage which exceeds 1% of the total area of the lot.
(2) The total of all buildings shall not exceed an area of 1.25% of the total lot area.
D. Maximum height.
(1) In stories: two and one-half (2 1/2) stories.
(2) In feet: 35 feet.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Minimum off-street loading spaces: see § 240-82.
G. All permitted storage shall be entirely within a building except for parking and
loading vehicles.
H. All lighting shall be located and shaded in a manner so that the light source itself is
not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
A. Lot requirements.
§ 240-39.1 ZONING § 240-40
240:51
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 5,000 square feet. (Any lot existing in the
R-2F Zone in single and separate ownership on June 29, 1959, having at least
7,500 square feet, may be used for two-family residence.)
(2) Minimum lot width and length of street-line frontage: 50 feet per dwelling
unit. [Amended 4-17-1963]
(3) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: eight feet.
(b) Total of two: 18 feet.
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 1,200.
C. Floor area. Minimum first-floor area, in square feet.
(1) One story: 1,000.
(2) One and one-half stories: 800.
(3) Two and two and one-half stories: 700.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: two and one-half (2 1/2).
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§ 240-40 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-40
240:52
§ 240-41. Garden Apartment District. R-GA.
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Lot coverage. No buildings, accessory structures, pools, courts, drives or paved
areas shall be erected or installed to exceed a lot coverage of 35%. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 3,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum depth of lot: 150 feet.
(3) Maximum coverage of lot: 25%. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.) [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 25 feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(b) Total of two: 60 feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 400.
C. Floor area. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: an average of 750 square feet per
dwelling unit.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: two and one-half (2 1/2).
§ 240-40 ZONING § 240-41
240:53
§ 240-42. Attached Residence District: R-A.
(2) In feet: 35.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 2,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
(3) Maximum coverage of lot: 25%.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) Least one: 25 feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(b) Total of two: 60 feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
(c) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 300.
C. Floor area. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: an average of 750 square feet per
dwelling unit.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: 2 1/2.
(2) In feet: 35.
§ 240-41 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-42
240:54
§ 240-43. Tower Apartment District: R-TA.
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 1,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
(3) Maximum coverage of lot: 20%.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces.
(1) Minimum front yard: 15 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be provided on
each street. (See § 240-54.)
(2) Minimum side yards.
(a) One and one-half (1 1/2) inches per foot of building height but not less
than five feet or one inch for each foot of building length, a minimum of
10 feet from a street.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(3) Minimum rear yard: three inches per foot of building height but not less than
15 feet.
(a) A rear yard shall be provided on a corner lot, and the owner shall have
the privilege of electing which yard is to be the rear yard.
(b) An unattached accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in height
and located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be placed at a
minimum distance of five feet from the property line. On a corner lot,
such accessory building shall not be located nearer to the street line than
the required minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
(4) Minimum courts: as required by § 240-55.
(5) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 200.
C. Floor area. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: an average of 750 square feet per
dwelling unit.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: six.
(2) In feet: 70.
§ 240-42 ZONING § 240-43
240:55
E. Off-street parking. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as required by
§§ 240-75 through 240-78.
§ 240-43 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-43
240:56
ARTICLE VII
Business and Industrial Districts: Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
§ 240-44. (Reserved)65
§ 240-45. Business-Residential District: BR. [Amended 4-4-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990; 11-19-2003 by L.L. No. 23-2003; 9-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Nonresidential use.
(a) Minimum lot area: none.
(b) Minimum width at front setback line: 150 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum building coverage: none.
B. Minimum yards.
(1) Nonresidential use.
(a) Front yard: none, but no parking shall be permitted in front of any
building unless the building setback from the street line is at least 75 feet.
(b) Side yard.
[1] No side yard is required but, if provided, shall be at least four feet,
except where a lot adjoins a residence district, there shall be a side
yard of at least 10 feet, which shall be permanently and suitably
planted with evergreens to form a landscaped screen.
[2] A corner lot adjacent to a residence district shall have a minimum
setback of five feet from the street upon which said residence district
has frontage.
(c) Rear yards. No rear yard is required, except where a lot adjoins a
residence district, in which case the rear yard shall be at least 25 feet, at
least 10 feet of which shall be permanently and suitably planted with
evergreens to form a landscaped screen.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use.
(a) Front yard: 15 feet. In the case of a property fronting Myrtle Boulevard,
the Planning Board is authorized to reduce or waive the minimum fifteenfoot
front yard requirement, provided that the reduction or waiver of the
front yard requirement is for the purpose of maintaining conformity with
65. Editor's Note: Former § 240-44, Office Building Districts: OB-1 and OB-2, was repealed 4-19-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006.
§ 240-44 ZONING § 240-45
240:57
the front yard setback or "built-to" line of other buildings in close
proximity.
(b) Side yards.
[1] No side yard is required, except where a lot adjoins a road right-ofway
or adjacent lot, in which case the side yard shall be at least 10
feet.
[2] In the case where a lot adjoins a driveway or parking area, the side
yard setback shall be at least five feet.
(c) Rear yard: 20 feet. See § 240-45B(2)(a) herein. Upon authorizing the
reduction or waiver of the minimum fifteen-foot front yard requirement
for a property fronting Myrtle Boulevard, the Planning Board is
authorized to increase the minimum twenty-foot rear yard requirement up
to a minimum thirty-foot rear yard requirement, should the Board deem it
necessary for the purpose of maintaining adequate light, air and privacy.
(d) Usable open space per dwelling unit: 100 square feet.
C. Maximum floor area (as a percentage of lot area).
(1) Nonresidential use: 50%.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use: 70%.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) Nonresidential.
(a) In stories: two.
(b) In feet: 30.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use.
(a) In stories: four.
(b) In feet: 44.
E. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: see §§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Minimum off-street loading space: see § 240-82.
G. Other provisions and requirements:
(1) All permitted storage, except for the parking of motor vehicles, shall be
entirely within a building.
(2) All lighting shall be so located and shaded in a manner that the light source
itself is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
(3) Within all residential developments of 10 or more units, no fewer than 10% of
the total number of units must be created as Fair and Affordable Housing units
per the Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing Model Ordinance. In
§ 240-45 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-45
240:58
residential developments of five units to nine units, at least one Fair and
Affordable Housing unit shall be created.
H. Design requirements and guidelines.
(1) There are five areas where careful attention to design is warranted. Those areas
are building design; landscaping on the perimeter of a lot and within its
parking area; signs and exterior lighting; placement of buildings on lots; and
parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts. Criteria for each such design
element are set forth in Subsection H(8)(a) through (e) of this section.
(2) In general.
(a) For lots in this district having frontage on the Boston Post Road, the
objectives of these criteria are to ensure that the Boston Post Road in the
Town of Mamaroneck develops into an attractive and convenient
business district for the Town, functions as a focal point for local
residents and through-travelers and blends landscaped commercial and
residential structures in a compatible way; and
(b) For lots in this district that do not have frontage on the Boston Post Road,
the objectives of the criteria set forth in this section are to ensure that
these areas in the Town of Mamaroneck become convenient for local
residents and through-travelers and develop into attractive parcels that
blend landscaped commercial and residential structures in a compatible
way.
(3) Applicants are discouraged from proposing standardized corporate franchise
design.
(4) In addition to complying with the standards, requirements and guidelines
contained in this section, all applicants shall propose customized, site-specific
designs that satisfy the criteria contained in Chapter 3 of the Code. In
situations where any provision of Chapter 3 of the Code is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply.
(5) For any project which requires site plan approval and/or a special permit
("Board approval") and involves any of the work described in Subsection
H(5)(a) through (g), below, the Board having the authority to issue such
approval and/or permit (the "issuing Board") shall not do so without first
obtaining an advisory opinion from the Board of Architectural Review with
respect to the design criteria contained in Subsection H(8)(a) through (c) of
this section.
(a) Construction of a new structure;
(b) Relocation of an existing structure;
(c) Demolition or razing of all or a portion of the exterior of an existing
structure;
(d) Addition to or alteration of the exterior wall of an existing structure by
tearing down or removing any portion thereof or by filling in, sealing,
§ 240-45 ZONING § 240-45
240:59
boarding up, closing or enclosing any portion of an existing window or
door space of an existing structure;
(e) Alteration of any roofline;
(f) Construction, enlargement or alteration of any nonlandscaped area on a
lot, including, but not limited to, parking areas, access lanes, sidewalks,
loading, refuse or storage areas; or
(g) The removal or change to landscaping on the lot.
(6) Prior to conducting a public hearing on an application requiring Board
approval, the issuing Board shall refer the application to the Board of
Architectural Review for an advisory opinion regarding the proposed projects:
(a) Building design;
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area; and
(c) Signs and exterior lighting.
(7) In determining whether to grant site plan approval and/or issue a special
permit, the issuing Board shall consider the opinion rendered by the Board of
Architectural Review and decide whether to accept or reject that Board's
recommendations, in whole or in part. It shall also apply the design review
criteria set forth below with respect to the proposed projects:
(a) Placement of buildings on the lot; and
(b) Parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts.
(8) The design criteria to be applied by the Board of Architectural Review when
rendering its advisory opinion and by the issuing Board in determining
whether to accept or reject the Board of Architectural Review's opinion in
whole or in part and in deciding whether to grant site plan approval and/or
issue a special permit are:
(a) Building design.
[1] At least 40% of the primary structure's front elevation at street level
shall be window.
[2] Structures situated at corners should "wrap" the corner by continuing
facade elements on all street elevations, with such elements as the
overall building material and window design, and horizontal features
such as the cornice.
[3] Main building entrances shall face the street and shall be easily
identifiable and scaled to the size of the street that they face.
[4] Proposed changes in exterior architectural features shall be in
harmonious relationship to the remainder of the structure and to the
surrounding area. Unity and compatibility with adjacent structures is
to be achieved to the maximum extent possible. Areas of review
§ 240-45 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-45
240:60
shall include the scale and general size of the structure or structures
in relationship to the existing surroundings, specifically, the
structure's overall height, width, street frontage, number of stories,
roof type, facade openings (windows, doors, etc.) and architectural
details.
[5] Treatment of the sides and the rear of the structures shall be
comparable in appearance and amenity to the treatment given to the
street frontage elevation.
[6] Building materials and colors should be selected which avoid jarring
and incongruous contrasts, both within new development and seen
against existing structures.
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area.
[1] The proposed landscaping shall visually bind the primary structure
into the larger streetscape fabric or soften the edge of a freestanding
structure; provide shade, windbreak and glare reduction to
pedestrians and parked cars; physically separate pedestrians from
vehicles; and provide pervious surface to assist in stormwater
management.
[2] A coordinated landscaped design shall be required, incorporating
open space and/or recreation, if appropriate, walks, access drives,
parking areas and lot perimeter. The following areas shall be
landscaped:
[a] Along the public right-of-way.
[i] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, one
shade tree shall be planted for every 30 feet of frontage,
excluding curb cut openings. Additional front yard
landscaping shall be required.
[b] Along the parking lot's perimeter.
[i] The landscaped perimeter strip shall be a minimum of five
feet wide. Except where there is a sufficient reason not to
do so, one tree and three shrubs shall be planted for every
35 linear feet.
[c] Within the parking lot's interior, where appropriate.
[i] Planting islands shall be evenly spaced within the parking
lot.
[ii] No planting island shall be less than five feet wide in any
dimension.
[iii] Plants shall be a mix of shrubs, deciduous trees, evergreen
trees and ground cover.
[iv] Existing parking areas shall either install landscaped
§ 240-45 ZONING § 240-45
240:61
§ 240-46. Service Business-Residential: SB-R. [Added 4-4-1990 by L.L. No.
islands or increase the number of landscaped islands to the
maximum extent practicable.
[v] All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition.
(c) Signs and exterior lighting. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 175
of the Code, the following provisions shall be applied:
[1] Signs shall not be mounted on a pole. Signs shall be wall signs,
projecting signs, monument signs or hanging signs.
[2] No one business shall exceed two signs on the premises.
[3] Multiple uses on a lot shall have coordinated signage.
[4] Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be of such a type and location and shall
have such shielding as will direct the light downward and will
prevent the light from shining directly on any adjacent residential
property or street. Site illumination for uncovered areas shall be
evenly distributed.
(d) Placement of buildings on the lot.
[1] Primary structures should be placed as close as practicable to the
front yard setback line. The preferred build-to line shall be 10 feet or
less, for nonresidential structures, from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way. The preferred build-to line for
residential structures shall be 10 feet from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way.
[2] In developments where there will be more than one structure on a
single site, such structures, and their signage, landscaping and
lighting, shall be designed as an integrated part of an overall site
design related to other surrounding development and topographical
conditions.
(e) Parking, internal circulation and curb cuts.
[1] To the maximum extent practicable, parking shall be located to the
side and/or rear of the primary structure.
[2] No more than 10% of the parking may be located as convenience
(short-term) parking in front of the primary structure.
[3] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, including but
not limited to a demonstration by the applicant that it cannot
coordinate internal parking lot circulation for its property with the
parking area on an adjacent lot, no lot shall be allowed more than
one curb cut. Internal parking lot circulation shall be encouraged
between adjoining lots.
§ 240-45 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-46
240:62
2-1990; amended 11-19-2003 by L.L. No. 23-2003; 9-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Lot requirements:
(1) Nonresidential use.
(a) Minimum lot area: the same as Business-Residential (B-R) District.
(b) Minimum width at front setback line: 150 feet.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at front setback line: 150 feet.
B. Minimum yards:
(1) Nonresidential use: the same as Business-Residential (B-R) District.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use: the same as
Business-Residential (B-R) District.
(3) For a residential use or a combination of business and residential use, the
usable open space per dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 100 square feet.
C. Maximum floor area (as a percentage of lot area).
(1) Nonresidential use: 50%.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use: 70%.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) Nonresidential.
(a) In stories: two.
(b) In feet: 30.
(2) Residential use or a combination of business and residential use.
(a) In stories: four.
(b) In feet: 44.
E. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: the same as Business-Residential
(B-R) District.
F. Minimum off-street loading space: the same as Business-Residential (B-R) District.
G. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) All permitted storage, except for the parking of motor vehicles, shall be
entirely within a building.
(2) All lighting shall be so located and shaded in a manner that the light source
§ 240-46 ZONING § 240-46
240:63
itself is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
(3) Site planning standards. During its review of site plans for development within
the SB-R District, the Planning Board shall apply the following standards in
addition to all those applicable standards set forth in Chapter 177, Site Plan
Review.
(a) Buildings shall be situated on the site in a manner that minimizes the
visual impact, in terms of scale and height on adjacent residential
properties.
(b) Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided along the property lines of
adjacent residential properties and along streets giving access to
residential neighborhoods so as to provide the most effective visual
screening. The specific materials to be used shall be reviewed to
determine the effect of such screening at all times of the year.
(c) Appropriate conditions and measures shall be provided for minimizing
the discharge of oil, grease and other pollutants to the public storm
drainage system, waterways and wetlands.
(4) Within all residential developments of 10 or more units, no fewer than 10% of
the total number of units must be created as Fair and Affordable Housing units
per the Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing Model Ordinance. In
residential developments of five units to nine units, at least one Fair and
Affordable Housing unit shall be created.
H. Design requirements and guidelines.
(1) There are five areas where careful attention to design is warranted. Those areas
are building design; landscaping on the perimeter of a lot and within its
parking area; signs and exterior lighting; placement of buildings on lots; and
parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts. Criteria for each such design
element are set forth in Subsections H(8)(a) through (e) of this section.
(2) In general.
(a) For lots in this district having frontage on the Boston Post Road, the
objectives of these criteria are to ensure that the Boston Post Road in the
Town of Mamaroneck develops into an attractive and convenient
business district for the Town, functions as a focal point for local
residents and through-travelers and blends landscaped commercial and
residential structures in a compatible way; and
(b) For lots in this district that do not have frontage on the Boston Post Road,
the objectives of the criteria set forth in this section are to ensure that
these areas in the Town of Mamaroneck become convenient for local
residents and through-travelers and develop into attractive parcels that
blend landscaped commercial and residential structures in a compatible
way.
(3) Applicants are discouraged from proposing standardized corporate franchise
design.
§ 240-46 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-46
240:64
(4) In addition to complying with the standards, requirements and guidelines
contained in this section, all applicants shall propose customized, site-specific
designs that satisfy the criteria contained in Chapter 3 of the Code. In
situations where any provision of Chapter 3 of the Code is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply.
(5) For any project which requires site plan approval and/or a special permit
("Board approval") and involves any of the work described in Subsection
H(5)(a) through (g), below, the Board having the authority to issue such
approval and/or permit (the "issuing Board") shall not do so without first
obtaining an advisory opinion from the Board of Architectural Review with
respect to the design criteria contained in Subsection H(8)(a) through (e) of
this section.
(a) Construction of a new structure;
(b) Relocation of an existing structure;
(c) Demolition or razing of all or a portion of the exterior of an existing
structure;
(d) Addition to or alteration of the exterior wall of an existing structure by
tearing down or removing any portion thereof or by filling in, sealing,
boarding up, closing or enclosing any portion of an existing window or
door space of an existing structure;
(e) Alteration of any roofline;
(f) Construction, enlargement or alteration of any nonlandscaped area on a
lot, including, but not limited to, parking areas, access lanes, sidewalks,
loading, refuse or storage areas; or
(g) The removal or change to landscaping on the lot.
(6) Prior to conducting a public hearing on an application requiring Board
approval, the issuing Board shall refer the application to the Board of
Architectural Review for an advisory opinion regarding the proposed project's:
(a) Building design;
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area; and
(c) Signs and exterior lighting.
(7) In determining whether to grant site plan approval and/or issue a special
permit, the issuing Board shall consider the opinion rendered by the Board of
Architectural Review and decide whether to accept or reject that Board's
recommendations, in whole or in part. It shall also apply the design review
criteria set forth below with respect to the proposed project's:
(a) Placement of buildings on the lot; and
(b) Parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts.
§ 240-46 ZONING § 240-46
240:65
(8) The design criteria to be applied by the Board of Architectural Review when
rendering its advisory opinion and by the issuing Board in determining
whether to accept or reject the Board of Architectural Review's opinion in
whole or in part and in deciding whether to grant site plan approval and/or
issue a special permit are:
(a) Building design.
[1] At least 40% of the primary structure's front elevation at street level
shall be window.
[2] Structures situated at corners should "wrap" the corner by continuing
facade elements on all street elevations, with such elements as the
overall building material and window design, and horizontal features
such as the cornice.
[3] Main building entrances shall face the street and shall be easily
identifiable and scaled to the size of the street that they face.
[4] Proposed changes in exterior architectural features shall be in
harmonious relationship to the remainder of the structure and to the
surrounding area. Unity and compatibility with adjacent structures is
to be achieved to the maximum extent possible. Areas of review
shall include the scale and general size of the structure or structures
in relationship to the existing surroundings, specifically, the
structure's overall height, width, street frontage, number of stories,
roof type, facade openings (windows, doors, etc.) and architectural
details.
[5] Treatment of the sides and the rear of the structures shall be
comparable in appearance and amenity to the treatment given to the
street frontage elevation.
[6] Building materials and colors should be selected which avoid jarring
and incongruous contrasts, both within new development and seen
against existing structures.
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area.
[1] The proposed landscaping shall visually bind the primary structure
into the larger streetscape fabric or soften the edge of a freestanding
structure; provide shade, windbreak and glare reduction to
pedestrians and parked cars; physically separate pedestrians from
vehicles; and provide pervious surface to assist in stormwater
management.
[2] A coordinated landscaped design shall be required, incorporating
open space and/or recreation, if appropriate, walks, access drives,
parking areas and lot perimeter. The following areas shall be
landscaped:
[a] Along the public right-of-way.
§ 240-46 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-46
240:66
[i] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, one
shade tree shall be planted for every 30 feet of frontage,
excluding curb cut openings. Additional front yard
landscaping shall be required.
[b] Along the parking lot's perimeter.
[i] The landscaped perimeter strip shall be a minimum of five
feet wide. Except where there is a sufficient reason not to
do so, one tree and three shrubs shall be planted for every
35 linear feet.
[c] Within the parking lot's interior, where appropriate.
[i] Planting islands shall be evenly spaced within the parking
lot.
[ii] No planting island shall be less than five feet wide in any
dimension.
[iii] Plants shall be a mix of shrubs, deciduous trees, evergreen
trees and ground cover.
[iv] Existing parking areas shall either install landscaped
islands or increase the number of landscaped islands to the
maximum extent practicable.
[v] All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition.
(c) Signs and exterior lighting. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 175
of the Code, the following provisions shall be applied:
[1] Signs shall not be mounted on a pole. Signs shall be wall signs,
projecting signs, monument signs or hanging signs.
[2] No one business shall exceed two signs on the premises.
[3] Multiple uses on a lot shall have coordinated signage.
[4] Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be of such a type and location and shall
have such shielding as will direct the light downward and will
prevent the light from shining directly on any adjacent residential
property or street. Site illumination for uncovered areas shall be
evenly distributed.
(d) Placement of buildings on the lot.
[1] Primary structures should be placed as close as practicable to the
front yard setback line. The preferred build-to line shall be 10 feet or
less, for nonresidential structures, from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way. The preferred build-to line for
residential structures shall be 10 feet from the boundary line between
§ 240-46 ZONING § 240-46
240:67
§ 240-47. Business - Mixed Use Business District: (B-MUB). [Added 4-4-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990; amended 11-19-2003 by L.L. No. 23-2003]
The following requirements shall apply except as otherwise provided in § 240-25E(1).
the lot and the right-of-way.
[2] In developments where there will be more than one structure on a
single site, such structures, and their signage, landscaping and
lighting, shall be designed as an integrated part of an overall site
design related to other surrounding development and topographical
conditions.
(e) Parking, internal circulation and curb cuts.
[1] To the maximum extent practicable, parking shall be located to the
side and/or rear of the primary structure.
[2] No more than 10% of the parking may be located as convenience
(short-term) parking in front of the primary structure.
[3] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, including but
not limited to a demonstration by the applicant that it cannot
coordinate internal parking lot circulation for its property with the
parking area on an adjacent lot, no lot shall be allowed more than
one curb cut. Internal parking lot circulation shall be encouraged
between adjoining lots.
A. Lot requirements: the same as Business (B) District.
B. Yards, courts and open spaces: the same as Business (B) District.
C. Floor area: the same as Business (B) District.
D. Maximum height: the same as Business (B) District.
E. Design requirements and guidelines.
(1) There are five areas where careful attention to design is warranted. Those areas
are building design; landscaping on the perimeter of a lot and within its
parking area; signs and exterior lighting; placement of buildings on lots; and
parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts. Criteria for each such design
element are set forth in Subsections E(8)(a) through (e) of this section.
(2) In general.
(a) For lots in this district having frontage on the Boston Post Road, the
objectives of these criteria are to ensure that the Boston Post Road in the
Town of Mamaroneck develops into an attractive and convenient
business district for the Town, functions as a focal point for local
residents and through-travelers and blends landscaped commercial and
residential structures in a compatible way; and
(b) For lots in this district that do not have frontage on the Boston Post Road,
§ 240-46 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-47
240:68
the objectives of the criteria set forth in this section are to ensure that
these areas in the Town of Mamaroneck become convenient for local
residents and through-travelers and develop into attractive parcels that
blend landscaped commercial and residential structures in a compatible
way.
(3) Applicants are discouraged from proposing standardized corporate franchise
design.
(4) In addition to complying with the standards, requirements and guidelines
contained in this section all applicants shall propose customized, site-specific
designs that satisfy the criteria contained in Chapter 3 of the Code. In
situations where any provision of Chapter 3 of the Code is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply.
(5) For any project which requires site plan approval and/or a special permit
("Board approval") and involves any of the work described in Subsections
E(5)(a) through (g) below, the Board having the authority to issue such
approval and/or permit (the "Issuing Board") shall not do so without first
obtaining an advisory opinion from the Board of Architectural Review with
respect to the design criteria contained in Subsections E(8)(a) through (c) of
this section.
(a) Construction of a new structure;
(b) Relocation of an existing structure;
(c) Demolition or razing of all or a portion of the exterior of an existing
structure;
(d) Addition to or alteration of the exterior wall of an existing structure by
tearing down or removing any portion thereof, or, by filling in, sealing,
boarding up, closing or enclosing any portion of an existing window or
door space of an existing structure;
(e) Alteration of any roofline;
(f) Construction, enlargement or alteration of any nonlandscaped area on a
lot, including, but not limited to, parking areas, access lanes, sidewalks,
loading, refuse or storage areas; or
(g) The removal or change to landscaping on the lot.
(6) Prior to conducting a public hearing on an application requiring Board
approval, the Issuing Board shall refer the application to the Board of
Architectural Review for an advisory opinion regarding the proposed project's:
(a) Building design;
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area; and
(c) Signs and exterior lighting.
(7) In determining whether to grant site plan approval and/or issue a special
§ 240-47 ZONING § 240-47
240:69
permit, the Issuing Board shah consider the opinion rendered by the Board
of Architectural Review and decide whether to accept or reject that Board's
recommendations, in whole or in part. It shall also apply the design review
criteria set forth below with respect to the proposed project's:
(a) Placement of buildings on the lot; and
(b) Parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts.
(8) The design criteria to be applied by the Board of Architectural Review when
rendering its advisory opinion and by the Issuing Board in determining
whether to accept or reject the Board of Architectural Review's opinion in
whole or in part and in deciding whether to grant site plan approval and/or
issue a special permit are:
(a) Building design.
[1] At least 40% of the primary structure's front elevation at street level
shall be window.
[2] Structures situated at corners should "wrap" the corner by continuing
facade elements on all street elevations, with such elements as the
overall building material and window design, and horizontal features
such as the cornice.
[3] Main building entrances shall face the street and shall be easily
identifiable and scaled to the size of the street that they face.
[4] Proposed changes in exterior architectural features shall be in
harmonious relationship to the remainder of the structure and to the
surrounding area. Unity and compatibility with adjacent structures is
to be achieved to the maximum extent possible. Areas of review
shall include the scale and general size of the structure or structures
in relationship to the existing surroundings; specifically, the
structures overall height, width, street frontage, number of stories,
roof type, facade openings (windows, doors, etc) and architectural
details.
[5] Treatment of the sides and the rear of the structures shall be
comparable in appearance and amenity to the treatment given to the
street frontage elevation.
[6] Building materials and colors should be selected which avoid jarring
and incongruous contrasts, both within new development and seen
against existing structures.
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area.
[1] The proposed landscaping shall visually bind the primary structure
into the larger streetscape fabric or soften the edge of a freestanding
structure; provide shade, windbreak and glare reduction to
pedestrians and parked cars; physically separate pedestrians from
vehicles; and provide pervious surface to assist in stormwater
§ 240-47 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-47
240:70
management.
[2] A coordinated landscaped design shall be required, incorporating
open space and/or recreation, if appropriate, walks, access drives,
parking areas and lot perimeter. The following areas shall be
landscaped:
[a] Along the public right-of-way.
[i] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, one
shade tree shall be planted for every 30 feet of frontage,
excluding curb cut openings. Additional front yard
landscaping shall be required.
[b] Along the parking lot's perimeter.
[i] The landscaped perimeter strip shall be a minimum of five
feet wide. Except where there is a sufficient reason not to
do so, one tree and three shrubs shall be planted for every
35 linear feet.
[c] Within the parking lot's interior, where appropriate.
[i] Planting islands shall be evenly spaced within the parking
lot.
[ii] No planting island shall be less than five feet wide in any
dimension.
[iii] Plants shall be a mix of shrubs, deciduous trees, evergreen
trees and groundcover.
[iv] Existing parking areas shall either install landscaped
islands or increase the number of landscaped islands to the
maximum extent practicable.
[v] All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition.
(c) Signs and exterior lighting. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 175
of the Code, the following provisions shall be applied:
[1] Signs shall not be mounted on a pole. Signs shall be wall signs,
projecting signs, monument signs or hanging signs.
[2] No one business shall exceed two signs on the premises.
[3] Multiple uses on a lot shall have coordinated signage.
[4] Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be of such a type and location and shall
have such shielding as will direct the light downward and will
prevent the light from shining directly on any adjacent residential
property or street. Site illumination for uncovered areas shall be
evenly distributed.
§ 240-47 ZONING § 240-47
240:71
§ 240-48. Light Industry District: LI.
(d) Placement of buildings on the lot.
[1] Primary structures should be placed as close as practicable to the
front yard setback line. The preferred build-to line shall be 10 feet or
less, for nonresidential structures, from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way. The preferred build-to line for
residential structures shall be 10 feet from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way.
[2] In developments where there will be more than one structure on a
single site, such structures, and their signage, landscaping and
lighting, shall be designed as an integrated part of an overall site
design related to other surrounding development and topographical
conditions.
(e) Parking, internal circulation and curb cuts.
[1] To the maximum extent practicable, parking shall be located to the
side and/or rear of the primary structure.
[2] No more than 10% of the parking may be located as convenience
(short-term) parking in front of the primary structure.
[3] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, including but
not limited to a demonstration by the applicant that it cannot
coordinate internal parking lot circulation for its property with the
parking area on an adjacent lot, no lot shall be allowed more than
one curb cut. Internal parking lot circulation shall be encouraged
between adjoining lots.
A. Lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum width at front setback line: none.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
B. Minimum yards.
(1) Front yards: none.
(2) Side yards:
(a) No side yard is required but, if provided, shall be at least four feet; except
where a lot adjoins a residence district, there shall be a side yard of at
least 10 feet, which shall be permanently and suitably planted with
evergreens to form a landscaped screen.
(b) A corner lot adjacent to a residence district shall have a minimum setback
of five feet from the street upon which said residence district has frontage.
§ 240-47 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-48
240:72
§ 240-48.1. Urban renewal areas. [Amended 5-8-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
In any area determined by the Town Board to be appropriate for designation under
Article XV of the General Municipal Law as an urban renewal area, one or more of
the following uses shall be permitted in accord with the provisions of an adopted urban
renewal plan.
(3) Rear yards: No rear yard is required except where a lot adjoins a residence
district, in which case the rear yard shall be at least 25 feet, at least 10 feet of
which shall be permanently, suitably planted with evergreens to form a
landscaped screen.
C. Maximum floor area (as a percentage of lot area): 100%.
D. Maximum heights.
(1) In stories: two.
(2) In feet: 30.
E. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: see §§ 240-75 through 240-78.
F. Minimum off-street loading space: see § 240-82.
G. Other provisions and requirements:
(1) All permitted storage, except for the parking of motor vehicles, shall be
entirely within a building.
(2) All lighting shall be so located and shaded in a manner that the light source
itself is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
A. Any permitted use in the Business District - B, in accord with the construction
requirements therefor set forth in § 240-45.
B. Multifamily dwellings as permitted in the Tower Apartment District - R-TA, in
accord with the construction requirements therefor set forth in § 240-43, except that
building height shall not exceed four stories or 44 feet and there shall be at least
1,750 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit on the site.
C. Affordable multifamily dwellings as follow:
(1) Lot requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 1,200 square feet.
(c) Minimum depth of lot: 100 feet.
(d) Maximum coverage of lot: 30%.
(2) Yards, courts and open spaces.
(a) Minimum front yard: 15 feet. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be
§ 240-48 ZONING § 240-48.1
240:73
provided on each street.
(b) Minimum side yards: 10 feet each; provided, however, that unattached
accessory buildings, not over one story or 15 feet in height and located on
the rear 1/3 of the lot, may be placed at a minimum distance of five feet
from the property line. On a corner lot, such accessory building shall not
be located nearer to the street line than the required minimum front yard
setback for the zoning district.
(c) Minimum rear yard: 15 feet. On a corner lot, one yard shall be designated
a rear yard, at the discretion of the owner.
(d) Usable open space, in square feet per dwelling unit: 100.
(e) A five-foot wide landscaped buffer strip shall be provided along all public
streets, which may only be interrupted for necessary driveways and
sidewalks.
(3) Dwelling unit size.
(a) The average size of all dwelling units on any site shall not exceed two
bedrooms per unit.
(b) No dwelling unit shall have more than three bedrooms.
(4) Maximum heights.
(a) In stories: four.
(b) In feet: 44.
(5) Off-street parking: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
D. Design requirements and guidelines. [Added 11-19-2003 by L.L. No. 23-2003]
(1) There are five areas where careful attention to design is warranted. Those areas
are building design; landscaping on the perimeter of a lot and within its
parking area; signs and exterior lighting; placement of buildings on lots; and
parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts. Criteria for each such design
element are set forth in Subsections D(8)(a) through (e) of this section.
(2) In general.
(a) For lots in this district having frontage on the Boston Post Road, the
objectives of these criteria are to ensure that the Boston Post Road in the
Town of Mamaroneck develops into an attractive and convenient
business district for the Town, functions as a focal point for local
residents and through-travelers and blends landscaped commercial and
residential structures in a compatible way; and
(b) For lots in this district that do not have frontage on the Boston Post Road,
the objectives of the criteria set forth in this section are to ensure that
these areas in the Town of Mamaroneck become convenient for local
residents and through-travelers and develop into attractive parcels that
§ 240-48.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-48.1
240:74
blend landscaped commercial and residential structures in a compatible
way.
(3) Applicants are discouraged from proposing standardized corporate franchise
design.
(4) In addition to complying with the standards, requirements and guidelines
contained in this section, all applicants shall propose customized, site-specific
designs that satisfy the criteria contained in Chapter 3 of the Code. In
situations where any provision of Chapter 3 of the Code is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply.
(5) For any project which requires site plan approval and/or a special permit
("Board approval") and involves any of the work described in Subsection
D(5)(a) through (g), below, the Board having the authority to issue such
approval and/or permit (the "Issuing Board") shall not do so without first
obtaining an advisory opinion from the Board of Architectural Review with
respect to the design criteria contained in Subsections D(8)(a) through (c) of
this section.
(a) Construction of a new structure;
(b) Relocation of an existing structure;
(c) Demolition or razing of all or a portion of the exterior of an existing
structure;
(d) Addition to or alteration of the exterior wall of an existing structure by
tearing down or removing any portion thereof, or, by filling in, sealing,
boarding up, closing or enclosing any portion of an existing window or
door space of an existing structure;
(e) Alteration of any roofline;
(f) Construction, enlargement or alteration of any nonlandscaped area on a
lot, including, but not limited to, parking areas, access lanes, sidewalks
loading, refuse or storage areas; or
(g) The removal or change to landscaping on the lot.
(6) Prior to conducting a public hearing on an application requiring Board
approval, the Issuing Board shall refer the application to the Board of
Architectural Review for an advisory opinion regarding the proposed project's:
(a) Building design;
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area; and
(c) Signs and exterior lighting.
(7) In determining whether to grant site plan approval and/or issue a special
permit, the Issuing Board shah consider the opinion rendered by the Board of
Architectural Review and decide whether to accept or reject that Board's
recommendations, in whole or in part. It shall also apply the design review
§ 240-48.1 ZONING § 240-48.1
240:75
criteria set forth below with respect to the proposed project's:
(a) Placement of buildings on the lot; and
(b) Parking, internal traffic circulation and curb cuts.
(8) The design criteria to be applied by the Board of Architectural Review when
rendering its advisory opinion and by the Issuing Board In determining
whether to accept or reject the Board of Architectural Review's opinion in
whole or in part and in deciding whether to grant site plan approval and/or
issue a special permit are:
(a) Building design.
[1] At least 40% of the primary structure's front elevation at street level
shall be window.
[2] Structures situated at corners should "wrap" the corner by continuing
facade elements on all street elevations, with such elements as the
overall building material and window design, and horizontal features
such as the cornice.
[3] Main building entrances shall face the street and shall be easily
identifiable and scaled to the size of the street that they face.
[4] Proposed changes in exterior architectural features shall be in
harmonious relationship to the remainder of the structure and to the
surrounding area. Unity and compatibility with adjacent structures is
to be achieved to the maximum extent possible. Areas of review
shall include the scale and general size of the structure or structures
in relationship to the existing surroundings; specifically, the
structures overall height, width, street frontage, number of stories,
roof type, facade openings (windows, doors, etc) and architectural
details.
[5] Treatment of the sides and the rear of the structures shall be
comparable in appearance and amenity to the treatment given to the
street frontage elevation.
[6] Building materials and colors should be selected which avoid jarring
and incongruous contrasts, both within new development and seen
against existing structures.
(b) Landscaping on the lot perimeter and within the parking area.
[1] The proposed landscaping shall visually bind the primary structure
into the larger streetscape fabric or soften the edge of a freestanding
structure; provide shade, windbreak and glare reduction to
pedestrians and parked cars; physically separate pedestrians from
vehicles; and provide pervious surface to assist in stormwater
management.
[2] A coordinated landscaped design shall be required, incorporating
§ 240-48.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-48.1
240:76
open space and/or recreation, if appropriate, walks access drives,
parking areas and lot perimeter. The following areas shall be
landscaped:
[a] Along the public right-of-way.
[i] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, one
shade tree shall be planted for every 30 feet of frontage,
excluding curb cut openings. Additional front yard
landscaping shall be required.
[b] Along the parking lot's perimeter.
[i] The landscaped perimeter strip shall be a minimum of five
feet wide. Except where there is a sufficient reason not to
do so, one tree and three shrubs shall be planted for every
35 linear feet.
[c] Within the parking lot's interior, where appropriate.
[i] Planting islands shall be evenly spaced within the parking
lot.
[ii] No planting island shall be less than five feet wide in any
dimension.
[iii] Plants shall be a mix of shrubs, deciduous trees, evergreen
trees and groundcover.
[iv] Existing parking areas shall either install landscaped
islands or increase the number of landscaped islands to the
maximum extent practicable.
[v] All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition.
(c) Signs and exterior lighting. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 175
of the Code, the following provisions shall be applied:
[1] Signs shall not be mounted on a pole. Signs shall be wall signs,
projecting signs, monument signs or hanging signs.
[2] No one business shall exceed two signs on the premises.
[3] Multiple uses on a lot shall have coordinated signage.
[4] Signs shall not be nternally illuminated.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be of such a type and location and shall
have such shielding as will direct the light downward and will
prevent the light from shining directly on any adjacent residential
property or street. Site illumination for uncovered areas shall be
evenly distributed.
(d) Placement of buildings on the lot.
§ 240-48.1 ZONING § 240-48.1
240:77
[1] Primary structures should be placed as close as practicable to the
front yard setback line. The preferred build-to line shall be 10 feet or
less, for nonresidential structures, from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way. The preferred build-to line for
residential structures shall be 10 feet from the boundary line between
the lot and the right-of-way.
[2] In developments where there will be more than one structure on a
single site, such structures, and their signage, landscaping and
lighting, shall be designed as an integrated part of an overall site
design related to other surrounding development and topographical
conditions.
(e) Parking, internal circulation and curb cuts.
[1] To the maximum extent practicable, parking shall be located to the
side and/or rear of the primary structure.
[2] No more than 10% of the parking may be located as convenience
(short-term) parking in front of the primary structure.
[3] Except where there is a sufficient reason not to do so, including but
not limited to a demonstration by the applicant that it cannot
coordinate internal parking lot circulation for its property with the
parking area on an adjacent lot, no lot shall be allowed more than
one curb cut. Internal parking lot circulation shall be encouraged
between adjoining lots.
§ 240-48.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-48.1
240:78
ARTICLE VIII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 240-49. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or
modifications as herein provided by the following general supplementary regulations.
§ 240-50. Terraces and porches. [Amended 4-17-1963; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996]
A paved terrace or wood deck, not more than 18 inches above average adjacent grade,
as measured to the finished deck, top or stone surface, whether adjacent to a dwelling or
not, shall not be considered in the determination of yard size or lot coverage; provided,
however, that such terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets or other forms of
enclosures; but such terraces may have an open guardrail not over three feet high and
shall not project into any yard to a point closer than five feet from any side or rear lot
line. Any porch, either open or enclosed, shall be considered a part of the building in the
determination of the size of the yard or the amount of lot coverage.
§ 240-51. Projecting architectural features.
§ 240-52. Walls and fences. [Amended 2-7-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
A. Cornices, eaves, chimneys, bay windows, windowsills, belt courses and other
architectural features may project not more than two feet into any required yard.
The sum of any bay window projections on any wall shall not exceed 1/4 the length
of such wall, and no such projecting bay window shall have a total length of more
than 10 feet nor be more than one story in height. Provided their total area does not
exceed 40 square feet, steps and their platforms are permitted to project into any
required side or rear yard a distance of not more than five feet and into a required
front yard a distance of no more than eight feet. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 10-15-2008 by L.L. No. 8-2008]
B. Fire escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than
six feet; provided, however, that such fire escape shall not be closer than four feet
at any point to any lot line.
A. The yard requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary
retaining wall nor to prohibit any fence or wall, provided that in any residence
district such fence or wall shall not exceed four feet in height in any required front
yard and/or five feet in height in any required side or rear yard. For the purposes of
this chapter, the height of any retaining wall shall be included in the computation of
the height of a wall or fence placed on top of or above such retaining wall or at a
distance of four feet or less horizontally from the retaining wall, in determining
whether or not a wall or fence meets the heights restrictions of this provision.
B. Gates, posts, capitals and pillars shall comply with the height requirements of this
provision, except that ornamental or decorative features on top of posts, pillars,
capitals and gates may exceed the height limitations of this provision by no more
than 12 inches. However, no more than 10% of the total length of a fence or wall,
§ 240-49 ZONING § 240-52
240:79
§ 240-53. Visibility at intersections.
At any street intersection in any residential district, no fence, wall or other structure or
planting more than three feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within
the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said
street lines at points which are 30 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured
along said street line. The height of three feet shall be measured above the road surface
at the nearest edge of the road. This subsection shall not apply to existing trees, provided
that no branches are closer than six feet to the ground. This provision shall be in addition
to the provisions of § 161-4 of this Code.
§ 240-54. Corner lots.
On a corner lot in any residence district, there shall be provided a yard on each street
equal in depth to the required front yard on such streets. A rear yard shall be provided on
each corner lot, and the owner shall elect which yard is the rear yard.
§ 240-55. Courtyards.
The least dimension of any inner court at the sill level of the lowest windows shall be
equal to the height of the highest wall forming a part of such court. The depth of any
outer court shall not exceed one-half (1/2) its width, and such width shall not be less than
15 feet.
§ 240-56. Height exceptions.
including gates, posts, capitals and pillars, may have an ornamental or decorative
feature which exceeds the height limitations set forth in Subsection A.
C. Six-foot fences are permitted in business or commercial districts in the side and rear
yards only.
D. Walls and fences are subject to § 240-53.
E. Fences which have a finished or textured side and an unfinished side and which are
erected on or near a boundary line separating two or more lots or on or near the
boundary line separating a lot from a street shall be erected so that the finished or
textured sides face the neighboring lot or lots or the street, as the case may be. In
addition, the supporting elements for such fences, such as beams, columns, pipes,
posts, wires and the like, shall not be placed or located against or on the same side
as the finished or textured side of such fences if more than 1/2 of the length or
height of such supports is visible only from one side of the fence. [Added
1-19-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to spires, cupolas and domes
of churches nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads or
similar features and necessary mechanical or amateur electronic devices and
appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. Such features, however, shall be
erected only to such heights as are necessary to accomplish the purpose they are
intended to serve, and the total area covered by such features shall not exceed 10%
of the area of the roof on which they are located. Exceptions to the ten-percent area
§ 240-52 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-56
240:80
§ 240-57. Minimum house size. [Amended 4-17-1963]
No dwelling unit erected or created by alteration subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter shall have a first-floor area less than that required in the schedule of regulations.
Such floor area shall include all floor area used for human occupancy within the
exterior walls of the building, as defined in Chapter 106, Fire Prevention and Building
Construction, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck, but shall not include open
porches or breezeways, garages, basements or uninhabitable attic space. For the purpose
of this section, the first-floor area of a split-level house shall be deemed to be the total
area of the lowest habitable floor or floors. Where the second-story area, in square feet,
used for human occupancy exceeds the minimum first-floor area as required by this
section and the schedule of residence district regulations referred to in § 240-20 of this
chapter, the minimum house size, in square feet, shall be the area of the second story
used for human occupancy.
§ 240-58. Dwellings in house trailers and accessory buildings.
§ 240-59. Central air-conditioning units. [Added 12-5-2001 by L.L. No. 8-2001]
limitation may be provided for energy conservation devices; provided, however,
that application for any such exception shall not be treated as a request for a
variance under this chapter but shall be filed with the Town Board as an application
for a special use permit pursuant to §§ 240-60 through 240-65 of this Code. The
Town Board may refer any such application to other official bodies for comment
and recommendation before acting thereupon. No structure having a height of more
than 70 feet in an R-TA District, more than 87 feet in a B-MUB District, or more
than 50 feet in any other district shall be erected unless approved by the Board
of Appeals. [Amended 3-21-1979; 5-25-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005; 6-21-2006 by
L.L. No. 13-2006]
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the erection above the building
height limit of a parapet wall or cornice, for ornament and without windows,
extending above such height limit not more than five feet.
A. House trailers, as defined in this chapter, shall be prohibited from all districts,
except that one trailer may be parked or stored in an enclosed accessory garage or
accessory building as set forth in § 240-21C(8), provided that no living quarters
shall be maintained nor any business conducted in connection therewith while such
trailer is stored. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. Any accessory building on the same lot with a main residence building shall not be
used for residence purposes, except for domestic employees of the owners or of the
tenants of the main building who are employed on the premises.
A. For the purposes of this section and for no other purpose, the following terms are
defined as follows:
AREA — The square footage of the horizontal plane on which a central airconditioning
unit or its pad is situated.
CENTRAL AIR-CONDITIONING UNIT — Any mechanical device that is
designed to regulate the temperature within more than one room of a building and
§ 240-56 ZONING § 240-59
240:81
§ 240-59.1. Maximum size of one- or two-family homes. [Added 1-8-2003 by L.L.
No. 1-2003]
either is situated on the ground or on a pad which is situated on the ground.
EXISTING CENTRAL AIR-CONDITIONING UNIT — Any central airconditioning
unit that existed on September 1, 2001.
PAD — Any artificial surface on which a central air-conditioning unit is situated.
REPLACEMENT UNIT — Any central air-conditioning unit that replaces either:
(1) An existing central air-conditioning unit; or
A central air-conditioning unit that was situated at the same location as an
existing central air-conditioning unit.
(2)
B. Existing central air-conditioning units shall not require a building permit or a letter
of completion from the Building Department unless such a unit is moved from
where it was located on September 1, 2001.
C. A replacement unit shall not require a building permit or a letter of completion from
the Building Department if:
(1) Such unit is not larger in cubic feet than the unit it replaces; and
(2) Area.
(a) If situated on the ground, such unit does not occupy an area that is greater
than the area of the unit it replaces or the area of the pad on which that
unit sat; or
(b) If such unit is situated on a pad, the area of such pad is not greater than
the area of the unit it replaces or the area of the pad on which that unit sat.
D. All other central air-conditioning units shall require a building permit and a letter
of completion from the Building Department.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of the subject property. The applicant may authorize
another person to act in the applicant's behalf.
AVERAGE — The total square footage of all of the buildings on all of the
comparison parcels divided by the number of comparison parcels.
COMPARISON PARCEL — Any lot which:
Has a lot line that lies within 300 feet of any of the lot lines of the subject
property and abuts one of the streets that the subject property abuts; or
(1)
Has a lot line which, in whole or in part, is the same as one of the lot lines of
the subject property; or
(2)
(3) Touches the subject property at any point.
§ 240-59 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-59.1
240:82
SEASONAL PORCH — Any structure that:
SUBJECT PROPERTY —The lot for which a building permit is sought.
TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE — The aggregate floor area of all of the buildings
on a lot, exclusive of the aggregate floor area of any basements, regardless of their
use.
(1) Exists on the effective date of this section;
(2) Is attached to the dwelling on the subject property;
(3) Has a floor, a roof and structural supports; and
Does not have permanent heating or air conditioning equipment installed
therein.
(4)
B. Maximum permitted total square footage and floor area ratio.
(1) The maximum permitted total square footage of all of the buildings on a lot
shall be the greater of:
(a) The maximum total square footage allowed for a lot when applying the
maximum floor area ratio for that lot plus any additional square footage
to which the lot may be entitled under Subsection B(3) of this section; or
(b) The average.
(2) The maximum floor area ratio for a lot shall be determined by the following
chart:
1 2 3 4
For a Lot Whose Size
Appears in a Row
(square feet)
The Maximum
Floor Area Ratio
Shall Be
The Maximum Total Square
Footage for a Lot whose Size
is Shown in Column 2 of this
(square feet)
1 1,000 .55000 550.00
2 2,000 .55000 1100.00
3 3,000 .55000 1650.00
4 4,000 .55000 2200.00
5 5,000 .55000 2750.00
6 6,000 .55000 330.000
7 7,000 .52000 3640.00
8 8,000 .49000 3920.00
9 9,000 .46000 4140.00
10 10,000 .43000 4340.00
11 11,000 .41000 4510.00
12 12,000 .39000 4680.00
§ 240-59.1 ZONING § 240-59.1
240:83
1 2 3 4
For a Lot Whose Size
Appears in a Row
(square feet)
The Maximum
Floor Area Ratio
Shall Be
The Maximum Total Square
Footage for a Lot whose Size
is Shown in Column 2 of this
(square feet)
13 13,000 .36900 4797.00
14 14,000 .35000 4900.00
15 15,000 .33400 5110.00
16 16,000 .32000 5120.00
17 17,000 .31000 5270.00
18 18,000 .30000 5400.00
19 19,000 .29000 5510.00
20 20,000 .28100 5620.00
21 21,000 .27250 5722.50
22 22,000 .26500 5830.00
23 23,000 .25820 5938.60
24 24,000 .25200 6048.00
25 25,000 .24600 6150.00
26 26,000 .24070 6279.00
27 27,000 .23200 6264.00
28 28,000 .22760 6372.80
29 29,000 .22350 6481.50
30 30,000 .21960 6588.00
31 31,000 .21600 6696.00
32 32,000 .21250 6800.00
33 33,000 .21000 6930.00
34 34,000 .20750 7055.00
35 35,000 .20500 7175.00
36 36,000 .20375 7335.00
37 37,000 .20250 7492.50
38 38,000 .20125 7647.50
39 39,000 .20000 7800.00
40 40,000 .19875 7950.00
41 41,000 .19815 8124.15
42 42,000 .19755 8297.10
43 43,000 .19695 8968.85
44 44,000 .19635 8639.40
§ 240-59.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-59.1
240:84
1 2 3 4
For a Lot Whose Size
Appears in a Row
(square feet)
The Maximum
Floor Area Ratio
Shall Be
The Maximum Total Square
Footage for a Lot whose Size
is Shown in Column 2 of this
(square feet)
45 45,000 .19575 8808.75
46 46,000 .19545 8990.70
47 47,000 .19485 9352.80
48 48,000 .19485 9352.80
49 49,000 .19455 9532.95
50 50,000 .19425 9712.50
(3) The maximum permitted total square footage for a lot whose size lies between
the lot sizes shown in Column 2 of any two adjacent rows on the chart
contained in Subsection B(2) of this section shall be equal to:
(a) The maximum total square footage set forth in Column 4 of that chart for
the lot referred to in Column 2 of the lower numbered row; plus
(b) Ten square feet for each 100 square feet (or part thereof) by which the lot
exceeds the size of the lot referred to in Column 2 of the lower numbered
row.
Example: The maximum permitted total square footage for a lot that is
20,725 square feet in size is determined as follows: The size of the lot
lies between the sizes of lots referred to in rows 20 and 21 on the chart.
The maximum total square footage for a lot that is 20,000 square feet in
size is 5,620.00 square feet. The lot in this example exceeds the square
footage of the lot in Row 20 by 725.00 square feet. Accordingly, the
lot is entitled to additional square footage of 10 square feet x 8 = 80.00
square feet. Hence, the maximum permitted total square footage for a lot
equal to 20,725 square feet in size is 5,620.00 + 80.00 = 5,700.00.
(4) The maximum permitted total square footage for any lot whose size is greater
than 50,000 square feet shall be 9,712.50 square feet plus 10 square feet for
each 100 square feet (or part thereof) by which the size of such lot exceeds
50,000 square feet. Under no circumstances, however, shall the maximum
permitted total square footage for any lot exceed 15,000 square feet.
C. The average.
(1) If an applicant wishes to obtain a building permit which will result in the
subject property having buildings whose aggregate total square footage
exceeds the maximum permitted total square footage allowed for the subject
property, the applicant can compute the average.
(2) To determine the average, the applicant shall identify all of the comparison
parcels by measuring the comparison distance from each of the lot lines of the
§ 240-59.1 ZONING § 240-59.1
240:85
subject property using the scale on the tax assessment map of the Town;
compute the total square footage of all of the buildings on each of the
Comparison Parcels by using the records of the Town's Building Department
(If the records of the Town's Building Department do not contain sufficient
information to determine the total square footage of all of the buildings on any
comparison parcel, the applicant shall use the records of the Town's Assessor
in order to make that determination); add the total square footage of all the
buildings on all of the comparison parcels and divide that sum by the number
of comparison parcels.
(3) The applicant's computation of the average shall be given to the Town's
Building Department. It shall be in writing and shall consist of a list of all of
the comparison parcels identified by their street addresses and their tax block
and lot designations on the Town's tax assessment map; the number of
buildings on each comparison parcel; the total square footage of all of the
buildings on each comparison parcel, the sum of the total square footage of all
of the buildings on all of the comparison parcels; and the average. The
applicant's architect or engineer shall certify the accuracy of the computation
of the average. If there is no architect or engineer, the accuracy of the
computation of the average shall be verified under oath by the applicant.
(4) If the average is a figure that exceeds what the maximum permitted total
square footage for all of the buildings on the Subject Property would be when
applying Subsection B of this section, the Applicant shall be entitled to a
building permit for construction which, when completed, will result in the total
square footage of all of the buildings on the subject property being greater than
what Subsection B of this section would allow but not greater than the average.
(5) Nothing in this section shall relieve the applicant from satisfying all of the
other requirements of this chapter and all of the requirements of every other
law that must be satisfied before the Town's Building Department may issue a
building permit.
D. Applicability of this section.
(1) This section shall apply only to a lot whose principal use is a one- or a twofamily
dwelling.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) A lot shall not be in violation of this section if the total square footage of
all of the buildings on that lot will be greater than the maximum permitted
total square footage allowed for that lot because of construction done or
to be done pursuant to a building permit issued prior to the effective date
of this section.
(b) Assuming that there is compliance with all other requirements for the
issuance of a building permit, a building permit shall be issued during the
first 90 days after this section goes into effect for construction based upon
building plans that shall have been filed with the Building Department
before the effective date of this section even though no building permit
shall have been issued before the effective date of this section and, upon
§ 240-59.1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-59.1
240:86
completion of such construction, the total square footage of all of the
buildings on that lot will be greater than the maximum permitted total
square footage allowed for that lot. Starting on the 91st day after the
effective date of this section, building plans filed with the Building
Department prior to the effective date of this section shall no longer be
exempt from the application of this section.
(3) This section shall not apply to any lot for which:
(a) An application for a variance shall have been filed prior to the effective
date of this section; provided that such application either shall have
appeared on the agenda of a meeting of the Board of Appeals held prior
to the effective date of this section or is scheduled to appear on the agenda
for the first meeting of the Board of Appeals after the effective date of
this section; or
(b) An application for an approval and/or a permit from the Planning Board
shall have been filed prior to the effective date of this section; provided
such application either shall have appeared on the agenda of a meeting of
the Planning Board held prior to the effective date of this section or is
scheduled to appear on the agenda for the first meeting of the Planning
Board after the effective date of this section.
(4) This section shall apply to any lot for which an interpretation of the Zoning
Ordinance is being requested from the Board of Appeals.
(5) An attic which exists on the effective date of this section and is not legally
permitted to be used as habitable space (as that term is defined in the New
York State Building Code in effect on January 1, 2003) can be converted to
habitable space even though, upon completion of the conversion, the
maximum permitted total square footage for all of the buildings on the subject
property will exceed the maximum permitted total square footage allowed for
that lot so long as after the conversion, the exterior walls of the building in
which such attic is located remain in the same position and the sum of the
horizontal length of all of the alterations in the roof line on a side of the
building is no longer than 1/4 of the horizontal length of the wall beneath such
roof on that side of the building.
(6) A seasonal porch may be permanently enclosed even though upon completion
of that work, the maximum total square footage for all of the buildings on the
subject property will exceed the maximum permitted total square footage
allowed for that lot so long as neither the exterior of the seasonal porch nor the
exterior walls of the dwelling to which the seasonal porch is attached are
relocated closer to the lot lines of the subject property after the permanent
enclosure is completed.
§ 240-59.1 ZONING § 240-59.1
240:87

ARTICLE IX
Special Use Permits
§ 240-60. Intent.
The special uses for which conformance to additional standards is required by this
chapter shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the
satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein, in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter. All such uses are declared to possess characteristics of such
unique and special forms that each specific use shall be considered as an individual case.
§ 240-61. Applications; fee. [Amended 5-4-1977; 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
A. An application for a special permit shall be made to the Planning Board. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in § A250-1 and shall be on a
form prescribed by the Planning Board requiring the following information:
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
(1) The name of the applicant and owner of the property.
(2) The location of the property, intersecting streets and the Tax Map description.
(3) The present use at the proposed location for the special permit.
(4) The proposed use at the location for the special permit.
(5) Any construction which will be required.
(6) A list of all other permits or applications which must be made by the applicant
in order to proceed with the use.
(7) The signature of the applicant, with a certification that the information
contained in the application is true.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by an environmental assessment form.
[Amended 11-5-2003 by L.L. No. 19-2003]
C. The application shall be accompanied by 15 sets of plans for the proposed
development, which shall show the location of all buildings, parking ares, traffic
access and circulation drives, open spaces, landscaping, topography, special
features and any other pertinent information, including such information about
neighboring properties, that may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter. The plans submitted shall contain a detailed
architectural design of all buildings and a landscaping plan, as well as plans and
specifications for signs which the applicant proposes to use in connection with the
buildings to be erected.
D. The applicant must comply with the notification procedures contained in Chapter
144. [Amended 2-16-2005 by L.L. No. 2-200566]
E. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall send a copy of the
66. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law would become effective 4-30-2005 if it
was filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 240-60 ZONING § 240-61
240:89
§ 240-62. Standards for granting permit. [Amended 12-19-1984 by L.L. No.
10-1984]
The Planning Board shall not grant a special permit unless, upon public hearing, it
determines the following:
§ 240-63. Hearings. [Amended 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
application and plans to the Police Department, Fire Department, Traffic
Committee, Town Engineer, Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration and any other agency it deems
appropriate for review and comment. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
F. Should an agency of the Town having jurisdiction over that application deem it
necessary to hire consultants for technical review and/or on-site inspection, the
applicant shall be required to pay the actual cost to the Town for such services.
[Added 4-24-2019 by L.L. No. 5-2019]
A. That the proposed use is in general harmony with the surrounding area and shall not
adversely impact upon adjacent properties due to the traffic generated by said use
or the access of traffic from said use onto and off of adjoining streets.
B. That the operations in connection with the special permit use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration, flashing of
lights or other aspects than would be operations of any permitted use not requiring
a special permit.
C. That the proposed special permit use will be in harmony with the general health,
safety and welfare of the surrounding area and that by the nature of its particular
location it will not adversely impact upon surrounding properties or surrounding
property values.
D. That there are not existing violations of this chapter on the property which is the
subject of the application.
A. Within 62 days of receiving an application containing all necessary information and
plans, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on that application. At least
10 days before the date of the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the Town. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 2-16-2005 by L.L. No. 2-200567]
B. Within 62 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall render
its decision, based upon the evidence produced before it at the public hearing.
[Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
C. The Planning Board shall grant a special permit if it determines that the applicant
complies with all requirements for the issuance of a permit under this chapter.
67. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law shall become effective 4-30-2005 if it was
filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 240-61 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-64
240:90
§ 240-64. Conditions and safeguards. [Amended 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
The Planning Board shall attach such conditions and safeguards to the special permit
as are necessary to assure the continual conformance with all applicable standards
and requirements. All special permits shall be issued for a period of no more than
two years, and, upon the expiration of the two-year period, the applicant must apply
for an extension of the special permit and demonstrate that there has been no change
in circumstances in the area which would require the Planning Board to deny such
extension.
§ 240-65. Expiration of permits. [Amended 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
A special permit shall be deemed authorized only for the particular use or uses specified
and shall further permit only the applicant to conduct such use. Should the applicant
at any time cease to conduct the use for which a permit has been granted, then any
other person, firm or corporation seeking to conduct said use at the same location must
apply for a special permit for said use. Further, should the use at any time be abandoned
for a period of nine months, then said permit is deemed to have expired and any other
and further use on that property requiring a special permit shall only be permitted after
compliance with the requirements for an application for a new permit.
§ 240-64 ZONING § 240-65
240:91

ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses
§ 240-66. Continuation of existing uses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawfully permitted use of land or
buildings existing at the time of the adoption of or any amendment to this chapter may
be continued although such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the district in which such land or building is located. Said uses shall be
deemed nonconforming uses.
§ 240-67. Use of land.
Where no building is involved, the nonconforming use of land may be continued;
provided, however, that no such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor
shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that lawfully occupied by such
use at the time it became legally nonconforming nor shall any such nonconforming use
be moved, in whole or in part, to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied
by such nonconforming use at the time of the adoption of the provisions of this chapter
that made it nonconforming, provided, further, that if such nonconforming use of land
or any portion thereof ceases for any reason for any continuous period of more than 90
days or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of the land shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. No nonconforming use of land shall be changed to
another nonconforming use.
§ 240-68. Use of buildings.
A. A building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the use regulations
for the district in which it is situated, shall not be enlarged or extended unless such
building or structure, including such enlargement or extension, is made to conform
to all regulations, including use, for the district in which it is situated.
B. Such nonconforming building shall not be structurally altered unless authorized
under § 240-71 or unless such alterations are required by law; provided, however,
that such maintenance and repair work as is required to keep a nonconforming
building or structure in sound condition shall be permitted, and provided, further,
that any such nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of the
building which were lawfully and manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of the adoption of the provisions of this chapter that made said use
nonconforming.
C. A nonconforming use of a building may be changed only to a conforming use.
D. If any nonconforming use of a building ceases for any reason for a continuous
period of more than one year or is changed to a conforming use or if the building in
or on which such use is conducted or maintained is moved for any distance
whatever, for any reason, then any future use of such building shall be in conformity
with the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such building
is located.
E. If any building in or on which any nonconforming use is conducted or maintained
§ 240-66 ZONING § 240-68
240:93
§ 240-69. Deviations from dimensional requirements.
A building that is conforming in use but does not meet the height, yard, court, floor area,
parking, loading, open space or land coverage requirements of this chapter shall not be
considered to be nonconforming within the meaning of § 240-68. However, no permit
shall be issued that will result in an increase in the extent by which such building fails to
meet such requirements.
§ 240-70. Undersize lots.
§ 240-71. Damaged buildings. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
If any building shall be accidentally destroyed or damaged due to fire, explosion or other
cause to the extent of not more than 50%, above the foundations, of its reproduction
value at the time of the damage, as determined by the Building Inspector or the Director
is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the lot on which such building was
located and the subsequent use of any building thereon shall be in conformity
with the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land or
building is located.
A. A permit may be issued, subject to § 240-93, for the erection of a building
incorporating a permitted use on any lot existing in single separate ownership as of
the date of adoption of this chapter or of any amendment thereto or as to which a
valid conveyance or contract of sale has been executed and delivered prior to such
date, which lot does not meet the requirements of this chapter with respect to area,
depth, width or frontage; provided, however, that where the owner of any such lot
also owned or had under contract to purchase adjoining land on such date, such
other land or so much thereof as may be necessary shall be combined with the
original lot to make a single lot meeting such requirements, if possible. Otherwise,
it shall be combined to make a lot which meets such requirements to the fullest
extent possible. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
B. In the case of a lot which does not meet the required dimensions in a residence
district, the minimum required front and rear yards shall be those of the residence
district in which said lot's depth would meet the current requirements, the minimum
required side yards shall be those of the residence district in which said lot's width
would meet the current requirements, and the minimum required floor area shall be
that of the residence district in which said lot's area would meet the current
requirements.
C. A permit may be issued for the erection of a building incorporating a permitted use
on any lot shown as a separate parcel upon a subdivision map or plat duly approved
by the Planning Board of the Town of Mamaroneck and recorded in the office of
the County Clerk, Division of Land Records, prior to the effective date of this
chapter; provided, however, that the owner or subdivider has filed with the Planning
Board a bond for the completion of the street improvements and utilities as required
by the Planning Board under the provisions of §§ 277 and 278 of the Town Law or,
in the alternative, that such street improvements and utilities have been completed
as required by the Planning Board. [Amended 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
§ 240-68 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-71
240:94
of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, it may be restored on its
original foundations, but if damaged or destroyed to a greater extent, it nevertheless
may be rebuilt or restored to provide an equivalent livable or usable area, but it shall
conform to the side yard requirements in this chapter, and if such building shall be a
dwelling, it shall not be nearer to the street than the average distance of the dwellings
on the lots adjacent thereto on each side or, if there be none adjacent, the average of the
two nearest dwellings on the same side of the street in the same block, provided that
such buildings, when restored, shall comply with the structural requirements of Chapter
106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction. This section shall not apply unless such
building is restored within 12 months of such damage or destruction.
§ 240-72. (Reserved)68
§ 240-73. Completion of buildings under construction. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Any building for which a permit has been duly granted prior to the effective date of
any amendment to this chapter which makes such building nonconforming as to use or
causes it to deviate in other respects from the height, yard, court, floor area, parking,
loading, open space or land coverage requirements of this chapter may be completed in
accordance with the plans on file with the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, subject, however, to the provisions of
§ 240-87 of this chapter.
§ 240-74. Existing special uses deemed conforming. [Amended 4-17-1963]
Any use lawfully existing on the effective date of this amended chapter or on the date
of any subsequent amendment to this chapter, in the district in which such use is or was
at that time classified in this chapter as one requiring a special permit, shall, without
further action, be deemed to be a conforming use in such district. Any extension of or
addition to such use or any enlargement or extension of any building or structure shall be
subject to the requirements of §§ 240-60 through 240-64, inclusive, of this chapter, and
said sections shall apply to such extension, addition or enlargement of any use, building
or structure in like manner as to original permitted special uses.
68. Editor's Note: Former § 240-72, Nonconforming signs, as amended 4-17-1963, was deleted 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996.
§ 240-71 ZONING § 240-74
240:95

ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 240-75. Intent.
It is the intention of this chapter that all structures and land uses be provided with
a sufficient amount of off-street motor vehicle parking to meet the needs of persons
employed at or making use of such structures and/or uses and sufficient off-street
loading and unloading facilities to meet the needs of such structures or land uses.
§ 240-76. Required space to be shown on plan.
The plans for any new building or any expansion of an existing building, when submitted
for a building permit, shall show specifically the location and size and type of
improvement of the off-street parking or loading space required to comply with this
chapter and the means of access to such space from the public streets or highways.
Except for one- and two-family residences, no building permit shall be issued until
such plan for parking and loading space and access to it and required improvement
is approved by the Town Engineer, who shall determine that traffic access, traffic
circulation and general layout of the parking facility are planned with regard to safety
to traffic on the public street and safety and adequacy of access for cars and pedestrians
using the parking facility. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or
land use until the required off-street parking space has been established.
§ 240-77. Existing buildings and uses.
§ 240-78. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 4-17-1963; 4-4-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990; 7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
A. Buildings and land uses in existence or for which building permits have been
approved on the effective date of this amended chapter shall be subject to the
parking or loading space requirements of this chapter on the date of such permit or
the date the use was established, in the case of existing uses, provided that any
parking and loading facilities then existing to serve such structures or uses shall not
in the future be reduced except where they exceed such requirements, in which case
they shall not be reduced below such requirements. Required parking and loading
facilities shall, however, be provided as a condition for the issuance of any building
permit for any enlargement of such structures or uses in the future, but, in the case
of exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship to such properties arising out of this
requirement, appeal may be made to the Board of Appeals. In acting upon such
case, the Board of Appeals shall require such degree of compliance as it may deem
reasonable for that part of the structure or use that is legally nonconforming but
shall not waive any part of the requirement for that part of the structure or use that
constitutes an enlargement or expansion and shall not permit reduction or
elimination of whatever quantity of parking may already be in existence unless it is
in excess of requirements.
B. Required off-street parking facilities which, after development, are later dedicated
to and accepted by the Town shall be deemed to continue to serve the uses or
structures for which they were originally provided.
§ 240-75 ZONING § 240-78
240:97
9-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Off-street motor vehicle parking facilities shall be provided as follows, except as
provided above or where additional parking requirements may be made as a
condition of the issuance of a special permit under Article IX, in which case
provisions of that section shall apply:
Type of Use Minimum Requirements
1- and 2-family dwelling units 2 spaces for each dwelling
Multiple dwellings:
Studio 1 space
1-bedroom 1 1/4 spaces
2-bedroom 2 spaces; 1 1/2 spaces in the B-R and
SB-R Districts
3-bedroom 2 1/2 spaces; 2 spaces in the B-R and
SB-R Districts
Professional office or home occupation
permitted in a required residential zone as
an accessory use
2 spaces in addition to spaces for
residential units, except that medical
or dental offices shall have 4 spaces
for each doctor or dentist in addition
to residential parking requirements
Rooming house or boardinghouse 1 space for each guest sleeping room,
plus 1 space per resident family
Hospital, clinic, sanitarium or
convalescent home
1 space for each patient bed,
excluding bassinets, plus 1 space for
each person employed in the building
Theater, auditorium, athletic field or other
place of public assembly other than a
church
1 space for each 5 seats or 200 square
feet in such place of assembly,
whichever would be greater
Church or other place of worship 1 space for each 5 seats or pew
spaces
Bowling alley 5 spaces for each alley
Other center of public amusement, the
capacity of which cannot be measured in
terms of seats
1 space for every 200 square feet of
floor space devoted to patron use
Restaurant or place dispensing food or
drink
1 space for each 50 square feet of
floor space devoted to patron use
Retail or service business 1 space for each 200 square feet of
floor space
Wholesale, storage, utility or other
commercial building or use
1 space for each person for which the
building or use is designed or for
each 2,000 square feet, whichever is
greater
§ 240-78 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-78
240:98
§ 240-79. Layout and location of off-street parking facilities.
Type of Use Minimum Requirements
Office for business or professional use 1 space for each 300 square feet of
floor area
Funeral parlor or undertaking
establishment
At least 10 spaces for each chapel or
viewing room and 1 for each person
working in such establishment; offstreet
loading for delivery and funeral
cortege assembly shall be considered
for site plan approval
Private golf courses 2 parking spaces for each acre of land
contained in the course
Public golf courses 2.5 spaces for each acre of land
contained in the course
Public multiple use recreational facilities 2.5 spaces per acre on a course; 1
space for every 3 bathers in a
swimming pool
Tennis, public or private 3 spaces per court
Private swimming pools 1 space for each 3 bathers
Soccer, football and baseball fields 10 spaces for each field, plus 1 space
for every 5 spectator seats
B. Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for structures and land
uses which do not fall within the categories listed above shall be determined in each
case by the Board of Appeals, which shall consider all factors entering into the
parking needs of such use.
C. Where two or more different uses occur on a single lot, the total amount of parking
facilities to be provided shall be the sum of the requirements for each individual use
on the lot, except that the Board of Appeals may approve the joint use of parking
space by two or more establishments on the same or contiguous lots, the total
capacity of which space is less than the sum of the spaces required for each,
provided that the Board finds that the capacity to be provided will substantially
meet the intent of the requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees among such establishments, and provided
that such approval of such joint use shall be automatically terminated upon the
termination of the operation of any of such establishments.
D. In the B-R and SB-R Districts, the off-street parking requirements may be reduced
by the Planning Board in the course of site plan review if the applicant demonstrates
and the Planning Board finds that the capacity of such off-street parking is
sufficient to meet the demands of such use or uses such as the case of shared
parking by two or more different land uses. In no case shall such reduction be
greater than 15% of that required by type of use.
A. The required off-street parking facilities for structures and land uses which are
§ 240-78 ZONING § 240-79
240:99
developed after the effective date of this chapter shall be provided on the same lot
or premises with such structure or land use, except that off-street parking spaces
required for structures or land uses on two adjoining lots may be provided in a
single common facility on one or both of said lots, and except that the Board of
Appeals may permit all or part of the required spaces to be located on any lot within
500 feet of the building, except in a residence district, if the Board determines that
it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the building.
B. In residence districts: [Amended 4-17-1963; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
12-15-2010 by L.L. No. 11-2010]
(1) Restrictions.
(a) Motor vehicles shall not be parked in the portion of a lot which is
bounded by the front lot line of such lot, an imaginary line running within
that lot which is parallel to the front lot line and 25 feet distant from the
front lot line and the imaginary straight lines which project from the front
lot line to the points where the side walls of the dwelling on such lot meet
the front wall of that dwelling; and
(b) Motor vehicles shall not be parked within five feet of a side lot line or
five feet of a rear lot line nor shall the area of a lot lying within five feet
of a side lot line or within five feet of a rear lot line be developed for
travel by, or the parking of motor vehicles; and
(c) Provided the requirements of § 240-79B(1)(b) are met, motor vehicles
may be parked within 25 feet of the front lot line in one side yard but not
in both side yards.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Section 240-79 B(1)(a) shall not apply to:
[1] Any parking space that violates that section if that parking space
existed on the effective date of this Subsection B; or
[2] Any parking space in a driveway which terminates at the door by
which a motor vehicle would enter a garage located on a lot.
(b) Section 240-79B(1)(b) shall not apply to:
[1] Any driveway which is used by more than one lot on the effective
date of this Subsection B; or
[2] Any lot created by a subdivision approved by the Planning Board if
such lot or lots are designed to contain a driveway which will be
used by more than one lot.
C. No parking in connection with any nonresidential use shall be so located that motor
vehicles may enter or leave the parking area across a sidewalk except at a point or
points approved as part of a plan, as required by § 240-76.
D. No parking required for a business use in a business district may be provided in a
residence district.
§ 240-79 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-79
240:100
§ 240-80. Improvement of parking facilities.
Required off-street parking facilities may be enclosed in a structure or may be open
except as required specifically for multifamily dwellings under § 240-78A, provided that
all required parking facilities shall be graded, surfaced, drained and suitably maintained
to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer to the extent necessary to avoid nuisances of
dust, erosion or excessive water flow across public ways or adjacent lands. The Town
Engineer may require the plan to provide for suitable markings to indicate individual
parking spaces, maneuvering area, entrances and exits.
§ 240-81. Operation and maintenance of off-street parking facilities.
Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the use or structure
exists which the facilities are designed to serve. Required parking areas developed for
specific structures and uses shall be reserved at all times to those persons who are
employed at or make use of such structures and land uses, except when dedicated to and
accepted by the Town as public parking areas.
§ 240-82. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading and unloading facilities, as defined in this chapter and located on the
same site with the use to be served, shall be provided as follows:
E. Parking areas shall be laid out so that vehicles will not be required to back into the
public highway when leaving the parking area.
F. Off-street parking facilities developed to meet the requirements of § 240-78A or B
for residence uses shall be made available to the tenants or owners on a basis equal
to the lowest whole number listed in § 240-78 without charge or fee. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
G. Off-street parking for all other uses shall be available for owners, employees and
customers. Customer parking for retail, wholesale or office uses must be kept
available as 10% of required parking, with a minimum of two spaces. Vehicles
displayed for sale or rent may not use areas required as off-street parking pursuant
to § 240-78A and B. [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996]
A. For retail and service business establishments, restaurants and other places serving
food and beverages, where the ground floor area exceeds 2,000 square feet: one
space for the first 4,000 square feet of floor area or major portion thereof used for
business purposes and one additional space for each additional 10,000 square feet
of business floor space or major portion thereof.
B. For wholesale businesses, storage warehouses, manufacturing or industrial
establishments: one space for each 10,000 square feet or major portion thereof used
for such purposes.
C. Reasonable and appropriate off-street loading requirements for structures and land
uses which do not fall within the categories listed above shall be determined, in
each case, by the Board of Appeals, which shall consider all factors entering into
the loading and unloading needs of such use.
§ 240-79 ZONING § 240-82
240:101

ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 240-83. Compliance required; enforcement.
A. No board, agency, officer or employee of the Town shall issue, grant or approve
any permit, license, certificate or other authorization, including special permits by
the Town Board, for any construction, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement or
moving of any building or for any use of land or building that would not be in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, license, certificate
or other authorization issued, granted or approved in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be null and void and of no effect without the necessity of any
proceedings or revocation or nullification thereof, and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit, license or certificate or authorization shall
be unlawful, and no action shall be taken by any board, agency, officer or employee
of the Town purporting to validate any such violation.
B. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration or either's designated representative shall enforce this chapter.
[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Moratorium on development along section of Boston Post Road. [Added 2-26-2003
by L.L. No. 3-2003]
(1) This subsection shall apply to all properties which border the Boston Post
Road between the Town's boundary with the Village of Larchmont and the
Town's boundary with the Village of Mamaroneck.
(2) This subsection shall be in effect until May 31, 2004.
(3) While this subsection is in effect:
(a) The Planning Board shall not grant any preliminary or final approval to a
subdivision plat, site plan or special permit for properties described in
Subsection C(1), but may renew special permits, provided that the
conditions imposed on the renewed special permit are the same as the
conditions imposed on the existing special permit.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall not grant any variance or special permit for
properties described in Subsection C(1).
(c) The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration may issue building permits, certificates of
completion, letters of compliance or certificates of occupancy (permanent
or temporary) provisions for work done or to be done on properties
described in Subsection C(1) when such work does not require a variance,
final approval of a subdivision plat, site plan approval or a special permit.
[Added 12-3-2003 by L.L. No. 24-2003; amended 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
(4) The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration shall revoke or rescind any building permit or
§ 240-83 ZONING § 240-83
240:103
§ 240-84. Records and reports. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
certificates of occupancy issued in violation of this subsection. [Amended
1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(5) Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of this
subsection shall be subject to:
(a) Such penalties as may otherwise be provided by the laws, rules and
regulations of the Town of Mamaroneck for violations; and
(b) Injunctive relief in favor of the Town of Mamaroneck to cease such
actions which conflict with this subsection and, if necessary, to remove
any construction which may have taken place in violation of this
subsection.
(6) Exemptions.
(a) Should the application of this subsection impose an unnecessary hardship
upon the owner of a property described in Subsection C(1), the owner of
that property or a person acting with the owner's permission may apply to
the Town Board in writing for an exemption from this subsection upon
submission of proof of such unnecessary hardship. For the purpose of this
subsection, the mere delay in being permitted to take an application for a
building permit, variance, special permit, site plan or subdivision shall
not be considered an unnecessary hardship.
(b) Within 30 days after the submission of a written application to the Town
Clerk for an exemption from this subsection, the Town Board shall
schedule a public hearing on that application and shall publish notice of
such hearing at least 10 days prior thereto in the official newspaper of the
Town. At the public hearing, the property owner and any other parties
wishing to present evidence with regard to the application shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Within 30 days after closing the public hearing,
the Town Board shall render its decision either granting or denying the
application for an exemption from this subsection. If the Town Board
determines that a property owner will suffer an unnecessary hardship if
this subsection is applied to a particular property, then the Town Board
shall exempt that property from this subsection to the minimum extent
necessary.
(c) Any party aggrieved by the determination of the Town Board may
challenge its decision pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules within 30 days of the filing of the Town Board's decision in the
Office of the Town Clerk.
A. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration shall keep a permanent record, including all pertinent maps and
plans, of all applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy.
B. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
§ 240-83 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-84
240:104
§ 240-85. Building permits.
§ 240-86. Certificate of occupancy.
Use Administration shall also keep a permanent record of all violations of this
chapter, whether reported by private citizens or by any board, agency, officer or
employee of the Town, and such record shall show the disposition of all such
violations.
C. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration shall make a report to the Town Board, in writing, at least once
every three months, reporting the number and type of building permits and
certificates of occupancy issued and listing all reported or continuing violations of
this chapter and the disposition or pending action of such violations.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, structurally altered, demolished,
moved or removed, wholly or partly, and no excavation for any building, structure
or use shall be made until a permit therefor has been issued by the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration. Except upon a written authorization of the Board of Appeals, no
such building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building
where such construction, addition, alteration, moving or use thereof would be in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L.
No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. A building permit shall be void if construction is not started within a period of six
months and completed within a period of two years of the date of said permit.
[Amended 1-5-1960]
C. There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits three copies of a
layout or plot plan drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and
accessory buildings existing and the lines within which the building or structure is
to be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part
thereof, the number of families or housekeeping units that a building is designed to
accommodate and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring
lots that may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
chapter. One copy of such plan shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall
have been approved by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration. All dimensions shown on this plan
relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual
survey, and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started.
The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration, after inspection of the property, may require information
relative to the contours of the lot where the building or buildings are to be located.
[Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner to make or permit any new use of land or to use or
permit the use of any building or premises or part thereof created, erected, changed,
converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, in its use or structure, after the effective
date of this amended chapter, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued
§ 240-84 ZONING § 240-86
240:105
§ 240-87. Building permits issued prior to effective date. [Amended 1-5-1960]
All permits for buildings or structures issued prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall be null and void unless construction is started within a period of six months from
the date of the issuance of such permit and completed within a period of two years from
the date of issuance of such permit. If building operations are discontinued for a period
of six months or more, any further construction shall be in conformity with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-88. Penalties for offenses; other remedies.
by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration. Such certificate shall state that such building or premises or
part thereof and the proposed use thereof are in complete conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The lack of a certificate of occupancy for buildings
and uses existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter shall not, of itself,
be deemed to be noncompliance with this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration to issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that he is satisfied that
the building and the proposed use of the building or premises conform with all
the requirements herein set forth. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for
coincident with an application for a building permit. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is required for both
initial and continued occupancy and use of the building or land to which it applies
and shall continue in effect as long as such building and the use thereof or of such
land is in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any requirements
made pursuant thereto.
C. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land
Use Administration shall maintain a record of all certificates, and copies shall be
furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected. Upon written request from the owner, the Building Inspector
or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall
issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or premises, certifying, after
inspection, that the extent and kind of use and disposition conform to the provisions
of this chapter. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
A. Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, architect or builder or the agent of any of them
who violates or is accessory to the violation of any provisions of this chapter or who
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs,
alters, enlarges, converts or moves, uses any building or uses any land in violation
of any detailed statement or plans submitted by him and approved under the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be liable to a fine
which shall not exceed $50 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation. Violations shall be prosecuted and
penalties collected in the manner prescribed by law or ordinance effective in the
§ 240-86 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-88
240:106
§ 240-89. Board of Appeals. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002; 11-5-2003
by L.L. No. 20-2003; 4-21-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004; 5-4-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
Town. [Amended 1-5-1960]
B. Any building erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, demolished, moved
or removed or used contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter and any use of
any land or any building which is conducted, operated or maintained contrary to
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be
unlawful. The proper Town authorities may institute an injunction, mandamus,
abatement or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such
erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion or use in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter. Upon the failure or refusal of the proper local
officer, board or body of the Town to institute any such appropriate action or
proceeding for a period of 10 days after written request by a resident taxpayer of
the Town to so proceed, any three taxpayers of the Town residing in the district
wherein such violation exists, who are jointly or severally aggrieved by such
violation, may institute such appropriate action or proceeding in like manner as
such local officer, board or body of the Town is authorized to do. The Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use
Administration or either's designated representative shall serve notice personally or
by registered mail, and, if by mail, it may be addressed to the owner or occupant of
the premises where such violation exists, at the address given by him upon the
application for any permit required under the provisions of this chapter or Chapter
106, Fire Prevention and Building Construction, of the Code of the Town, or to the
last-known address of the owner as shown by the records in the office of the Town
Receiver of Taxes or in the office of the Register of the County of Westchester, and,
if such violation does not cease within such time as proper Town authorities may
specify and a new certificate of occupancy is not obtained, they shall institute such
of the foregoing actions as may be necessary to terminate the violation. Such notice
may also be served by posting on the premises. The remedies provided for herein
are cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies
provided by law. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 1-20-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
C. Any person, corporation, partnership or entity that establishes, constructs or installs
any building, improvement, structure, or conducts or operates any land use in
violation of § 240-25D, 240-30, 240-31 or 240-32.1A of the Code of the Town of
Mamaroneck shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, subject to a penalty
of up to $250 for each day that such violation continues to exist. Nothing herein
shall be construed to limit the authority of the Town to seek and obtain injunctive
relief for any violation of this chapter. [Added 2-6-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
A. Supersession. [Amended 4-7-2021 by L.L. No. 6-2021]
(1) Portions of § 267, Subdivision 11, of the New York Town Law hereby are
superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized
words are new matter added thereto. Section 267, Subdivision 11, of the New
York Town Law, as superseded below, shall apply in the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 240-88 ZONING § 240-89
240:107
"Section 267
11. Alternate members. (a) A town board may, by local law or ordinance, or
as a part of the local law or ordinance, or as part of the local law or ordinance
creating the [zoning] board of appeals, establish alternate [zoning] board of
appeals member positions for purposes of substituting for a regular member
in the event such member is absent or is unable to participate because of a
conflict of interest. Alternate members of the [zoning] board of appeals shall
be appointed by resolution of the town board, for terms established by the
town board.
(b) The chairperson of the [zoning] board of appeals [may] shall designate
[an] the alternate member to substitute for a regular member when such
member is absent or is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest
[on] with respect to a[n application or] matter before the board. The town
board shall establish the procedure for making that designation. When [so
designated, the] an alternate member sits in the place of a regular member,
the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of
such regular member of the board. Such designation shall be entered into
the minutes of the [initial zoning] board of appeals meeting at which the
substitution is made.
(c) All provisions of this section relating to [zoning] board of appeals member
training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest,
compensation, eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, and service on other
boards, shall also apply to alternate members."
(2) Portions of § 267, Subdivision 7-a, of the New York Town Law hereby are
superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized
words are new matter added thereto. Section 267, Subdivision 7-a, of the New
York Town Law, as superseded below, shall apply in the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 240-89 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-89
240:108
"Section 267
7-a. Training and attendance requirements. (a) Each member of the board of
appeals who has not served on the board of appeals or the planning board
for at least 60 months shall complete, at a minimum, four hours of training
each year [designed to enable such members to more effectively carry out
their duties]. Each member of the board of appeals who has served on the
board of appeals or the planning board for at least 61 months shall complete,
at a minimum, two hours of training each year. Such training must be in
areas designed to enable such members to more effectively carry out their
duties. [Training received by a member in excess of four hours in any one
year may be carried over by the member into succeeding years in order to
meet the requirements of this subdivision.] Such training shall be approved
by the town board and may include, but not be limited to, training provided
by a municipality, regional or county planning office or commission, county
planning federation, state agency, statewide municipal association, college
or other similar entity. Training may be provided in a variety of formats,
including but not limited to, electronic media, video, distance learning and
traditional classroom training.”
(3) On a regular basis during the course of the year, members of the Board of
Appeals shall provide the Town Clerk with copies of the certifications of
attendance received by them from providers of training, or such other proof as
may be available that indicates the type of training the members have received
during the year. On or about October 1 of each year, the Town Clerk shall send
a notice to each member of the Board of Appeals showing the number of hours
of training that such member has reported for that year and the number of
hours of training, if any, that such member must complete before December
31 of that year.
(4) On or about December 1 of each year, the Town Clerk shall submit to the
Town Board a list of the names of each member of Board of Appeals and the
number of hours of training for that year that each member has reported to the
Town Clerk.
B. Procedures. The Board of Appeals shall follow the rules and procedure set forth in
New York Town Law § 267-a; however, it shall have the power to adopt from time
to time such rules and procedure not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary, to
carry out the provisions of this chapter and to exercise the authority vested in it by
the New York Town Law.
C. Procedures regarding alternate members.
(1) An alternate member shall substitute for a regular member of the Board of
Appeals who is absent or is unable to participate in a matter due to a conflict
of interest. If the number of alternate members exceeds the number of regular
members who either are absent or have a conflict of interest with respect to a
particular matter, the Chairperson of the Board of Appeals shall designate the
alternate member who will substitute for the absent regular member or the
regular member with a conflict of interest. If the Chairperson is absent or is the
member with the conflict of interest, the longest-tenured regular member of
§ 240-89 ZONING § 240-89
240:109
the Board of Appeals shall make this designation.
(2) If an alternate member participates in a matter before the Board of Appeals,
the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of the
regular member whom the alternate member shall have replaced. If an
alternate member participates in a matter due to the absence of a regular
member, and, at a subsequent meeting at which that same matter is heard, the
regular member for whom the alternate member substituted is present, the
regular member shall resume the position as a regular member of the Board of
Appeals in connection with that matter.
D. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties
prescribed by the New York Town Law and by this chapter. None of the following
provisions shall limit any power conferred upon the Board of Appeals by the New
York Town Law.
(1) Interpretation. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Inspector or the Director of Building
Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration, the Board of Appeals shall
decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision of this
chapter, including determination of the exact location of any district boundary
line if uncertainty remains after referring to the rules specified in Article II.
[Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(2) Use variances.
(a) "Use variance" shall have the same meaning as it has in New York Town
Law § 267(1)(a).
(b) On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration regarding the application of this chapter, the
Board of Appeals may grant use variances from the applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions upon a showing by the applicant for such
variance that the applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have
caused unnecessary hardship. In determining whether the applicant has
proven unnecessary hardship, the Board of Appeals shall apply the
criteria therefor set forth in § 267-b(2)(b) of the New York Town Law.
[Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(c) When granting use variances, the Board of Appeals shall grant the
minimum variances that it deems necessary and adequate to address the
unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, while at the same time
preserving and protecting the character of the neighborhood and the
health and welfare of the community.
(3) Area variances.
(a) "Area variance" shall have the same meaning as it has in New York Town
Law § 267-1(b).
(b) On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the
§ 240-89 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-89
240:110
§ 240-90. Appeals.
§ 240-91. Fees. [Amended 12-9-1964; 3-3-1971; 10-19-1977; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002; 8-17-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011; 1-20-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016; 4-24-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
Any person or corporation, other than the Town of Mamaroneck, making any application
to the Board of Appeals under the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Building
Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and Land Use Administration
the fees, set forth in § A250-1, for both processing the applications and advertising
the notice of hearing for each application filed. Should an agency of the Town having
jurisdiction over that application deem it necessary to hire consultants for technical
Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code Enforcement and
Land Use Administration regarding the application of this chapter, the
Board of Appeals may grant to an applicant an area variance from the
applicable zoning regulations and restrictions. In determining whether the
applicant is entitled to an area variance, the Board of Appeals shall apply
the criteria therefor set forth in § 267-b(3)(b) of the New York Town
Law. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(c) When granting area variances, the Board of Appeals shall grant the
minimum variances that it deems necessary and adequate while at the
same time preserving and protecting the character of the neighborhood
and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
E. Imposition of conditions. When granting either use variances or area variances, or
both, the Board of Appeals shall have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed
use of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
such variances may have on the neighborhood or community.
F. Availability of statutes. The Building Inspector or the Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use Administration shall maintain copies of §§ 267-a,
267(1)(a), 267(1)(b), 267-b(2) and 267-b(3) of the New York Town Law and shall
distribute them upon request. [Amended 1-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. All appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be taken in the manner and within the
time prescribed by § 267-a(5)(b) of the New York Town Law. All such appeals
shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Each appeal shall set forth
the facts of the case, refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved and
contain the reasons why the appeal ought to be granted. Every decision of the Board
of Appeals shall recite the findings on which the decision was based. [Amended
5-4-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
B. The person applying to the Board of Appeals must comply with the notification
procedures contained in Chapter 144. [Added 2-16-2005 by L.L. No. 2-200569]
69. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law would become effective 4-30-2005 if it
was filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 240-89 ZONING § 240-91
240:111
review and/or on-site inspection, the applicant shall be required to pay the actual cost to
the Town for such services.
§ 240-91 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-91
240:112
ARTICLE XIII
Amendments
§ 240-92. Procedure.
§ 240-93. Effect on issuance of permits. [Amended 4-17-1963]
Whenever the Town Board, by resolution, authorizes a public hearing on a proposed
amendment to this chapter, for a period of 60 days following the date of such resolution,
no building shall be erected, enlarged or altered and no permit shall be issued for the
construction, enlargement or alteration of any building or for the occupancy of any land
or building in any manner that would be contrary to this chapter as it would be changed
by the proposed amendment.
A. The Town Board, from time to time, may amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this chapter, after public notice and hearing, in the
manner provided by the Town Law.
B. Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the Town Board
or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning Board for report thereon before the
public hearing provided for in § 240-92A above. In recommending the adoption of
any such proposed amendment, the Planning Board shall state its reasons for such
recommendation, describing any condition that it believes makes the amendment
advisable and specifically setting forth the manner in which, in its opinion, the
amendment would be in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan of land use for the
Town and would be in furtherance of the purposes set forth in § 240-2 of this
chapter. In recommending the rejection or revision of any proposed amendment, the
Planning Board shall similarly state its reasons. Failure of the Planning Board to
make a report on any proposed amendment within 45 days of the date of referral
shall be deemed to be approval thereof, unless such proceedings have theretofore
been terminated.
C. A person petitioning for an amendment or change to any provision of this chapter
must comply with the notification procedures contained in Chapter 144. [Added
2-16-2005 by L.L. No. 2-200570]
70. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-2005, adopted 3-16-2005, provided that this local law would become effective 4-30-2005 if it
was filed with the Secretary of State prior to that date.
§ 240-92 ZONING § 240-93
240:113

ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Approval
[Added 12-19-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
§ 240-94. Site plan approval required.
All applications for building permits, special permits and variances are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 177, Site Plan Review, of the Code of the Town of Mamaroneck
unless specifically exempted from the requirements of site plan approval under § 177-7
of Chapter 177, Site Plan Review. No application for a building permit may be granted
unless there has been full compliance with the requirements of Chapter 177, Site Plan
Review, and no application for special permit or variance may be granted unless a
condition of said granting of a special permit or variance is in compliance with all
requirements of Chapter 177, Site Plan Review, where applicable.
§ 240-94 ZONING § 240-94
240:115

ARTICLE XV
Planning Board
[Added 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
§ 240-95. Powers of Planning Board; procedures regarding alternate members.
[Added 11-5-2003 by L.L. No. 20-2003; amended 5-4-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
A. Supersession. [Amended 4-7-2021 by L.L. No. 6-2021]
(1) Portions of § 271, Subdivision 15, of the New York Town Law hereby are
superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized
words are new matter added thereto. Section 271, Subdivision 15, of the New
York Town Law, as superseded below, shall apply in the Town of
Mamaroneck.
"Section 271
15. Alternate members. (a) A town board may, by local law or ordinance,
or as a part of the local law or ordinance, or as part of the local law or
ordinance creating the planning board, establish alternate planning board
member positions for purposes of substituting for a regular member in the
event such member is absent or is unable to participate because of a conflict
of interest. Alternate members of the planning board shall be appointed by
resolution of the town board, for terms established by the town board.
(b) The chairperson of the planning board [may] shall designate [an] the
alternate member to substitute for a regular member when such member is
absent or is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest [on] with
respect to a[n application or] matter before the board. The town board shall
establish the procedure for making that designation. When [so designated,
the] an alternate member sits in the place of a regular member, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such regular
member of the board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of
the [initial] planning board meeting at which the substitution is made.
(c) All provisions of this section relating to planning board member training
and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest, compensation,
eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, and service on other boards, shall also
apply to alternate members."
(2) Portions of § 271, Subdivision 7-a, of the New York Town Law hereby are
superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized
words are new matter added thereto. Section 271, Subdivision 7-a, of the New
York Town Law, as superseded below, shall apply in the Town of
Mamaroneck.
§ 240-95 ZONING § 240-95
240:117
"Section 271
7-a. Training and attendance requirements. (a) Each member of the planning
board who has not served on the board of appeals or the planning board for
at least 60 months shall complete, at a minimum, four hours of training each
year [designed to enable such members to more effectively carry out their
duties]. Each member of the planning board who has served on the board
of appeals or the planning board for at least 61 months shall complete, at a
minimum, two hours of training each year. Such training must be in areas
designed to enable such members to more effectively carry out their duties.
[Training received by a member in any one year may be carried over by
the member into succeeding years in order to meet the requirements of this
subdivision.] Such training shall be approved by the town board and may
include, but not be limited to, training provided by a municipality, regional
or county planning office or commission, county planning federation, state
agency, statewide municipal association, college or other similar entity.
Training may be provided in a variety of formats, including but not limited to,
electronic media, video, distance learning and traditional classroom training."
(3) On a regular basis during the course of the year, members of the Planning
Board shall provide the Town Clerk with copies of the certifications of
attendance received by them from providers of training, or such other proof as
may be available that indicates the type of training the members have received
during the year. On or about October 1 of each year, the Town Clerk shall send
a notice to each member of the Planning Board showing the number of hours
of training that such member has reported for that year and the number of
hours of training, if any, that such member must complete before December
31 of that year.
(4) On or about December 1 of each year, the Town Clerk shall submit to the
Town Board a list of the names of each member of Planning Board and the
number of hours of training for that year that each member has reported to the
Town Clerk.
B. Supersession. Portions of § 271(15) of the New York Town Law hereby are
superseded. Words enclosed in brackets are eliminated therefrom. Italicized words
are new matter added thereto. Section 271(15) of the New York Town Law, as
superseded below, shall apply in the Town of Mamaroneck.
§ 240-95 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § 240-95
240:118
"Section 271
15. Alternate members. a. A town board may, by local law or ordinance, or as
part of the local law or ordinance creating the planning board, establish alternate
planning board member positions for purposes of substituting for a regular
member in the event such member is absent or is unable to participate because of
a conflict of interest. Alternate members of the planning board shall be appointed
by resolution of the town board, for terms established by the town board.
b. The chairperson of the planning board [may] shall designate [an] the alternate
member to substitute for a regular member when such member is absent or
is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest [on] with respect to
a[n application or] matter before the board. The town board shall establish the
procedure for making that designation. When [so designated the] an alternate
member sits in place of a regular member, the alternate member shall possess
all the powers and responsibilities of such regular member of the board. Such
designation shall be entered into the minutes of the [initial] planning board
meeting at which the substitution is made.
c. All provisions of this section relating to planning board member training and
continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest, compensation, eligibility,
vacancy in office, removal, and service on other boards, shall also apply to
alternate members."
C. Procedures. The Planning Board shall have the power to adopt from time to time
such rules and procedure not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary to exercise
the authority granted to it.
D. Procedures regarding alternate members.
(1) An alternate member shall substitute for a regular member of the Planning
Board who is absent or is unable to participate in a matter due to a conflict of
interest. If the number of alternate members exceeds the number of regular
members who either are absent or have a conflict of interest with respect to a
particular matter, the Chairperson of the Planning Board shall designate the
alternate member who will substitute for the absent regular member or the
regular member with the conflict of interest. If the Chairperson is absent or is
the member with the conflict of interest, the longest-tenured regular member
of the Planning Board shall make this designation.
(2) If an alternate member participates in a matter before the Planning Board, the
alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of the
regular member whom the alternate member shall have replaced. If an
alternate member participates in a matter due to the absence of a regular
member, and, at a subsequent meeting at which that same matter is heard, the
regular member for whom the alternate member substituted is present, the
regular member shall resume the position as a regular member of the Planning
Board in connection with that matter.
E. Powers. The Planning Board shall have all of the powers and duties heretofore
granted to or imposed upon it by the Town Board.
§ 240-95 ZONING § 240-95
240:119

Appendix
§ 240-95 ZONING § 240-95
240:121

Chapter A250
FEE SCHEDULE
§ A250-1. Enumeration of fees.
The schedule of fees and deposits for services, applications, permits and licenses is as
follows:
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
§ 50-3C Alarm system user permit, per calendar
year or part thereof
$30
§ 50-4D(1) False alarm penalties, per calendar year:
Second $15
Third and fourth $50
Fifth through 15th $100
Each subsequent occurrence $250
§ 55-6A Mechanical amusement device license fee,
annual:
Per device $50
Per premises $125
§ 58-7A Dog license fee for each neutered male or
spayed female dog
$20, plus state
surcharge of $1
Dog license fee for each unneutered male
or unspayed female dog
$25, plus state
surcharge of $3
§ 58-7G Failure to respond to an enumeration $50
§ 58-8 Redemption of impounded animals:
Fee for impound $10 per day
First impoundment of an animal within
same calendar year
$40
Second impoundment of an animal within
same calendar year
$50
Any subsequent impoundment of an
animal within same calendar year
$60
§ 95-30A Erosion and sediment control
Filing fees:
Surface water and erosion control permit
for a parcel with an existing one- or twofamily
dwelling
$250
§ 240-95 FEE SCHEDULE § A250-1
A250:1
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
Surface water and erosion control permit
for the construction of a new one- or twofamily
dwelling on either a vacant parcel
or on a parcel where more than 50%
existing residence is demolished
$400
Surface water and erosion control permit
in all other cases
$400
Fee for applicant-requested modification
(no work has commenced)
$100
Fee for applicant-requested modification
(work has commenced)
$150
Permit fees:
Surface water and erosion control permit
for a parcel with an existing one- or twofamily
dwelling
$200
Surface water and erosion control permit
for the construction of a new one- or twofamily
dwelling on either a vacant parcel
or on a parcel where more than 50%
existing residence is demolished
$300
Surface water and erosion control permit
in all other cases
$400 and where
controls exceed $5,000
of anticipated costs,
then 6% fee additional
for all costs in excess
of $5,000. This 6% is
not part of the
engineering fees for
site plan approval.
Stormwater pollution prevention permit $500
Inspection fees:
Minimum inspection fee for a parcel with
a one- or two-family dwelling
$100
All other residential parcels $150
All other cases $250
NOTE: If work is commenced prior to the
permit being issued, all fees for the project
will be doubled.
§ 99-6A License fee for use of public property, per
day
Minimum $500;
maximum $5,000
§ A250-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § A250-1
A250:2
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
§ 99-6B License fee for use of private property, per
day
$150
§ 106-20A Blasting permit application (A bond in the
amount of $100,000 as well as public
liability insurance naming the Town of
Mamaroneck as a coinsured in an
aggregate amount of not less than
$2,000,000 is to accompany application.)
$350
§ 106-20A Supplemental blasting at the same site $100
§ 106-49B Discharge compliance certificate
application
$75
§ 106-56 Building fees:
Filing fees (applies to all permits issued by
the Director of Building Code Enforcement
and Land Use Administration):
Residential $100 filing fee, plus
$17 per $1,000 of
construction cost
Commercial $100 filing fee, plus
$25 per $1,000 of
construction cost
Original certificate of occupancy:
One- and two-family dwellings and
related accessory structures
$100
Commercial and all other buildings $100
Temporary certificate (plus bond as
required by Director of Building Code
Enforcement and Land Use
Administrator)
$300
Copy of certificate of occupancy $0.25
Original letter of compliance $100
Copy of letter of compliance $0.25
Mechanical rock removal permit
application
$100 filing fee, plus
$17 per $1,000 of rock
removal cost
To raze any structure:
Residential demolition $100 filing fee, plus
$17 per $1,000 of
demo cost
§ A250-1 FEE SCHEDULE § A250-1
A250:3
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
Commercial demolition $100 filing fee, plus
$25 per $1,000 of
demo cost
NOTE: Fees for all permits issued after construction has started or where it has been
completed shall be double the calculated fee.
Permit renewals: 1/12 of the original building permit fee multiplied by the number of
months to be extended, but in no case to be less than $500
To move a building: Treat fees the same as for new construction.
§ 110-12B Floodplain development permit $100 filing fee, plus up
to $1,500 to cover
costs
§ 114-7A Wetlands permit application $200
§ 117-6 Garage sale license application $20
§ 154-7A Peddling license, vehicle $50
§ 154-7B Peddler's license $50
§ 158-6 Plumbing fees:
Residential plumbing fee $75, plus $17 per
$1,000 of plumbing
installation
Commercial plumbing fee $150, plus $25 per
$1,000 of plumbing
installation
NOTE: For purposes of fee, gas appliances shall be considered as a plumbing fee.
§ 158-6 Fuel oil equipment:
Each oil burner, hourly rated capacity up
to 2 gallons
$100
Over 2 gallons and up to 10 gallons $150
Over 10 gallons $200
§ 158-6 Storage tanks: Removal, installation or
abandonment:
Up to 275 gallons $100 filing fee, plus
$100 permit fee
Over 275 gallons and up to 550 gallons $100 filing fee, plus
$125 permit fee
Over 550 gallons and up to 1,000 gallons $100 filing fee, plus
$150 permit fee
Over 1,000 gallons and up to 2,000
gallons
$100 filing fee, plus
$350 permit fee
For each 1,000 gallons over 2,000 gallons $30 per 1,000 gallons
§ A250-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § A250-1
A250:4
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
NOTE: Removal of underground tanks
requires a $1,200 bond
Gas piping permit and test $100
§ 167-8B Photocopies, not to exceed 9 inches by 14
inches
$0.25 per page
§ 167-8 Blueprint or plan photocopy $2 per square feet
§ 167-8 Digital topographic/Tax Map CD $100 per map page
§ 167-8 Town Code/inserts (no cover) $360
§ 167-8 Zoning pamphlet $20
§ 167-8 Zoning, election or Town Map $3
§ 175-17 Signs:
Filing fee $100
For erecting, placing or painting a new
sign, altering, reconstructing, enlarging or
relocating an existing sign
$150
Temporary signs as approved by Building
Department
$60
Temporary signs as approved by Town
Board
$200
§ 177-15 Site plan approval application $350, plus $25 for
each parking space
required by the Zoning
Ordinance
§ 177-15 Engineering fees 6% of the total
performance bond or
$2 per linear foot of
road surface,
whichever is higher
§ 187-5 Restoration deposits:
Street openings up to 100 square feet $1,200
Additional deposit for street openings in
excess of 100 square feet
$10 per square foot
over 100 square feet
§ 190-22 Subdivision of land:
Up to 2 lots $300, plus $150 for
each additional lot
shown on application
§ 198-Reserved Taxi drivers (Reserved)
§ 198-3
Reserved
Taxicab and livery license (Reserved)
§ A250-1 FEE SCHEDULE § A250-1
A250:5
Code Section Subject Fee or Deposit
§ 198-7B
Reserved
Replacement of taxicab license or badge (Reserved)
§ 207-6A Tree removal permit application:
1 to 4 trees $75
Each additional tree $15
219-63 Residential parking permits $25 per motor vehicle
per year
§ 240-61A Special permit fees:
Application fee $300
Renewal $150
§ 240-91 Zoning Board of Appeals application
§ 240-91 Area variance, first request $200
§ 240-91 Each additional requested variance $100
§ 240-91 Use variance $200
§ 240-91 Zoning variance extension $200
§ 240-91 Fee for advertising hearing by Board of
Appeals
$50
NA Bowling alley $250
NA Bounced check fee $20
NA Property tax fee (charge to tax service
entities for property tax payments without
tax bill)
$5 per parcel/tax bill
NA Accident report $0.25 per page
NA Complaint report $0.25 per page
NA Auctioning permits, per day $5
NA Auctioneering permit $100
NA Certified copies of vital records $10
§ A250-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § A250-1
A250:6
Disposition List
§ A250-1 FEE SCHEDULE § A250-1
A250:7

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
7-1990 12-5-1990 Architectural Review Board Ch. 3
4-1992 5-20-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-1992 6-3-1992 Animals amendment NCM
6-1992 6-3-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-1992 9-9-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-1992 10-21-1992 Erosion and sediment control Ch. 95
9-1992 10-21-1992 Solid waste Ch. 183
10-1992 11-18-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-1993 2-17-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-1993 2-17-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-1993 3-3-1993 Senior citizen tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
4-1993 3-17-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-1992 3-31-1993 Erosion and sediment control
amendment
Ch. 95
6-1993 3-31-1993 Board of Architectural Review
amendment
Ch. 3
7-1993 5-3-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-1993 6-2-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-1993 9-8-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-1993 10-20-1993 Cable television Ch. 74
11-1993 12-1-1993 Cable television amendment Ch. 74
12-1993 12-15-1993 Senior citizen tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
1-1994 1-5-1994 Residency requirements Ch. 36
§ A250-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-1994 3-7-1994 Signs Ch. 175
3-1994 3-7-1994 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-1994 5-4-1994 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-1994 6-1-1994 Solid waste amendment Ch. 183
6-1994 7-20-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
7-1994 8-17-1994 Moratorium on cellular phone
antennas
NCM
8-1994 9-21-1994 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-1994 11-16-1994 Moratorium on cellular phone
antennas amendment
NCM
10-1994 12-7-1994 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
11-1994 12-7-1994 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-1995 2-1-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-1995 2-1-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-1995 2-15-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
4-1995 3-15-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
5-1995 4-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-1995 4-19-1995 Noise from outdoor power tools
and gasoline-powered blowers
Ch. 141, Art. II
7-1995 5-3-1995 Police Department
Administration
Ch. 32, Art. II
8-1995 5-3-1995 Fire safety zones amendment Ch. 108
9-1995 9-6-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-1995 10-11-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
11-1995 10-11-1995 Waterfowl Ch. 233
12-1995 10-11-1995 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
13-1995 12-6-1995 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
1-1996 1-17-1996 Plumbing Ch. 158
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:2
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-1996 2-7-1996 Noise from outdoor power tools
and gasoline-powered blowers
amendment
Ch. 141, Art. II
3-1996 2-7-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
4-1996 2-28-1996 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-1996 2-28-1996 Moratorium on adult-oriented
land uses
NCM
6-1996 3-20-1996 Fire hydrants Ch. 102
7-1996 4-17-1996 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-1996 4-17-1996 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-1996 4-17-1996 Parking lots amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-1996 5-1-1996 Mechanical amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 55
11-1996 5-1-1996 Vehicles and traffic Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
12-1996 5-15-1996 Trees amendment Ch. 207
13-1996 6-19-1996 Delinquent taxes Ch. 195, Art. V
14-1996 7-17-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
15-1996 7-17-1996 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
16-1996 9-4-1996 Environmental quality review
amendment
Ch. 92
17-1996 10-16-1996 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
18-1996 12-4-1996 Moratorium on food-related
retail establishments
NCM
1-1997 1-8-1997 Filming and videotaping Ch. 99
2-1997 2-5-1997 Environmental quality review
amendment
Ch. 92
3-1997 4-16-1997 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
4-1997 5-7-1997 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
5-1997 5-21-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-1997 5-21-1997 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VI
7-1997 5-21-1997 Moratorium on food-related
retail establishments extended
NCM
8-1997 6-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-1997 7-2-1997 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
10-1997 7-2-1997 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
11-1997 9-3-1997 Moratorium on food-related
retail establishments extended
NCM
12-1997 9-3-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
13-1997 10-22-1997 Solid waste amendment Ch. 183
14-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
15-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
16-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
17-1997 12-3-1997 Moratorium on food-related
retail establishments extended
NCM
1-1998 1-1-1998 Waterfront revitalization
amendment
Ch. 234
2-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-1998 3-4-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
5-1998 3-18-1998 Sewers amendment Ch. 173
6-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-1998 5-20-1998 Alternative veterans exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VI
8-1998 10-7-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-1998 10-21-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-1998 12-16-1998 Helicopters and other aircraft
amendment
Ch. 122
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:4
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1-1999 1-6-1999 Defense and indemnification
amendment
Ch. 26, Art. I
2-1999 2-10-1999 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
3-1999 3-24-1999 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-1999 5-19-1999 Residential and commercial
properties amendment
Ch. 161, Art. II
5-1999 6-16-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-1999 9-8-1999 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
7-1999 10-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2000 2-16-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-2000 2-16-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2000 3-22-2000 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2000 4-12-2000 Local impact review;
environmental quality review
amendment
Ch. 130; Ch. 92
5-2000 5-17-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2000 5-17-2000 Official Map amendment NCM
7-2000 5-17-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2000 6-21-2000 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
9-2000 7-19-2000 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-2000 8-23-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
11-2000 8-23-2000 Removal from office Ch. 35
12-2000 8-23-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
13-2000 8-23-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
14-2000 8-23-2000 Conservation areas amendment Ch. 77
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-2000 9-6-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
16-2000 10-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
17-2000 10-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
18-2000 10-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
19-2000 10-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
20-2000 11-1-2000 Telecommunications
franchising and licensing
Ch. 75
1-2001 3-7-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-2001 4-18-2001 Official Map amendment NCM
3-2001 5-2-2001 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
4-2001 5-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2001 5-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2001 6-20-2001 Persons with disabilities and
limited incomes tax exemption
Ch. 195, Art. VIII
7-2001 12-19-2001 Repeal Conservation Advisory
Commission
Ch. 12, Editor's note
only
8-2001 12-5-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
9-2001 12-19-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2002 1-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-2002 1-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2002 2-6-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2002 2-6-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
5-2002 4-17-2002 Town-owned parking lots Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2002 4-16-2002 Water emergencies Ch. 231
7-2002 2-6-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:6
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
8-2002 10-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-2002 10-16-2002 Code of Ethics amendment;
zoning amendment (alternate
members of Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals)
Ch. 17, Art. I; Ch.
240
10-2002 10-16-2002 Building code enforcement
amendment
Chs. 95,
106,114,175, 183,
192; Editor's note
page
11-2002 11-20-2002 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
12-2002 11-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2003 1-8-2003 Zoning amendment
(McMansions)
Ch. 240
2-2003 1-22-2003 Coastal Zone Management
Commission amendment
Ch. 8
3-2003 2-26-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
4-2003 2-26-2003 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
5-2003 2-26-2003 Persons with disabilities and
limited incomes tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VIII
6-2003 2-26-2003 Wetlands and watercourses Ch. 114
7-2003 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2003 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-2003 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-2003 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
11-2003 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
12-2003 4-22-2003 Board of Architectural Review
amendment; boards,
commissions, authorities and
committees; Code of Ethics
amendment; trees amendment
Chs. 3, 5, 17, 207
13-2003 5-28-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:7
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
14-2003 6-25-2003 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment
Ch. 5
15-2003 7-9-2003 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
16-2003 9-3-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
17-2003 9-16-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
18-2003 9-16-2003 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
19-2003 11-5-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
20-2003 11-5-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
21-2003 11-5-2003 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
22-2003 11-5-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
23-2003 11-19-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
24-2003 12-3-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
25-2003 12-3-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
26-2003 12-3-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2004 1-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-2004 2-11-2004 Mechanical rock removal; fees
amendment
Ch. 106; Part 3; Ch.
A250
3-2004 3-17-2004 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
4-2004 4-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
5-2004 4-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
6-2004 4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2004 5-18-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2004 5-18-2004 Site plan review amendment Ch. 177
9-2004 5-18-2004 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
10-2004 5-18-2004 Parks and fields Ch. 149
11-2004 6-2-2004 Persons with disabilities and
limited incomes amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VIII
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:8
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
12-2004 9-22-2004 Quality of life laws;
enforcement
Ch. 34
13-2004 10-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
14-2004 10-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2005 1-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
2-2005 2-16-2005 Notification procedures; site
plan review amendment;
subdivision of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 144, 177, 190
and 240
3-2005 3-16-2005 Notification procedures
amendment; site plan review
amendment; subdivision of land
amendment, zoning amendment
(effective date)
Ch. 144, Editor's
Note only
4-2005 4-13-2005 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
5-2005 5-4-2005 Vehicles and traffic: idling of
motor vehicles
Ch. 219, Art. I
6-2005 5-4-2005 Building construction
amendment; fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2; Ch.
A250
7-2005 5-4-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
8-2005 5-18-2005 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment (Tree Preservation
Commission); trees amendment
Chs. 5 and 207
9-2005 5-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
10-2005 6-1-2005 Enforcement of quality of life
laws amendment
Ch. 34
11-2005 6-1-2005 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment (Board of
Assessment Review)
Ch. 5
12-2005 7-13-05 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
13-2005 7-13-05 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
14-2005 7-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
15-2005 9-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 7-2007
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:9
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
16-2005 9-21-2005 Signs amendment Ch. 175
17-2005 10-19-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
18-2005 12-20-2005 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
1-2006 1-4-2006 Taxation: alternative veterans
exemption
Ch. 195, Art. VI
2-2006 1-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2006 2-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2006 3-1-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
5-2006 4-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
6-2006 4-24-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 175
7-2006 5-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Temporary measure
8-2006 5-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Temporary measure
9-2006 6-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Temporary measure
10-2006 6-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Temporary measure
11-2006 6-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
12-2006 6-21-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 175
13-2006 6-21-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
14-2006 9-6-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 175
15-2006 11-1-2006 Quality of life laws;
enforcement amendment
Ch. 34
16-2006 11-15-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 175
1-2007 2-27-2007 Signs amendment Ch. 175
2-2007 3-7-2007 Quality of life laws;
enforcement amendment
Ch. 34
3-2007 3-21-2007 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
4-2007 3-21-2007 Persons with disabilities and
limited incomes tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VIII
5-2007 4-4-2007 Signs amendment Ch. 175
6-2007 4-18-2007 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2007 7-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:10
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
8-2007 7-11-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 110
9-2007 9-5-2007 Trees amendment Ch. 207
10-2007 9-5-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
11-2007 11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
12-2007 11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
13-2007 11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2008 2-20-2008 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 154
2-2008 5-7-2008 Taxation: Cold War veterans
exemption
Ch. 195, Art. VII
3-2008 5-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2008 5-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2008 6-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2008 8-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 7-2008
7-2008 9-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2008 10-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
9-2008 11-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
10-2008 11-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
11-2008 12-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2009 1-21-2009 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 106
2-2009 7-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic: towing of
illegally parked motor vehicles
Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2013
3-2009 8-12-2009 Emergency access to buildings Ch. 91
4-2009 8-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2010 1-6-2010 Vehicles and traffic: parking
meters
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:11
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-2010 1-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic: residential
parking system; fee schedule
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018; Ch.
A250
3-2010 3-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2010 3-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2010 3-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2010 5-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2010 9-15-2010 Plumbing amendment Ch. 158
8-2010 11-3-2010 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
9-2010 11-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-2010 11-30-2010 Animals: general provisions
amendment; fee schedule
amendment
Chs. 58, Art. I;
A250
11-2010 12-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
1-2011 2-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
2-2011 3-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2011 4-6-2011 Erosion and sediment control Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2013
4-2011 4-6-2011 Water restrictions during times
of emergency amendment
Ch. 231, Art. I
5-2011 5-4-2011 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment
Ch. 5
6-2011 6-1-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2011 6-1-2011 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:12
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
8-2011 8-17-2011 Fees amendment Chs. 1; 32; 50; 55;
58; (repealed by
L.L. No. 10-2019);
95 (repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2013); 106;
114; 117; 147
(repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018); 154;
158; 167; 175; 177;
187; 190; 198; 207;
226; 240; A250
9-2011 12-7-2011 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
10-2011 12-7-2011 Plumbing amendment Ch. 158
1-2012 1-18-2012 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 17, Art. I
2-2012 2-15-2012 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment
Ch. 5, footnote only
3-2012 3-7-2012 Taxable status and valuation
dates
Ch. 195, Art. IX
4-2012 3-21-2012 Taxable status and valuation
dates amendment
Ch. 195, Art. IX
5-2012 5-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2012 5-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2012 11-19-2012 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment; persons with
disabilities and limited incomes
tax exemption amendment
Ch. 195, Arts. II and
VIII
8-2012 12-5-2012 Tax levy limit override 2013 NCM
1-2013 2-6-2013 Adjustment of veterans Real
Property Tax Law § 458
exemption
Ch. 195, Art. X
2-2013 6-12-2013 Idling of motor vehicles
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2013 7-24-2013 Towing of illegally parked
motor vehicles repealer; towing
of motor vehicles
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2013 7-24-2013 Notification procedures
amendment
Ch. 144
5-2013 9-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
6-2013 11-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 240
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:13
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
7-2013 11-20-2013 Notification procedures
amendment
Ch. 144
8-2013 12-4-2013 Tax levy limit override 2014 NCM
9-2013 12-18-2013 Erosion and sediment control Ch. 95
1-2014 4-23-2014 Taxation: Cold War veterans
exemption amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VII
2-2014 5-7-2014 Town-owned parking lots
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2014 8-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2014 9-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2014 10-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2014 11-19-2014 Quality of life laws;
enforcement amendment
Ch. 34
7-2014 12-3-2014 Sewer rents Ch. 174
8-2014 12-3-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2015 1-21-2015 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 174
2-2015 2-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2015 2-4-2015 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees;
sustainability collaborative
Ch. 5; Ch. 191
4-2015 3-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2015 3-25-2015 Notification procedures
amendment
Ch. 144
6-2015 5-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2015 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2015 7-22-2015 Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy) Program
Ch. 76
9-2015 7-22-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
10-2015 12-16-2015 Ethics: Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 17, Art. I
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:14
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
11-2015 12-16-2015 Moratorium on major
construction
NCM
1-2016 1-20-2016 Nomenclature changes Various
2-2016 3-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2016 3-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2016 4-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
5-2016 4-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2016 5-18-2016 Site plan review of residential
development
Ch. 178
7-2016 5-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2016 6-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-2016 6-15-2016 Site plan review of residential
development amendment
Ch. 178
10-2016 9-7-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
1-2017 12-7-2016 Tax levy limit override 2017 NCM
2-2017 1-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
3-2017 1-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
4-2017 3-15-2017 Trees amendment Ch. 207
5-2017 5-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
6-2017 5-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2017 6-7-2017 Noise: outdoor power tools and
gasoline-powered blowers
amendment
Ch. 141, Art. II
8-2017 6-21-2017 Fire prevention and building
construction: building
construction amendment
Ch. 106, Part 2
9-2017 10-4-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
1-2018 2-7-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:15
L.L. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-2018 2-28-2018 Boards, commissions,
authorities and committees
amendment
Ch. 5
3-2018 3-22-2018 Taxation: cold war veterans
exemption amendment
Ch. 195, Art. VII
5-2-2018 Fee Schedule amendment Ch. A250
5-2018 7-11-2018 Firearms amendment Ch. 100
6-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
7-2018 10-17-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
8-2018 10-17-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 9-2018
9-2018 11-19-2018 Fire safety zones amendment;
Town-owned parking lots
repealer; Abandoned vehicles
repealer; Vehicles and traffic
Ch. 108; Ch. 147;
Ch. 216; Ch. 219
10-2018 12-5-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override 2019 NCM
11-2018 12-5-2018 Sewer Rents Amendment Ch. 174
1-2019 1-16-2019 Taxation: Taxation of
Converted Condominiums
Ch. 195, Art. XI
3-6-2019 Fee Schedule Amendment Ch. A250
2-2019 3-20-2019 Ethics: Code of Ethics
Amendment
Ch. 17, Art. I
3-2019 4-24-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 190
4-2019 4-24-2019 Wetlands and Watercourses
Amendment
Ch. 114
5-2019 4-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 240
6-2019 4-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 240
7-2019 6-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219
8-2019 6-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:16
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
9-2019 9-4-2019 Bag Waste Reduction Ch. 60 23
10-2019 10-2-2019 Dances and Dance
Halls Repealer;
Operating Permits; Fee
Schedule Amendment
Ch. 82,
reference
only; Ch. 147;
Ch. A250
23
11-2019 11-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 23
12-2019 11-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 23
13-2019 12-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 23
1-2020 1-22-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 24
2-2020 2-5-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 24
3-2020 2-5-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 24
4-2020 3-4-2020 Helicopters and Other
Aircraft Amendment
Ch. 122 24
5-2020 4-1-2020 Taxation: Senior
Citizens Tax Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 195, Art.
II
24
6-2020 6-17-2020 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment; Fee
Schedule Amendment
Ch. 154; Ch.
A250
24
7-2020 9-9-2020 Taxation: Delinquent
Taxes Amendment
Ch. 195, Art.
V
24
8-2020 9-9-2020 Helicopters and Other
Aircraft Amendment
Ch. 122 24
9-2020 11-4-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment; Fee
Schedule Amendment
Ch. 219; Ch.
A250
24
10-2020 12-2-2020 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 106, Pt. 2 24
1-2021 1-20-2021 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 183 24
1-6-2021 Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. A250 24
2-2021 2-3-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 24
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:17
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3-2021 3-3-2021 Ethics: Code of Ethics
Amendment
Ch. 17, Art. I 25
4-2021 3-3-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 25
5-2021 4-7-2021 Property Maintenance:
Lot Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 161, Art. I 25
6-2021 4-7-2021 Zoning Amendment Ch. 240 25
7-2021 4-21-2021 Wetlands and
Watercourses
Amendment;
Notification Procedures
Amendment; Site Plan
Review of Residential
Development
Amendment
Ch. 114; Ch.
144; Ch. 178
25
8-2021 5-19-2021 Fire Prevention and
Building Construction:
Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 106, Part
2
25
9-2021 5-19-2021 Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 174 25
10-2021 6-16-2021 Fire Prevention and
Building Construction:
Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 106, Part
2
25
11-2021 8-17-2021 Fire Prevention and
Building Construction:
Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 106, Part
2
25
12-2021 9-22-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 219 25
§ DL-1 MAMARONECK TOWN CODE § DL-1
DL:18