Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage; Charter Amendments
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 1 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon, the following words and terms are defined as follows:
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Mount Vernon.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Mount Vernon.
COMPTROLLER — The Comptroller of the City of Mount Vernon.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon.
PARK — Includes public parks and parkways.
PERSON — Natural person, corporation, association, unincorporated
association, joint-stock association, firm or copartnership. Whenever a
penalty or fine is prescribed as applying to partners or associations, the
word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such word as
applied to corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees
thereof who are responsible for any violation of the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any property rights or interests owned by the City or
the School District of Mount Vernon, as well as all "streets," "parks," "public
places" and "waters" belonging to the City or the School District of Mount
Vernon.
REAL PROPERTY — Any lands under water, waterfront property, water
of any pond or stream; all easements and hereditaments, corporeal or
incorporeal; and every estate, interest and right, legal and equitable, in
lands or water; and any right, interest, privilege, easement and franchise
relating to the same, including terms for years and liens by way of
judgment, mortgage assignment or otherwise.
SEWER — A sewer, drainage canal, drain and sewage disposal work.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a public highway other than the street or
roadway, used or set aside for the use of pedestrians, including all flagged
sidewalks.
STREET — Street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, parkway,
driveway, bridge, plaza, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
public road, square and place.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
§ 1-3. Effect of Charter amendments.
In the event that the adoption of a new Charter or an amendment to
the Charter of the City of Mount Vernon creates, abolishes, consolidates
or gives a new title to any department, board, office, officer, official,
commissioner or director, these terms shall refer to such department,
board, office, officer, official, commissioner or director as shall perform or
have charge of the duties and functions of the department, board, office,
officer, official, commissioner or director so replaced, renamed,
consolidated or abolished.
Whenever any words in any section of the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon import the plural number, the singular shall be deemed to be
included, and whenever the singular number shall be used, it shall be
deemed to include the plural.
A.
Whenever the masculine gender is used in the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon, females as well as males shall be deemed to be included.
B.
C. Words in the present tense shall be deemed to include the future tense.
The words "written" and "in writing" shall be deemed to include
printing.
D.
The word "shall" as used in the Code of the City of Mount Vernon shall
be deemed to be mandatory.
E.
§ 1-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 1-3
1:4
ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 2 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 1-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-26-1980, approved
3-27-1980; 9-14-1983, approved 9-15-19831234]
§ 1-4.1. Theft of water. [Added 7-18-2006, approved 7-18-2006]
Any person, firm or corporation who unlawfully obtains water from the City
of Mount Vernon Water Department by obtaining water before it is metered
or any other method inconsistent with the established policies of the City of
Mount Vernon shall be deemed guilty of theft of water and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $500 plus the estimated cost of the
water stolen for the first offense. All subsequent offenses shall be subject to
a fine of $1,000 plus the estimated cost of the water stolen.
§ 1-5. Punishment for aiding or abetting.
When an act or omission is declared by the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon to be an offense and no punishment for aiding or abetting in the
doing thereof is expressly prescribed, every person who aids or abets
another in such act or omission is also guilty of such offense.
Any person violating any provision of the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon, unless otherwise specifically provided by the Penal Law and
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be guilty of an offense
and shall be punishable by a fine which shall not exceed $250 or
by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, or by a penalty not exceeding $500 for a corporation,
which may be recovered by the City in a civil action.
A.
The City may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction the
violation of any provision of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon,
notwithstanding that the Code of the City of Mount Vernon may provide
a penalty for such violation.
B.
1. Editor's Note: Sections 2 and 3 of this ordinance read as follows:
2. "§ 2. Reference to any section of the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon shall
be understood to refer to and to include the amended penalty section as provided by § 1-4
of Chapter 1, unless otherwise expressly provided.
3. § 3. This ordinance shall take effect upon approval of a 1983 local law, amending § 52 of
Article V of Chapter 490 of the Laws of 1922, as amended, being the Charter of the City of
Mount Vernon, under § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law."
4. Local Law No. 2-1983, which amended the above-mentioned § 52, was adopted 9-28-1983.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-6. Construal of provisions.
Reference to any section of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon shall be
understood to refer to and to include the penalty section provided in this
article unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 1-7. Effect of amendments to Code.
In the event of the amendment of any section of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon for which the penalty is provided in this article, the
penalty herein provided shall be held to apply to the section so amended,
whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty
is specifically amended therein.
§ 1-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 1-7
1:6
ARTICLE III
Compilation, Renumbering and Tabulation of Local Laws and
Ordinances
[Adopted 7-9-1980 by L.L. No. 10-1980, approved 7-24-1980]
§ 1-8. Legislative intent.
The local laws and ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon referred to in the
table set forth in § 1-9 of this article shall be known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Mount Vernon," and the various parts and sections of such
local laws and ordinances shall be distributed and designated as provided
and set forth in the table in § 1-9 of this article.
§ 1-9. Distribution of local laws and ordinances.
Derivation Table
Following is a complete list of existing ordinances and local laws included
in the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, with a table showing their
new numbers used in this local law, the old number and adoption and
amendment dates.5
§ 1-10. Repeal of local laws, ordinances and resolution.
The local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
or adopted by the Council of the City of Mount Vernon and not included
in the Code of the City of Mount Vernon and in force on the date of the
adoption of this local law are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
local law, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-11. Local laws, ordinances and resolutions saved from repeal;
matters not affected by repeal.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-10 of this
local law shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances,
resolutions, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from
repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Mount Vernon prior to the effective
date of this local law, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
A.
An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Mount
B.
5. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the Derivation Table is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
Vernon, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law and
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Mount
Vernon.
C.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Mount Vernon.
D.
Any local law, ordinance or resolution of the City of Mount Vernon
providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the City of Mount Vernon, or
any portion thereof.
E.
Any ordinance or resolution of the City of Mount Vernon appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
City of Mount Vernon, or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
F.
Local laws, ordinances or resolutions authorizing the purchase, sale,
lease or transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any local laws, ordinances or resolutions relating to salaries.
K. The Building Code of the City of Mount Vernon, as amended.
Any currently effective regulations pertaining to traffic and parking in
the City of Mount Vernon not contained in Chapter 256 of the Code of
the City of Mount Vernon.
L.
Any local laws or ordinances adopted subsequent to November 28,
1979.
M.
An ordinance permitting children to use public bowling alleys at certain
times under certain conditions adopted February 8, 1961, approved
February 9, 1961.
N.
An ordinance fixing the charges for certain maps adopted January 25,
1967, approved January 26, 1967.
O.
An ordinance creating the Mount Vernon Highway Safety Committee
adopted July 22, 1970, approved July 23, 1970.
P.
§ 1-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 1-11
1:8
§ 1-12. Meaning and intent of previously adopted legislation
unchanged.
In compiling and preparing the local laws and ordinances of the City for
publication as the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, as distributed and
designated in the table in § 1-9 hereof, no changes in the meaning or intent
of such local laws and ordinances have been made.
§ 1-13. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this local
law or of any local law or ordinance cited in the table in § 1-9 hereof
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
An ordinance authorizing the Recreation Department to permit the
operation of minibikes on the track area of Memorial Field on specified
days adopted July 22, 1970, approved July 23, 1970.
Q.
An ordinance authorizing a revocable license agreement for the
privilege of placing litter receptacles with display advertising on
sidewalks adopted July 23, 1971, approved July 29, 1971.
R.
An ordinance in relation to shopping carts adopted February 23, 1967,
approved February 24, 1967.
S.
An ordinance declaring it unlawful to refuse to sell automotive fuels or
oil to motor vehicles owned by or operated by the City, adopted May 2,
1974, approved May 3, 1974.
T.
An ordinance amending Chapter 42 of the General Ordinances relating
to taxicabs and taxicab drivers adopted March 10, 1976, approved
March 11, 1976.
U.
An ordinance amending Chapter 42 of the General Ordinances relating
to taxicabs and taxicab drivers adopted January 26, 1977, approved
January 27, 1977.
V.
An ordinance amending Chapter 38 of the General Ordinances relating
to streets and sidewalks, adopted May 8, 1974, approved May 9, 1974.
W.
An ordinance amending the General Ordinances by adding Chapter
101 relating to the establishment of general procedures for the
apportionment, assessment and collection of the expense of public
improvements adopted December 10, 1975, approved December 12,
1975.
X.
An ordinance adopting regulations governing public access to the
records of the City, adopted December 23, 1975, approved December
24, 1975.
Y.
An ordinance to add Chapter 98, Fire Prevention Code — Liquefied
Petroleum Gases, to the General Ordinances adopted April 19, 1976,
approved April 19, 1976.
Z.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:9
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-14. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, in loose-leaf form, has
been filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon and
shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is
taken on this local law; and if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall
be certified by the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon by impressing
thereon the Seal of the City of Mount Vernon, and such certified copy shall
remain on file in the office of said City Clerk, to be made available to
persons desiring to examine same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-15. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws and ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the City
of Mount Vernon" or any new local laws or ordinances, when enacted or
adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to be
part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that
reference to the Code of the City of Mount Vernon shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code of the City of Mount Vernon shall be enacted or adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-16. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the City of Mount Vernon required to
be filed in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by
the City Council subsequent to the enactment of this local law, in such
form as to indicate the intention of said City Council to be a part of
said Code, shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes or local laws, ordinances
or resolutions until such changes or local laws, ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-17. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the City of Mount Vernon
may be purchased from the City Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set
§ 1-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 1-17
1:10
by resolution of the City Council, which may also arrange by resolution for
procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Mount Vernon
to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to imprisonment for a term of not
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-19. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article III of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, to be entitled "General Provisions,
Article III, Compilation, Renumbering and Tabulation of Local Laws and
Ordinances," and the sections of this local law shall be numbered § 1-8 to
§ 1-20 inclusive.
§ 1-20. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of 2013 Code Revisions
[A local law adopting the 2013 Code Revisions of the City of Mount
Vernon and making certain substantive changes to existing
legislation of the City is presently proposed before the Council. Upon
final adoption, it will be included here as Article IV of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13
Chapter 7
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 1-20 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 1-20
1:14
ARTICLE I
Issuance by Parking Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 9-27-1978 by L.L. No. 3-1978, approved 10-19-1978]
§ 7-1. Authorization to issue tickets.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978,6 parking enforcement officers, who are civilian
employees of the Mount Vernon Police Department and assigned to the
Mount Vernon Parking Authority, are hereby specially authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets for all violations pertaining to the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 7-2. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
6. Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:15

ARTICLE II
Issuance by Sanitation Foremen Heavy-Motor Equipment Operators
and Motor Equipment Operators
[Adopted 4-16-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979, approved 5-3-1979]
§ 7-3. Authorization to issue tickets. [Amended 8-26-1985 by L.L.
No. 5-1985, approved 9-5-1985; 2-26-1997, approved 3-14-1997]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978,7 Sanitation Foremen, Heavy-Motor Equipment
Operators and Motor Equipment Operators who are civilian employees of
the Mount Vernon Department of Public Works and public servants of the
City of Mount Vernon, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance
tickets for:
§ 7-4. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
All violations of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon enforced by the
Department of Public Works.
A.
All sanitation violations, including parking tickets for failure of motor
vehicle owners and/or operators to comply with alternative side-of-thestreet
parking regulations on street-sweeping days in the City of Mount
Vernon.
B.
Violations of local laws enacted by the Westchester County Board of
Legislators in relation to the use of water during the period in which a
drought emergency is in effect.
C.
7. Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:17

ARTICLE III
Issuance by Housing Authority Guards
[Adopted 6-25-1980 by L.L. No. 9-1980, approved 7-14-1980]
§ 7-5. Authorization to issue tickets.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978,8 Housing Authority guards of the Mount Vernon
Municipal Housing Authority are hereby authorized to issue appearance
tickets for violations of Chapter 178, Article I, as amended, of the Code of
the City of Mount Vernon, entitled "Unnecessary Noise," on Mount Vernon
Municipal Housing Authority property.
§ 7-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect pursuant to § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
8. Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Issuance by Water Superintendent and Water Maintenance Foreman
[Adopted 3-11-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981, approved 3-25-1981;
amended in its entirety 8-26-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985, approved
9-5-1985; 9-9-2009 approved 9-10-2009]
§ 7-7. Authorization to issue tickets.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978,9 the Water Superintendent, Assistant Water
Superintendent and Water Maintenance Foreman of the Mount Vernon
Board of Water Supply are hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets
for violations of:
Local laws enacted by the Westchester County Board of Legislators
in relation to the use of water during the period in which a drought
emergency is in effect.
A.
Chapter 153 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon entitled
"Hydrants."
B.
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalties, § 1-4.1, of the Code
of the City of Mount Vernon entitled "Theft of Water."10
C.
9. Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of 2013 Code Revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:21

ARTICLE V
Issuance by Ordinance Officers
[Adopted 12-9-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987, approved 12-22-1987]
§ 7-8. Authorization to issue tickets.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978, as amended,11 ordinance officers, who are civilian
employees of the Mount Vernon Police Department, are hereby authorized
to issue and serve appearance tickets for all violations of the Charter and
Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
11.Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:23

ARTICLE VI
Issuance by Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Superintendent
of Plumbing, Housing Inspectors, Building Inspectors, Elevator/
Building Inspectors and Code Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 3-23-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994, approved 4-12-199412]
§ 7-9. Authorization to issue tickets.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Chapter
495 of the Laws of 1978, as amended,13 the Commissioner, Deputy
Commissioner, Superintendent of Plumbing, Housing Inspectors, Building
Inspectors, Elevator/Building Inspectors and Code Enforcement Officers
of the Mount Vernon Building Department are hereby authorized to issue
appearance tickets for:
All violations of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
A.
B. All violations of the Building Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
C. All violations of the Zoning Code of the City of Mount Vernon.14
All violations of Chapter 149, Housing Standards, of the Code of the
City of Mount Vernon.
D.
12.Editor's Note: This local law supersedes former Art. VI, Issuance by Plumbing Inspectors,
Housing Inspectors, Building Inspectors, Elevator Inspectors and Code Enforcement
Officers, adopted 3-14-1990, approved 3-15-1990.
13.Editor's Note: See § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:25
Chapter 10
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 10-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to preserve the prevailing aesthetic
character of the City and its environs while permitting originality and
resourcefulness in building design and appearances which are appropriate
to their site and surroundings, yet preventing such design and appearances
that would be unnecessarily offensive to visual sensibilities. The preserving
and promoting of the character, appearances and aesthetics of the City will
serve to maintain the property values within the City of Mount Vernon.
Enhancing the attractiveness of the residential and business areas of the
City offers an economic stability for the entire community. This chapter
serves to provide procedures for an architectural review of structures
henceforth erected, reconstructed or altered in the City to encourage good
qualities of exterior building design, appropriate appearances and to relate
such design and appearances to the surrounding sites and structures. It
is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent the harmful effects of
inappropriate exterior appearances of buildings erected, reconstructed or
altered in any neighborhood, thus promoting and protecting the general
welfare of the community and conserving the value of buildings.
§ 10-2. Findings.
The City Council hereby finds that structures and architectural features
with excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of
design in the exterior appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood
adversely affects the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring
areas for residential and business purposes or other use and by so doing
impairs the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impairs
the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property
in such areas, prevents the most appropriate development of such areas,
produces degeneration of property in such areas with attendant
deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the inhabitants and occupants thereof, and destroys a proper
relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and
the cost of municipal services provided therefor.
§ 10-3. Creation.
The Architectural Review Board of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby
created pursuant to Article 5, § 96-a, of the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York.
§ 7-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 10-4
1:26
§ 10-4. Organization.
§ 10-5. Powers and duties.
Membership. The Architectural Review Board shall consist of five
members. The members of the Architectural Review Board shall be
specially qualified by reason of training or experience in art,
architecture, community planning, land development, real estate,
landscape architecture or other relevant business or profession or by
reason of civic interest and sound judgment to judge of the effects
of a proposed building upon the desirability, property values and
development of surrounding areas. One member of the Architectural
Review Board shall be a licensed architect duly registered in the State
of New York and one member shall be a licensed real estate broker duly
registered in the State of New York. The members shall be appointed,
and the Chairman thereof shall be designated by the Mayor.
A.
Meetings and records. The presence of three members of the
Architectural Review Board shall be necessary for a quorum, and the
concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to effect and
decision before the Architectural Review Board. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on every
question or, if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating that
fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Every rule, determination, regulation, amendment or appeal
thereof, and every order, requirement and decision of the Architectural
Review Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Architectural Review Board.
B.
Terms. The members of the Architectural Review Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon as provided. To
assure that no more than two Board members' terms expire within any
given year, the new term of appointment for the first Board member's
term that expires in 2010 shall be five years, the new term of
appointment for the second Board member's term that expires in 2010
shall be four years, and the new term of appointment for the third
Board member's term that expires in 2010 shall be three years. All
subsequent new terms of appointment for expiring Board member
terms shall be five years. In the event of any Architectural Review
Board vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired
term. Each member shall be entitled to one vote.
C.
General. The Architectural Review Board shall have all of the powers
and duties prescribed by General Municipal Law of the State of New
York and by this chapter, which powers and duties are summarized and
more particularly specified in the following. The Architectural Review
Board shall take into specific consideration the goals as well as the
specifics of this chapter.
A.
Rules and regulations. The Architectural Review Board may adopt such
rules and regulations as it deems necessary and proper to the
B.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5
1:27
performance of its powers and duties hereunder and may amend or
repeal the same.
Amendments. Amendments to the rules and regulations adopted for
the governance and procedures of the Architectural Review Board shall
be made in the form of a vote to place such amendments on the
next agenda of the Architectural Review Board. No changes shall take
effect until placed upon such agenda, reviewed by the Architectural
Review Board staff and adopted pursuant to these regulations and any
requirements of applicable local and state law.
C.
Certificate of appropriateness review.
The Architectural Review Board must issue a certificate of
appropriateness related to the construction and site landscaping
of any new structures (primary and accessory) or the exterior
improvement, alteration, remodeling, repairing and/or
enlargement of any existing structures, including changes of
materials, windows, doors, proposed fences, proposed retaining
walls, proposed freestanding walls, proposed ramps and any other
exterior building element(s) because of its architectural elements,
colors, design(s), materials, height, or mass prior to the issuance of
a building permit.
(1)
The Architectural Review Board may adopt a list of types of
activities of lesser impact for which the staff of the Department
of Planning and Community Development may grant certificates of
appropriateness, and may establish procedures for this purpose.
The staff of Department of Planning and Community Development
may exercise discretion within such listed activities to grant or
deny certificates of appropriateness or to determine that an action
should instead be referred the Architectural Review Board. An
applicant may appeal the staff of the Department of Planning and
Community Development's decision to deny a certificate of
appropriateness under this section to the Architectural Review
Board.
(2)
D.
Recommendations.
Recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Architectural Review Board is empowered to make
recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals on area variance
applications.
(1)
Recommendations to the Planning Board. The Architectural Review
Board is empowered to make recommendations to the Planning
Board on site plan applications.
(2)
Recommendations to the City Council. The Architectural Review
Board is empowered to review and make recommendations on
matter or class of matters referred to the Architectural Review
(3)
E.
§ 10-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 10-5
1:28
§ 10-6. Certificate of appropriateness standards.
In considering a certificate of appropriateness, the Architectural Review
Board shall be guided by the following standards prior to rendering a
decision pursuant to § 10-7 of this chapter:
§ 10-7. Rendering decisions.
Board by the City Council prior to final action by the City Council
being taken on said matter(s).
Design guidelines. The Architectural Review Board may establish and
enforce design guidelines subject to City Council approval as the
Architectural Review Board deems necessary and proper to the
performance of its powers and duties hereunder.
F.
Ancillary powers. Perform such other advisory duties as may be
prescribed in the City Code.
G.
The natural features of the site and surroundings, exterior design and
appearances of existing structures and the character of the
surrounding properties and neighborhood and its peculiar suitability
for particular purposes, with a view to conserving and enhancing the
values of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
A.
The scale and mass of proposed new structures or additions to
structures in relation to the property itself, surrounding properties and
the neighborhood.
B.
The exterior materials, textures, colors, patterns, rhythms and styles
of a structure in relation to the structure itself, surrounding structures
and the neighborhood.
C.
The visual compatibility of a structure with surrounding properties
related to the facades of a structure, their proportion and arrangement
of windows, doors and other openings within the facade.
D.
The proposed action's consistency with the any design guidelines
established by the Architectural Review Board.
E.
Grounds for approval. The Architectural Review Board may approve
any application referred to it upon finding that the building or structure
for which the permit was requested, if erected or altered in accordance
with the submitted plan(s), would:
(1) Be in harmony with the purpose of this chapter;
Not be visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality
of exterior design or exterior materials;
(2)
Not have monotonous similarity or striking visual discord in
relation to the sites or surroundings;
(3)
A.
§ 10-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:29
Conditions and safeguards. The Architectural Review Board may
prescribe such conditions or restrictions applying to the granting of the
certificate of appropriateness as it deems necessary in each specific
case in order to minimize the adverse effects of such developments
upon other property in the neighborhood and to protect the public
health, safety, welfare and property values. Such conditions or
restrictions shall be incorporated in the building permit and certificate
of occupancy. Failure to comply with such conditions or restrictions
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may constitute the basis
for denial or revocation of a building permit or certificate of occupancy
and for all other applicable remedies such as but not limited to fines
and modification of the structure.
B.
Grounds for disapproval. The Architectural Review Board may
disapprove any application, provided that the Architectural Review
Board finds and states that the structure or building for which the
permit was requested would, if constructed, improved, built, altered,
remodeled, repaired and/or enlarged, create one of the following
detrimental effects:
Monotonous similarity to any other structure(s) located or
proposed to be located, such as but limited to setbacks from street
lines, heights, widths and lengths of elements of building design
and exterior materials and treatments in relation to the structure
itself, surrounding structures and the neighborhood;
(1)
Monotonous similarity related to the size and arrangement of
either doors, windows, other openings or breaks or extensions
of the facade(s) in relation to the structure itself, surrounding
structures and the neighborhood;
(2)
Striking dissimilarity or visual discord with respect to other
structures or buildings located or proposed to be located in the
same area and/or neighborhood, including but not limited to
setbacks from street lines and discontinuity with respect to
streetwalls;
(3)
Striking dissimilarity or visual discord with respect to size and
arrangement of doors, windows, porticos, porches or garages or
other openings, breaks or extensions in the facade;
(4)
Striking dissimilarity or visual discord with respect to other
significant design features, such as but not limited to exposed
mechanical equipment, service and storage areas, signage areas,
sign types, light fixtures, fences, drainage, vents and utility meters;
(5)
Visual offensiveness or poor quality of the exterior materials,
textures, color, patterns, rhythms and styles of a structure in
relation to the structure itself, surrounding structures and the
neighborhood;
(6)
C.
§ 10-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 10-7
1:30
§ 10-8. Procedure.
Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of the exterior design
of a structure, including but not limited to excessive and
nonharmonious divergences of the height or levels of any part of
the structure from the grade of terrain, or incompatibility of a
proposed structure or the refurbishing, reconstruction, alteration
or expansion of an existing structure with the terrain on which it
is to be located, the failure of the exterior design to complement
and enhance the natural beauty of its site, in regard to landscape,
topography, paved areas and surrounding structures.
(7)
Application. All applications to the Architectural Review Board shall be
made by the owner or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on
forms prescribed by the Architectural Review Board. Each application
shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall refer to the
specific provision of the chapter involved and shall exactly set forth, as
the case may be, the details of any and all waivers or deviations that
are applied for and the grounds for which it is claimed that the same
should be granted.
A.
Review by other agencies. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
Architectural Review Board shall forward copies for review and report
such to any other officials and agencies as it deems appropriate.
B.
Public meeting. The Architectural Review Board shall conduct a public
meeting on any application or request made pursuant to this chapter.
The deliberations of the Architectural Review Board shall be conducted
publicly, and all votes on any matter before the Architectural Review
Board must be taken at a public meeting.
Sign posting. A sign as prescribed in the Architectural Review
Board's rules and procedures shall be posted along all street
frontages of the subject site at least 14 days prior to the meeting
date. The applicant shall file with the Architectural Review Board a
duly sworn affidavit attesting that such notification was completed.
(1)
Affidavit of sign posting. All required affidavits shall be filed not
less than nine days prior to the date of the public meeting.
(2)
C.
Action. Every decision of the Architectural Review Board shall be by
issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, shall be recorded
and shall fully set forth the facts of the case and the findings and
conclusions on which it was based. Such certificate of appropriateness
shall be prepared. Such decision shall be made within 62 days of the
date of the public meeting.
D.
Expiration. Unless otherwise specifically set forth by the Architectural
Review Board in connection with its approval of a certificate of
appropriateness, such approval shall expire if a building permit is not
issued within one year from the date of approval and if all construction
E.
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-8
1:31
§ 10-9. Certificate of failure of Architectural Review Board to take
action.
The City Clerk is hereby specified as the officer who shall issue on behalf of
the City the certificate of failure of the Architectural Review Board to take
action as prescribed in § 10-8D of this chapter.
§ 10-10. Appeal to Zoning Board of Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Architectural Review Board
in disapproving a certificate of appropriateness application may take an
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after
proceeding in the same manner as is provided for zoning appeals and with
the same power and authority therein vested in passing upon appeals before
it under the provisions of law and in the exercise thereof, may reverse or
affirm or modify and affirm the action of the Architectural Review Board.
§ 10-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 12
work is not completed within two years of the date of issue of such
permit. Upon application to the Architectural Review Board, extensions
totaling a maximum of 12 months may be granted to each of these
time periods for appropriate cause. Such time limits shall be tolled by
any judicial proceedings to review the Architectural Review Board's
decision.
Compliance. The approved certificate of appropriateness in accordance
with the submitted plan(s), and any conditions attached thereto, shall
be complied with prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
pursuant to § 267-47 of the Mount Vernon Zoning Code. Certificate of
appropriateness revisions pursuant to § 10-8G hereof shall be subject
to the same approval procedure and requirements as the certificate of
appropriateness review. Continued compliance with all such conditions
shall be a requirement of the continued validity of the certificate of
occupancy. Failure to comply with any certificate of appropriateness
conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
may constitute the basis for denial or revocation of a building permit
or denial of a certificate of occupancy and for all other applicable
remedies, such as but not limited to fines and modification of the
structure.
F.
Amendments. Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which
require any change to an approved project design, or where the
applicant wishes to modify the approved project design for other
reasons, an amended certificate of appropriateness shall be filed for
review and approval in accordance with the same procedures required
for an initial application.
G.
§ 10-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 10-11
1:32
CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 12-1. Legislative intent.
The City Council recognizes that meaningful community access to
electronic communications will become a reality only when all the people
of Mount Vernon are able to obtain the necessary equipment, training,
technical assistance and channels at a minimal and nonprohibitive charge
and on a continuing and nondiscriminatory basis; in order to maximize such
effects, the Mount Vernon Cable Television Advisory Committee has been
organized to stimulate and facilitate open community use of the electronic
media.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMITTEE — The Mount Vernon Cable Advisory Committee.
FRANCHISE HOLDER — Group W Cable, Inc., or any corporation that
succeeds Group W Cable, Inc., as the holder of the cable television franchise
for the City of Mount Vernon.
MOUNT VERNON CABLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE — Seven members who
represent the Mount Vernon community, including two members appointed
by the Mayor, two members appointed by the City Council, two members
appointed by the Board of Education and one member appointed by the
franchise holder.
§ 12-3. Establishment.
The Mount Vernon Cable Advisory Committee is hereinafter referred to as
the "Committee" and is established for the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
§ 12-4. Membership. [Amended 8-12-1992, approved 8-13-1992;
3-26-1997, approved 3-27-1997; 3-27-2013, approved 3-28-2013]
The Committee shall consist of the following members who shall represent
the Mount Vernon community, including four members appointed by the
City Council, two members appointed by the Mayor of Mount Vernon,
two members appointed by the Mount Vernon Board of Education and a
representative from each cable provider. No member of the Committee shall
be an elected official. One member appointed by each designated authority
shall serve a one-year renewable term, and one member appointed by
the aforementioned designated authority shall serve a two-year renewable
term, and new members shall be appointed or old members reappointed by
the aforementioned designated authorities whenever necessary. In addition,
each designated authority may appoint two alternate members who shall
serve as substitutes for the members it appoints. The alternates shall serve
on the Committee whenever the appointed members cannot serve. The
§ 10-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:33
members of the Committee shall hereafter be referred to as delegates and
alternates, respectively.
§ 12-5. Term of office.
One member appointed by each designated authority shall serve a oneyear
renewable term, and one member shall serve a two-year renewable
term. The member appointed by the franchise holder shall serve a two-year
renewable term.
§ 12-6. Compensation.
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 12-7. Officers.
§ 12-8. Selection of officers.
The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary shall be elected by a
majority of the members present at the first meeting of the Committee and
annually thereafter.
§ 12-9. Administrator, assistants and staff.
The Committee may appoint an administrator and such assistants and
staff as it deems necessary to further the purpose of the Cable Television
Advisory Committee. Such administrator, assistants and staff shall serve at
the pleasure of the Committee for no compensation.
§ 12-10. Powers and duties.
The Committee is authorized and empowered to do the following:
The Committee shall have three officers, a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary.
A.
The Chairperson presides at all meetings and shall execute all
agreements or resolutions and perform all duties incident to this office.
B.
C. The Vice Chairperson shall preside in the absence of the Chairperson.
The Secretary shall issue notices of all regular and special meetings
and be responsible for the keeping of all minutes of meetings and
records pertaining to the work of the Committee.
D.
To seek the advice, representation and participation of all citizens,
organizations and groups which comprise the Mount Vernon
community, including representatives of all socioeconomic levels.
A.
To make special efforts to ensure that the telecommunications needs
of groups, which heretofore have traditionally not had the opportunity
B.
§ 12-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 12-10
1:34
§ 12-11. Meetings.
§ 12-12. Parliamentary procedure.
The rules in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern this Committee
in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with these bylaws.
Chapter 13
CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR THE DISABLED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
to use such facilities, are considered, and to continually investigate
various means of meeting such needs.
To work in cooperation with the cable franchise holder in Mount Vernon
to make a local access studio and equipment available to the public.
C.
To work with the cable franchise holder in Mount Vernon to seek out
and encourage public access use by all citizens and groups in Mount
Vernon.
D.
To make every effort to ensure that persons seeking to produce
programming representing any and all points of view will be permitted
to use the facilities and that such programming will be consistent with
the Constitutional guaranties of freedom of speech and the laws of the
United States and the State of New York.
E.
To take such steps and undertake such programs as will enhance
and foster the aforementioned objectives and to ensure quality
programming for this community.
F.
This Committee shall meet in the Mayor's conference room at City Hall
at a time designated by the Chairperson. In the event of a holiday, the
Chairperson shall schedule a meeting on the evening when a quorum of
the Committee can be gathered.
A.
Committee meetings, in addition to those regularly scheduled, may be
called by the Chairperson or upon the request of the Mayor or any
member of the Committee. Copies of the minutes of each meeting will
be forwarded to the Mayor, City Council and Board of Education.
B.
The presence of the Chairperson and three members of the Committee
shall constitute a quorum necessary to transact the business of the
Committee.
C.
Any Committee members who fail to attend three consecutive meetings
without good cause shall be removed from the Committee.
D.
§ 12-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-12
1:35
§ 13-1. Legislative intent.
The City Council recognizes that there exists an urgent need for
coordinating the efforts of this City with those organizations concerned
with disabled persons. In order to maximize such coordinating efforts,
a Citizen Advisory Committee is created and empowered to educate the
public and to formulate and make recommendations, including but not
limited to governmental and public bodies, with regard to the concerns of
disabled individuals in the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMITTEE — The Mount Vernon Advisory Committee for the Disabled.
MOUNT VERNON CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR THE DISABLED
— No more than 15 nor less than five City of Mount Vernon resident
members and five City of Mount Vernon resident ex officio members,
consisting of the Building Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner of
Public Works and the Commissioner of Planning and Community
Development, the Commissioner of Recreation and the Commissioner of
Public Safety, appointed by the Mayor for specified terms.
TERM — Three years from the date of appointment.
§ 13-3. Establishment.
The Mount Vernon Citizen Advisory Committee for the Disabled is
hereinafter referred to as the "Committee" and is established for the City of
Mount Vernon, New York.
§ 13-4. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary
and five to 15 individuals who are residents of the City of Mount Vernon
and appointed by the Mayor. Appointment of the five to 15 members and
the five ex officio members, consisting of the Building Commissioner, the
Deputy Commissioner of Public Works and the Commissioner of Planning
and Community Development, the Commissioner of Recreation and the
Commissioner of Public Safety, shall be based on demonstrated interest,
commitment and services in the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 13-5. Term of office.
All appointments shall be for terms of three years.
§ 12-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 13-6
1:36
§ 13-6. Compensation.
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 13-7. Qualifications.
In making appointments to the Committee, the Mayor shall take into
account professional competence, distinguished service rendered in the
area of the community and public service or interest of an individual to
serve as a Committee member.
§ 13-8. Meetings; quorum.
The Committee shall meet at least eight meetings per year on a stated
date to be selected by the Committee and may hold such other meetings
as it may determine from time to time. Any Committee member who fails
to attend three consecutive meetings without good cause shall be removed
from the Committee. Five members shall constitute a quorum. Whenever
the approval by the Committee is required, the affirmative vote of the
majority present shall be required.
§ 13-9. Powers and duties.
The Committee is authorized and empowered to do the following:
To increase public understanding concerning the needs of the disabled,
thus encouraging our disabled citizens to enrich their lives and those of
the community by wider use of talents and activities amongst us.
A.
To work for the elimination of architectural barriers within our City
which presently make some of the public buildings and recreational
facilities unavailable to them.
B.
To make education, employment, housing and transportation more
readily available to disabled citizens.
C.
To work with the Recreation Department to create activities which are
beneficial and fulfilling to disabled children.
D.
To establish a liaison between said Committee and the Board of
Education regarding educational services offered to disabled youths.
E.
To work in conjunction with the Westchester County Coordinating
Council for the Disabled to facilitate referrals and to increase services
for disabled citizens.
F.
To disseminate information compiled by the Governor's Committee on
Employment of the Disabled.
G.
To take such steps and undertake such programs as will enhance and
foster the above programs and the general well-being of our disabled
citizens.
H.
§ 13-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-9
1:37
Chapter 14
CIVILIAN ADVISORY BOARD FOR POLICE AFFAIRS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Firemen's Pension Funds — See
Ch. 56.
Special police — See Ch. 225.
§ 14-1. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a group of interested citizens and to
provide for them an opportunity to make their views and the community's
views known to the Department through a democratic process. The
Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity, attempting to identify
community hazards, add input to the Police Commissioner's field of
information, review police procedures for discipline, planning and training,
and thus provide assistance in managerial decisions. In order to achieve
these goals, the Board, through its regular meetings, will strive to assist,
advise and aid the Police Commissioner in matters relating to public
relations, discipline, planning, training and in the establishment of priorities
of services to be rendered to the public.
§ 14-2. Membership.
The Board shall consist of seven members and five associate members to be
appointed by the Mayor. In addition, the Second Deputy Commissioner of
the Department shall be a member of the Board. Members shall be residents
of the City for a period of not less than three years. Neither a member nor
an associate member shall be an employee of the Municipal Government of
the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 14-3. Term of office.
A member's term shall commence upon appointment and shall continue at
the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 14-4. Removal from office.
Any member absent without just cause from three meetings during one
calendar year may be removed from the Board.
§ 14-5. Voting privileges.
Members shall each have one vote on matters before the Board for
consideration. Associate members shall not have voting privileges, but shall
otherwise participate in all matters and discussions of the Board.
§ 14-6. Officers and duties.
§ 13-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 14-6
1:38
§ 14-7. Selection of officers.
The Chairperson shall be the Second Deputy Police Commissioner. The
Vice Chairperson and the Secretary shall be elected by a majority of the
members present at the first meeting in January in each calendar year. The
Vice Chairperson and Secretary may serve no more than two consecutive
years in their respective offices.
§ 14-8. Compensation.
The members of this Advisory Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 14-9. Committees.
This Board may provide by its bylaws for such standing committees as it
may deem necessary. At any meeting, when the Board deems it necessary to
establish a temporary committee to oversee certain tasks, such a committee
may be formed without further authorization of the bylaws.
§ 14-10. Meetings.
§ 14-11. Notice of meetings.
The Committee shall have three officers, a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary.
A.
The Chairperson presides at all meetings. The Chairperson or his/
her representative shall be responsible for meeting with the Police
Commissioner following each meeting to advise him as to the Board's
recommendations and discussion. The Chairperson shall meet with any
group or individual expressing a grievance concerning police policy,
action or procedure, in order that the Board may adequately discuss
and make recommendations concerning said grievance.
B.
C. The Vice Chairperson shall preside in the absence of the Chairperson.
The Secretary shall be responsible for the keeping of all minutes of
meetings and records pertaining to the work of this Board.
D.
This Board shall meet regularly on the first Wednesday of each month
at a time and place designated by the Chairperson. In the event of a
holiday, the Chairperson shall schedule a meeting on the evening when
a quorum of the Board can be gathered.
A.
Board meetings, in addition to those regularly scheduled, may be called
by the Chairperson or upon the request of the Mayor or the Police
Commissioner.
B.
The presence of the Chairperson or Cochairperson and four members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum necessary to transact the business
of the Board.
C.
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-11
1:39
§ 14-12. Parliamentary procedures.
The rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern this
Board in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with these bylaws.
Chapter 16
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 16-1. Chain of command in event of emergency.
In the event of enemy attack, this City Council does hereby designate
and establish as a definite succession or chain of command for emergency
operation of the government of the City the following officials to head the
City government in the event that the Mayor or the President of the City
Council is not available for such purpose:
§ 16-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 18
CRIMESTOPPERS BOARD
§ 18-1. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a board of interested citizens
and to provide for them an opportunity to assist law enforcement efforts
through citizen cooperation in a crimestopper program. The Board shall
be empowered to create and administer a reward fund obtained through
The Chairperson shall issue a written notice of call for all meetings.
The notice shall be mailed to each member of the Board at least seven
days prior to the date of the meeting. Copies of the notice of call shall
also be placed in the mailbox of the Police Commissioner. The notice
of call shall contain the date, time and place of the meeting and an
agenda for the meeting. The Chairperson of the Board may assign the
responsibility to prepare and distribute the notice of call.
A.
In the event of an emergency, some or all of the provisions of call may
be waived only with the permission of the Police Commissioner.
B.
A. Senior City Councilman, as to length of service.
B. Next Senior City Councilman, as to length of service.
C. Next Senior City Councilman, as to length of service.
D. Junior City Councilman.
§ 14-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 18-1
1:40
private sources and shall make payments to individuals who have supplied
information to the Police Department which has aided in a criminal
investigation. In order to ensure confidentiality, the Board shall be
empowered to adopt procedures to guarantee anonymity of any person
supplying information and to take such steps and undertake such programs
as will enhance and foster the aforementioned programs.
§ 18-2. Establishment.
The Mount Vernon Crimestoppers Board, hereinafter referred to as the
"Board," is established for the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 18-3. Membership. [Amended 10-26-1983, approved 10-27-1983]
The Board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Mayor.
In addition, the Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety
shall be a member of the Board. Members shall be residents of the City for
a period of not less than five years. No member may be an employee of the
municipal government of the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 18-4. Term of office.
A member's term shall commence upon appointment and shall continue at
the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 18-5. Compensation.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 18-6. Officers.
§ 18-7. Selection of officers.
The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary shall be elected by a
majority of the members present at the first meeting of the Board and
annually thereafter.
§ 18-8. Powers and duties.
The Board is authorized and empowered to do the following:
The Board shall have three officers, a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary.
A.
The Chairperson presides at all meetings and shall execute all
agreements or resolutions and perform all duties incident to this office.
B.
C. The Vice Chairperson shall preside in the absence of the Chairperson.
The Secretary shall issue notices of all regular and special meetings
and be responsible for the keeping of all minutes of meetings and
records pertaining to the work of the Board.
D.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:41
§ 18-9. Reward for information. [Amended 4-8-1992, approved
4-9-1992]
§ 18-10. Meetings.
To be responsible for the creation and maintenance of a fund to be
known as the "rewards for information fund," which shall be funded and
replenished through contribution from the general public.
A.
To make payment of rewards to the person or persons providing
information leading to the apprehension and indictment or conviction
of an individual for a felony or misdemeanor. [Amended 4-8-1992,
approved 4-9-1992]
B.
To make determination as to the amount of the reward and the manner
in which the information received contributed to the apprehension and
indictment or conviction. [Amended 4-8-1992, approved 4-9-1992]
C.
To take such measures as may be necessary to ensure the
confidentiality of the person or persons offering such information.
D.
A person shall be deemed to have provided information leading to the
apprehension and indictment or conviction of an individual for any
felony or misdemeanor when such person has provided the Department
of Public Safety with information which the Board has determined to
have materially contributed to such apprehension and indictment or
conviction. The Board shall be authorized to conduct such investigation
as deemed necessary prior to making such determination.
A.
Upon making a determination that the information submitted did
materially contribute to the apprehension and indictment or conviction
of an individual for a felony or misdemeanor, the person shall be
entitled to, and the Board shall pay from the reward fund, a reward
not to exceed $5,000. Payments made to two or more persons shall
be in proportionate shares and shall not exceed this limit. [Amended
2-28-1996, approved 2-29-1996]
B.
This Board shall meet in the Mayor's conference room at a time
designated by the Chairperson. In the event of a holiday, the
Chairperson shall schedule a meeting on the evening when a quorum of
the Board can be gathered.
A.
Board meetings, in addition to those regularly scheduled, may be called
by the Chairperson or upon the request of the Mayor or any member of
the Board.
B.
The presence of the Chairperson and three members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum necessary to transact the business of the Board.
C.
Any Board members who fail to attend three consecutive meetings
without good cause shall be removed from the Board.
D.
§ 18-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 18-11
1:42
§ 18-11. Parliamentary procedures.
The rules in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern this Board in all
cases to which they are applicable and which are not inconsistent with these
bylaws.
Chapter 24
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 46. Personnel policies — See Ch. 50.
§ 18-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-11
1:43

ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
[Adopted 12-24-1958 by L.L. No. 7-1958, approved 1-14-1959]
§ 24-1. Policy.
One of the most vital concerns of a free, representative government is the
maintenance of moral and ethical standards which are above cause for
reproach and which warrant the confidence of the people. These standards
must be practical; government is and should be fairly representative of the
people who elect it. The people are entitled to expect from their public
servants a standard above that of the marketplace, for such public servants
are entrusted with the welfare of the City. Some conflicts of interest are
clearly wrong and should be proscribed by sanctions. Some are composed
of such diverse circumstances, events and intangible and indirect concerns
that only the individual conscience will ever serve as an infallible guide.
For matters of such complexity and close distinctions the City Council finds
that standards of conduct reasonably to be expected of City officers and
employees should be established.
§ 24-2. Definitions. [Amended 2-9-1977 by L.L. No. 2-197715]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
CITY AGENCY — All departments, boards, committees, commissions or
bureaus of the City, but not including the judicial officers or the courts of
the City.
CITY EMPLOYEE — Includes all persons employed by the City full time
or part time, including temporary, provisional, classified and unclassified
employees.
CITY OFFICER — Includes all persons elected or appointed to any office of
the City of Mount Vernon established or authorized to be established by the
Charter of the City of Mount Vernon or otherwise by local law, resolution
or ordinance, persons performing services under contract with the City, and
members of City boards, agencies, bureaus, committees or commissions
who serve with or without pay, but shall not include Commissioners of
Deeds, volunteer firemen or civil defense volunteers.
§ 24-3. Prohibited activities and transactions. [Amended
12-16-1970 by L.L. No. 5-1970, approved 12-28-1970]
No City officer or employee shall:
Directly or indirectly solicit any gift; or accept or receive any gift,
whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment,
(1)
A.
15.Editor's Note: This local law was adopted over Mayor's veto.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:45
hospitality, thing or promise or any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the
gift was intended to influence him or could reasonably be expected
to influence him in the performance of his official duties or was
intended as a reward for any official action on his part. [Amended
2-9-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977]
Disclose confidential information acquired by him in the course of
his official duties to unauthorized persons or use such information
to further his personal interest.
(2)
Invest or hold any investment directly or indirectly in any financial,
business, commercial or other private transaction which creates a
conflict with his official duties.
(3)
Engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept private
employment or render services for private interests when such
employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the proper
discharge of his official duties.
(4)
After the termination of service or employment with such
municipality, appear before any board or agency of the City of
Mount Vernon in relation to any case, proceeding or application in
which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
(5)
Perform any professional services for others, for compensation,
in relation to any proceeding, petition or hearing before any City
agency as herein defined.
(6)
Represent any person, firm or corporation being sued by the City
of Mount Vernon in the defense of such suit, or represent or appear
for any person, firm or corporation filing a claim against or
prosecuting a legal action or proceeding against the City of Mount
Vernon, in the filing of such claim or the prosecution of such action
or proceeding.
(7)
Appear for or represent any person, firm or corporation in an action
involving the prosecution of such person, firm or corporation for
violation of any City ordinances or codes.
(8)
Take part in or vote or pass upon any matter before him or any
board or commission of which he is a member, in which matter he
has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest.
(9)
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to limit, restrict or prohibit
City officers or employees from performing their official duties nor from
appearing as a witness in any action, proceeding or hearing involving
the City of Mount Vernon nor from applying for certificates, licenses or
permits issued by City agencies without hearings.
B.
§ 24-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-3
1:46
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the City of Mount Vernon or any agency thereof
on behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any
personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized
or permitted by law. [Added 2-9-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977]
C.
No full-time City officer or employee shall engage directly or indirectly
in any other trade, business, occupation or profession during the
regular City working hours. [Added 2-9-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977]
D.
Whistle blower protection. [Added 8-10-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011,
approved 9-21-2011]
Neither the City nor any person, including City officers and
employees, may take or threaten to take, directly or indirectly,
official or personal action, including but not limited to discharge,
discipline, personal attack, harassment, intimidation, or change in
job, salary, or responsibilities, against any official, employee, or
other person (or against any member of their family) because that
person, or a person acting on his or her behalf: a) reports, verbally
or in writing, or files a complaint with the Board of Ethics; or b) is
requested by the Board of Ethics to participate in an investigation,
hearing, or inquiry, or is involved in a court action relating either
to the alleged violation or to evidence presented or given as part
of a Board of Ethics investigation or hearing; or c) for acting or
refusing to act as required by the City's Ethics Code and/or Article
18 of the General Municipal Law. The provisions of this subsection
are not applicable when the complainant, witness, or reporter of a
violation made accusations or other statements that were malicious
and false.
(1)
Any City officer or employee who violates Subsection E(1) has
committed an ethics violation.
(2)
In resolving a complaint that a City officer or employee has violated
this subsection, the Board of Ethics may recommend that a
retaliatory personnel action be reversed.
(3)
With regard to making a report of information concerning conduct
which any City officer, employee or other knows or reasonably
believes to involve corruption, criminal activity, conflict of interest,
gross mismanagement or abuse of authority by another City officer
or employee, which concerns his or her office or employment,
all City officers, employees and others are hereby advised of the
State of New York Whistleblower Laws, Labor Law § 740 and Civil
Service Law § 75-b, and should be guided accordingly. Those laws
are hereby included by reference and are a part hereof of this
subsection entitled "Whistleblower Laws.
(4)
E.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:47
City officers, employees and others are hereby advised that a
report of information regarding issues stated in Subsection E(4)
above can be made to the Board of Ethics and will be handled in
accordance with the same Board of Ethics rules and regulations for
reported violations of the Ethics Code and Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law.
(5)
Political activity. [Added 8-10-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011, approved
9-21-2011]
An official, employee, or municipal candidate may not knowingly
request, or authorize anyone else to request, that any subordinate
or potential future subordinate participate in an election campaign
or make a political contribution.
(1)
No candidate for any elected office of the City and no City officer
or employee shall knowingly request or knowingly authorize any
person to request that any of the following persons participate in
any political campaign activity in connection with any campaign for
City elected office: a City officer or employee; or any person who
has received a financial benefit from the City within the prior 12
months, including but not limited to persons that have contracts to
supply goods and services to the City. Nothing in this subsection
shall require that individual names of City officers and employees
be deleted from general mailing lists soliciting campaign
contributions from City residents, generally, or by geographic area.
(2)
Disclosure is required when a person or corporation makes a
campaign contribution to a City officer or employee in the prior 12
months in excess of an aggregate total amount of $5,000 where
that person or corporation is engaged in a professional contract
with the City. The disclosure shall be made in writing and shall be
retained in the office of the City Clerk as well as in the records
of the Board of Ethics. Nothing herein shall require recusal by the
City officer or employee; solely disclosure.
(3)
No City officer or employee shall engage in any political campaign
activity while on duty for the City, with the use of City funds,
supplies, vehicles, or facilities, or during any period of time during
which he or she is normally expected to perform services for the
City, for which compensation is paid.
(4)
No City officer or employee shall solicit any subordinate to engage
in political campaign activity on behalf of any candidate for any
elected office, including but not limited to City elected office.
(5)
No City officer or employee shall request any subordinate to
change their political affiliation.
(6)
Nothing herein shall prevent any City officer or employee from
voluntarily: engaging in any political campaign activity, voting,
making a campaign contribution, engaging in free speech,
(7)
F.
§ 24-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-3
1:48
§ 24-4. Disclosure of interest in legislation. [Added 12-16-1970 by
L.L. No. 5-1970, approved 12-28-1970]
To the extent that he knows thereof, a member of the City Council and
any officer or employee of the City of Mount Vernon, whether paid or
unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives official opinion to the
City Council on any legislation before the Council, shall publicly disclose on
the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial
or other private interest he has in such legislation.
§ 24-5. Standards of conduct. [Amended 12-16-1970 by L.L. No.
5-1970, approved 12-28-1970]
As standards of conduct, it is deemed advisable that no City officer or
employee should:
§ 24-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-25-1977 by L.L. No.
5-1977, approved 6-10-1977]
assembling for political purposes, or engaging in other acts not
prohibited by this section.
Accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity
which might require or induce him to disclose confidential information
which he has obtained by reason of his City employment.
A.
Use or attempt to use his official position to secure unwarranted
privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
B.
Engage in any transaction as representative or agent of the City with
any business entity in which he has a direct or indirect financial or
other interest that might reasonably tend to conflict with the proper
discharge of his official duties.
C.
Give reasonable basis by his conduct for the impression or belief that
any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor
in the performance of his official duties or that he is affected by the
kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or person.
D.
Make any personal investments in enterprises which he has reason to
believe may be directly involved in decisions or rulings to be made by
him or which will otherwise create substantial conflict between his duty
in the public interest and his private interest.
E.
Pursue any course of conduct which will raise or create public suspicion
that he is likely to be engaged in acts that are in violation of his public
trust.
F.
Penalty. Subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Law and in
addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any City
officer or employee who is found guilty, after a hearing, of violating
any of the provisions of §§ 24-3 and 24-4 of this article may be fined,
A.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:49
§ 24-7. Board of Ethics. [Added 2-9-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977;
amended 5-25-1977 by L.L. No. 5-1977, approved 6-10-1977]
suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner
provided by law by the officer or body having the power of appointment
over him or by any other manner prescribed by law.
Procedure. A person against whom disciplinary action is proposed shall
have written notice thereof and of the reasons therefor, shall be
furnished a copy of the charges preferred against him and shall be
allowed at least eight days for answering the same in writing. The
hearing upon such charges shall be held by the officer or body having
the power to remove the person against whom such charges are
preferred or by a deputy or other employee of such officer or body
designated in writing for the purpose. In case a deputy or other
employee is so designated, he shall, for the purpose of such hearing,
be vested with all the powers of such officer or body and shall make
a record of such hearing, which shall, with his recommendations, be
referred to such officer or body for review and decision. The person
or persons holding such hearing shall, upon the request of the person
against whom charges are preferred, permit him to be represented by
counsel and shall allow him to summon witnesses in his behalf. The
burden of proving a violation of §§ 24-3 and 24-4 of this article shall be
upon the person alleging the same. Compliance with technical rules of
evidence shall not be required.
B.
If such officer or employee is found guilty, a copy of the charges,
his written answer thereto, a transcript of the hearing and the
determination shall be filed in the office of the department, board or
agency in which he has been employed, and a copy thereof shall be
filed with the Municipal Civil Service Commission or other officer or
body having jurisdiction over such position. A copy of the transcript of
the hearing shall, upon request of the officer or employee affected, be
furnished to him without charge.
C.
A Board of Ethics is hereby established to be composed of five members
appointed by the City Council, all of whom shall reside in the City of
Mount Vernon. The members of such Board shall receive no salary or
compensation for their services as members of such Board. Two of the
initial members of the Board shall be appointed for terms of one year
and three of the initial members of the Board shall be appointed for
terms of two years; thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of
two years. The members of such Board shall not otherwise be officers
and employees of the City.
A.
The Board of Ethics shall act only with respect to officers, employees
and agency members of the City of Mount Vernon. The Board shall
render advisory opinions to such officers, employees and members of
City agencies of the City, with respect to this Code of Ethics and to
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York
and amendments thereof. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered
B.
§ 24-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-7
1:50
pursuant to written request of any City officer, employee or agency
under such rules and regulations as the Board of Ethics may prescribe
and shall have the advice and counsel of the Corporation Counsel. The
Board of Ethics may also make recommendations to the City Council
with respect to amendments to this Code of Ethics upon the request of
the City Council. No amendment initiated by the City Council shall be
adopted by the City Council without affording the Board of Ethics at
least 30 days to consider such amendment.
The Board of Ethics each year shall elect from its membership a
Chairman and Secretary, and upon its formation shall promulgate its
rules and regulations as to its forms and procedures and maintain
proper records of its opinions and proceedings, for which expenses it
shall be reimbursed as a City charge, and an adequate appropriation
for its operation shall be budgeted.
C.
The identity of the requesting officer, employee or agency member shall
be treated as confidential, but the opinion of the Board shall be a matter
of public record and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
D.
The Board of Ethics shall have the power and authority, in its discretion,
upon complaint being filed with it or on reference from the City Council
or on its own initiative, to investigate allegations of unethical practices
in violation of this article or any statute, rule or regulation relating to
conflicts of interest, ethical conduct and interest of municipal officers
and employees in contracts, and to render reports of such
investigations and recommendations to the City Council for action.
Investigative proceedings shall be treated as confidential unless the
subject thereof requests that they be made public. The City Council,
in its discretion and consistent with statutory provisions relating to
the discipline or removal of officers, employees and agency members,
may publicly disclose the reports and recommendations of the Board of
Ethics filed with it.
E.
All agencies of the City and all officers, employees and agency members
shall furnish to the Board of Ethics in connection with its investigations
such data, information and statements as may in the opinion of the
Board be necessary for the proper exercise of its functions, powers and
duties.
F.
The Board of Ethics shall have the power and authority to: [Added
4-15-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
Review completed financial disclosure statements in accordance
with §§ 810 through 813 of the General Municipal Law, the
provisions of this article, the rules and regulations of the Board
of Ethics and any other local law, ordinance or Code of Ethics
established by the City Council of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permit any person required to file a financial disclosure statement
to request the Board to delete from the copy made available for
(2)
G.
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:51
public inspection, one or more items of information which may be
deleted by the Board upon a finding that the information which
would otherwise be required to be disclosed will have no material
bearing on the discharge of the reporting person's official duties.
If such request for deletion is denied, the Board, in its notification
of denial, shall inform the person of his or her right to appeal
the Board's determination pursuant to the rules governing appeals
adopted pursuant to this provision and any applicable section of
the General Municipal Law. The Board shall promulgate rules and
regulations governing the issuance of written decisions in
connection with appeals.
Permit any person required to file a financial disclosure statement
to request an exemption from any requirement to report one or
more items of information which pertain to such person's spouse or
unemancipated children, which item or items may be exempted by
the Board upon a finding by the majority of the total members of
the Board, without vacancy, that the reporting individual's spouse,
on his or her own behalf or on behalf of an unemancipated child,
objects to providing the information necessary to make such
disclosure and that the information which would otherwise be
required to be reported will have no material bearing on the
discharge of the reporting person's official duties.
(3)
Permit any person who has not been determined by the City
Council to hold a policymaking position but who is otherwise
required to file a financial disclosure statement to request an
exemption from such requirement in accordance with the rules and
regulations governing such exemptions. Such rules and regulations
shall provide for exemptions to be granted either on the application
of the individual or on behalf of persons who share the same job
title or employment classification which the Board deems to be
comparable for purposes of this section. Such rules and regulations
may permit the granting of an exemption where, in the discretion
of the Board, the public interest does not require disclosure and
the applicant's duties do not involve the negotiation, authorization
or approval of the following:
Contracts, leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions,
variances, special permits or licenses as defined in § 73 of the
Public Officers Law;
(a)
The purchase, sale, rental or lease of real property, goods or
services or a contract therefor;
(b)
(c) The obtaining of grants of money or loans; or
The adoption or repeal of any rule or regulation having the
force and effect of law.
(d)
(4)
If a person required to file a financial disclosure statement with the
Board has failed to file a disclosure statement or has filed a deficient
H.
§ 24-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-7
1:52
statement, the Board shall notify the reporting person in writing, state
the failure to file or detail the deficiency, provide the person with a
fifteen-day period to cure the deficiency, and advise the person of the
penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirements. Such
notice shall be confidential. If the person fails to make such filing or
fails to cure the deficiency within the specified time period, the Board
shall send a notice of delinquency to the reporting person and to the
appointing authority for such person. [Added 4-15-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
If the Board determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that
a violation of the reporting requirement has occurred, it shall send a
notice of reasonable cause to the reporting person to the complainant,
if any, and to the City Council of the City of Mount Vernon. [Added
4-15-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
I.
A reporting individual who knowingly and willfully fails to file an annual
statement of financial disclosure or who knowingly and willfully with
intent to deceive makes a false statement or gives information which
such individual knows to be false on such statement of financial
disclosure filed pursuant to this section shall be assessed a civil penalty
in an amount not to exceed $10,000. Assessment of a civil penalty
hereunder shall be made by the Board with respect to the persons
subject to its jurisdiction. For a violation of this subdivision, other than
for conduct which constitutes a violation of Subdivision 12 of § 73 of
the Public Officers Law, the Board may, in lieu of a civil penalty, refer
a violation to the appropriate prosecutor and, upon such conviction,
but only after such referral, such violation shall be punishable as a
class A misdemeanor. A civil penalty for false filing may not be imposed
hereunder in the event a category of "value" or "amount" reported
hereunder is incorrect unless such reported information is falsely
understated. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, no other penalty, civil or criminal, may be imposed for a failure
to file or for a false filing of such statement. [Added 4-15-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
J.
A copy of any notice of delinquency or notice of reasonable cause sent
pursuant to this section shall be included in the reporting person's file
and be available for public inspection. [Added 4-15-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
K.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6 of the Public Officers Law,
the only records of the Board which shall be available for public
inspection are: [Added 4-15-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993, approved
4-29-1993]
The information set forth in an annual statement of financial
disclosure filed pursuant to this section except the categories of
value or amount which shall remain confidential and any other item
of information deleted pursuant to Subsection G(1) and (3) of this
section.
(1)
L.
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:53
§ 24-8. Severability.
§ 24-9. Repealer.
The resolution of the City Council adopted January 21, 1956, entitled "Code
of Ethics," is hereby repealed.
§ 24-10. Effective date.
This article shall take effect February 1, 1959.
(2) Notices of delinquency sent under Subsection H of this section.
(3) Notices of reasonable cause sent under Subsection I of this section.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy
in which said judgment shall have been rendered.
A.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to impair, limit or affect the
provisions for dismissal and removal of City officers and employees as
may be otherwise provided by law.
B.
The rules of ethical conduct of this article, as adopted, shall not conflict
with but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating
to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and
employees. [Added 12-16-1970 by L.L. No. 5-1970, approved
12-28-1970]
C.
§ 24-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-10
1:54
ARTICLE II
Financial Disclosure Statement
[Adopted 12-23-2008, approved 12-24-2008]
§ 24-11. Officials, officers and employees required to file.
The following elected officials, officers and employees of the City of
Mount Vernon shall be required to file a financial disclosure statement
required by General Municipal Law § 811 et seq.:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Corporation Counsel.
(3) First Assistant Corporation Counsel.
(4) Comptroller.
(5) First Deputy Comptroller.
(6) Commissioner of Assessment.
(7) Assistant Commissioner of Assessment.
(8) City Clerk.
(9) Deputy City Clerk.
(10)Affirmative Action Officer.
(11)Commissioner of Management Services.
(12)Commissioner of Department of Public Works.
(13)Deputy Commissioner of Department of Public Works.
(14)Commissioner of Public Safety.
(15)Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety.
(16)Chief of Police.
(17)Director of Parking Bureau.
(18)Commissioner of Fire Department.
(19)Deputy Commissioner of Fire Department.
(20)Chief of Fire Department.
(21)Commissioner of Department of Buildings.
(22)Deputy Commissioners of Department of Buildings.
(23)Director of Civil Defense.
(24)Director of Veterans' Service Agency.
A.
§ 24-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-11
1:55
(25)Deputy Director of Veterans' Service Agency.
(26)Commissioner of Recreation.
(27)Deputy Commissioner of Recreation.
(28)Advocate for Office of the Aging.
(29)Executive Director — Youth Bureau.
(30)Commissioner of Water Department.
(31)Deputy Commissioner of Water Department.
(32)Commissioner of Planning Department.
(33)Deputy Commissioner of Planning Department.
(34)Zoning Board of Appeals.
(35)Planning Board.
(36)City Council.
(37)Architectural Review Board.
(38)Civil Service Commission.
(39) Inspector General.
(40)Chief of Staff.
(41)Deputy Chief of Staff.
(42)Special Assistant to the Mayor-Governmental Relations.
(43)Special Assistant to the Mayor-Community Relations.
(44)Commissioner of Human Resources.
(45)Deputy Commissioner of Human Resources.
Said required elected officials, officers and employees of the City of
Mount Vernon are directed to file said financial disclosure statements
as prescribed by General Municipal Law § 811 et seq. and in
accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth in the
aforementioned General Municipal Law.
B.
§ 24-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 24-11
1:56
Chapter 28
HIGHWAY SAFETY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 28-1. Establishment.
A Highway Safety Committee is hereby established in accordance with
Article 16-A of the Executive Law, enacted as Chapter 620 of the Laws of
1967, to be known and designated as the "Mount Vernon Highway Safety
Committee."
§ 28-2. Purpose.
Such Committee shall coordinate local safety efforts and local highway
safety programs with the State Highway Safety Program as set forth in
Article 16-A of the New York State Executive Law.
§ 28-3. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of five persons, the Mayor of the City of
Mount Vernon, the Commissioner of Buildings, the Commissioner of Public
Works, the Commissioner of Public Safety and the Director of Civil Defense.
The Mayor shall be Chairman and shall designate of the members a Vice
Chairman and a Secretary. The powers of the Committee shall be vested in
and exercised by a majority of the Committee.
§ 28-4. Compensation.
The members of the Committee shall serve without pay for their services
needed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 28-5. Meetings; duties.
The Committee shall schedule stated meetings. Such stated meetings may
be attended by any citizen who gives advance notice of intention to attend
to present matters or suggestions for consideration of the Committee, and
further provided that such item is placed on the agenda of the Committee
for discussion at such meeting. The staff studies and work for the
Committee shall be performed by the staff of the Highway Safety Committee
to be appointed by the Mayor. Staff members shall serve without additional
compensation. The Mayor shall appoint one of the staff members as Staff
Coordinator. Said staff members shall attend the meetings of the Highway
Safety Committee, and the staff as a whole shall be responsible for the
initiation, study and report of matters comprehended within its supervision,
and the Committee, when authorized by the Common Council, may engage
§ 24-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:57
traffic engineers or other expert assistants on a consulting basis to
supplement said staff when necessary for effectuation of the Committee's
duties.
Chapter 30
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
§ 30-1. Creation.
A Commission on Human Rights is hereby established by the City of Mount
Vernon in accordance with Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law, as
enacted by Chapter 376 of the Laws of 1963.16
§ 30-2. Composition.
The Commission shall consist of 15 members to be appointed by the Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate one of such members to be Chairman, who shall
serve as Chairman at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 30-3. Term of office; vacancies.
Of the members first appointed, five shall be appointed for terms of office
of one year each, five for terms of office of two years each and five for
terms of office of three years each. Thereafter, all appointments, except to
fill vacancies, shall be for terms of office of three years each. Vacancies
occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms of office shall be filled for
the unexpired terms of the offices so filled.
§ 30-4. Compensation.
The members of the Commission, including the Chairman, shall serve
without salary but may be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily
incurred in the discharge of their official duties.
§ 30-5. Qualifications.
In making appointments to the Commission the Mayor shall take into
consideration the various religious, racial, nationality and political groups
in the community.
§ 30-6. Employment of staff and experts.
The Commission on Human Rights hereby created shall have the power
and authority, subject to applicable civil service requirements, to employ an
16.Editor's Note: In accordance with an amendment to Article 12-D of the General Municipal
Law, the Council of the City of Mount Vernon changed the name of the Commission on
Human Relations to the Commission on Human Rights by ordinance adopted 7-22-1964,
approved 7-23-1964.
§ 28-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 30-6
1:58
Executive Director and such other subordinates, experts, attorneys or other
employees as may be prescribed by the Board of Estimate and Contract.
§ 30-7. Appropriation.
There is hereby appropriated to the Commission on Human Rights to defray
its expenses from October 1 through December 31, 1963, the sum of $3,000,
to be financed by a budget note or notes to be hereafter authorized.
§ 30-8. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission, as provided in Article 12-D of the
General Municipal Law:
§ 30-9. Obligations.
The Commission shall discharge the following obligations:
To foster mutual respect and understanding among all racial, religious
and nationality groups in the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
To make such studies in any field of human relationship in the
community as in the judgment of the Commission will aid in
effectuating its general purposes.
B.
To inquire into incidents of tension and conflict among or between
various racial, religious and nationality groups, and to take such action
as may be designed to alleviate such tensions and conflict.
C.
To conduct and recommend such educational programs as, in the
judgment of the Commission, will increase goodwill among inhabitants
of the community and open new opportunities into all phases of
community life for all inhabitants.
D.
To report complaints to the Division of Human Rights alleging unlawful
discriminatory practices under Article 15 of the Executive Law. [Added
2-24-1982, approved 2-25-1982]
E.
Receive complaints of alleged discrimination because of race, creed,
color or national origin, seek the active assistance of the Division
of Human Rights in the solution of complaints which fall within the
jurisdiction of the Division and prepare its own plans in the case of
other complaints, with a view to reducing and eliminating such alleged
discrimination through the process of conference, conciliation and
persuasion. [Amended 2-24-1982, approved 2-25-1982]
A.
Hold conferences and other public meetings in the interest of the
constructive resolution of racial, religious and nationality group
tensions and the prejudice and discrimination occasioned thereby.
B.
Issue such publications and reports of investigation as in its judgment
will tend to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
C.
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-9
1:59
§ 30-10. Effect of amendments to applicable law.
In the event the provisions of the General Municipal Law, Article 12-D,
are amended, such amendments shall be effective with respect to the
Commission on Human Rights created hereby.17
§ 30-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect October 1, 1963, after its approval by the
Board of Estimate and Contract.
Chapter 38
MAP, OFFICIAL
§ 38-1. Official Map established.
The map entitled "Official Map of the City of Mount Vernon, Westchester
County, N.Y.," which map was approved by the City Planning Board on June
20, 1927, and by the Commissioner of Public Works on November 9, 1927,
is hereby, pursuant to Section 26 of Article 3 of the General City Law,
established as the Official Map of the City of Mount Vernon, New York.18
§ 38-2. Certification.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to at once file with the
Register of the County of Westchester a certificate certifying that the
aforesaid Official Map has been established by the City of Mount Vernon,
New York.
Enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial, religious
and nationality groups, community organizations, industry and labor
organizations, media or mass communication, fraternal and benevolent
associations and other groups in an educational campaign devoted to
fostering among the diverse groups of the community mutual esteem,
justice and equity and opening new opportunities into all phases of
community life for all individuals. [Amended 2-24-1982, approved
2-25-1982]
D.
Encourage and stimulate agencies under the jurisdiction of the Mayor
to take such action as will fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
E.
Submit a quarterly report to the Mayor and to the City Council on its
activities.
F.
17.Editor's Note: In accordance with an amendment to Article 12-D of the General Municipal
Law, the Council of the City of Mount Vernon changed the name of the Commission on
Human Relations to the Commission on Human Rights by ordinance adopted 7-22-1964,
approved 7-23-1964.
18.Editor's Note: An updated version of the Official Map of the City of Mount Vernon is
available in the office of the City Clerk. At the time of this publication it had been revised
through March 26, 1979.
§ 30-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 38-3
1:60
§ 38-3. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 42
NOTICES OF CLAIM
§ 42-1. Record of notices of claim to be kept.
In accordance with the provisions of § 50-f of the General Municipal Law,
the Corporation Counsel of the City of Mount Vernon is designated as the
officer to make and keep, on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon, a record of
notices of claim served against the City under the provisions of § 50-e of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 42-2. Method of recordkeeping.
The Corporation Counsel, in the making and keeping of such record, shall
comply with all the provisions of § 50-f of the General Municipal Law.
Chapter 46
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Continuity of government — See Ch. 16.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 24.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 50.
Police and Firemen's Pension Fund — See Ch.
56.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:61

ARTICLE I
City Clerk as Commissioner of Licenses
[Adopted 4-29-1958, approved 4-30-1958]
§ 46-1. Clerk designated as Commissioner of Licenses.
In addition to his powers and duties as City Clerk, the City Clerk shall
also be the Commissioner of Licenses and, except as otherwise provided by
law or ordinance, shall, as such Commissioner of Licenses, sign all licenses
and enter in an appropriate book the name of every person to whom a
license shall be granted, the date and particulars thereof and the sum paid
therefor. At the end of each week he shall pay the amount so received.
Where otherwise provided by law, the City Clerk shall perform such duties
in his capacity as City Clerk.
§ 46-2. Signing of licenses.
Any license issued under any ordinance heretofore adopted which provides
for the issuance of said license by the City Clerk shall henceforth be signed
by the Commissioner of Licenses irrespective of whether the application for
such license is required to be made to the City Clerk.
§ 46-3. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon its approval by the Board of Estimate and
Contract.19
19.Editor's Note: The Board of Estimate and Contract approved this article on May 25, 1958.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:63

ARTICLE II
Workmen's Compensation for Civil Defense Volunteers
[Adopted 11-28-1951, approved 11-29-1951; amended 11-10-1954,
approved 11-12-1954; 4-10-1957, approved 4-11-1957]
§ 46-4. Coverage extended.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Law of the
State of New York, as last amended, the City of Mount Vernon does hereby
elect and does extend to all classes of civil defense volunteers of the City
of Mount Vernon the protection of regular workmen's compensation during
authorized training and practice periods and when rendering assistance in
combating natural or peacetime disasters upon the direction of the chief
executive officer of the City of Mount Vernon, authorized by law to call
upon the Civil Defense Director for assistance in protecting human life or
property.
§ 46-5. Notification of Workmen's Compensation Board.
Notice of this election is to be forwarded to the Workmen's Compensation
Board of the State of New York.
§ 46-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-5
1:65

ARTICLE III
Workmen's Compensation for Certain Public Works Employees
[Adopted 5-8-1957, approved 5-10-1957]
§ 46-6. Coverage extended.
Any employee of the Department of Public Works not in a hazardous
employment and hence not covered by the Workmen's Compensation Law of
the State of New York is hereby declared to be brought within the coverage
of the Workmen's Compensation Law pursuant to the authority granted by
§ 3 of said Law.
§ 46-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 46-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-7
1:67

ARTICLE IV
Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 11-13-1957, approved 11-15-1957; amended in its entirety
7-11-2012, approved 7-12-2012]
§ 46-8. Powers.
The powers, training and other requirements for peace officers under
New York Criminal Procedure Law, Article 2 and other statutes, orders,
rules and regulations duly promulgated relating to auxiliary police are
hereby conferred upon members of the auxiliary police of the City of
Mount Vernon, New York, subject to such limitations as are contained
in said Article 8 of the New York State Defense Emergency Act (Chapter
784 of the Laws of 1951).
A.
When called for duty, the said auxiliary police shall possess the powers
and perform the duties as provided in Article 2 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York and shall be subject to the
orders, rules and regulations of the Mount Vernon Police Department.
B.
The said auxiliary police shall serve without compensation, shall not be
considered members of the regular police force of the City of Mount
Vernon and shall be used only in cases of necessity or emergency.
C.
§ 46-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:69

ARTICLE V
Attendance at Conventions
[Adopted 11-13-57, approved 11-15-57]
§ 46-9. Payment of costs by City; prior approval required.
No official, head of department, deputy or any subordinate shall be
permitted to attend any conference or conventions at the City's expense
without first obtaining the approval and consent of the City Council and the
Board of Estimate and Contract.
§ 46-10. Estimate of expenses to be submitted.
At the same time as such person applies for the approval and consent of
the City Council to attend any conference or convention, he shall submit an
estimate of the expense to the City for such attendance at such conference
or convention. No advancement shall be made by the Comptroller or other
financial officer of the City in contemplation of such expenses.
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-10
1:71

ARTICLE VI
Financial Reports of Water Commissioner
[Adopted 2-9-1955, approved 2-10-1955]
§ 46-11. Monthly reports required.
This City Council does hereby direct the Water Commissioner to render
financial reports, monthly, to the Council, as to its cash position, also
showing income, expenditures and operating expenses.
§ 46-12. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-12
1:73
Chapter 50
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 24. Officers and employees — See Ch. 46.
§ 46-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 46-12
1:74
ARTICLE I
Vacations, Sick Leaves and Leaves of Absence
[Adopted 4-26-1961, approved 4-27-1961]
§ 50-1. Applicability.
§ 50-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Includes all Commissioners and directors
appointed by the Mayor, as well as the City Clerk and City Judge.
FULL-TIME — Refers to City officers and employees receiving a fixed
annual salary and whose normal workweek includes 40 hours per week and
eight hours per day, inclusive of one hour per day for lunch.
PART-TIME — Refers:
SICK LEAVE — Refers to authorized absence from duty of an employee
because of his own sickness or disability or injury not within the scope of the
Workmen's Compensation Law. Such illness or injury must be sufficiently
serious to interfere with the performance of his or her duties or of such
a nature that attendance to duty would have deleterious effects on the
employee's health or of such a nature that attendance would have a
deleterious effect on the health of other City employees. Illness or injury
incurred through excessive use of intoxicating beverages is specifically
excluded.
§ 50-3. Employee classifications.
Except as otherwise herein provided, this article shall apply only to fulltime
and part-time City officers and employees, except elected officials,
members of boards and commissions, policemen, firemen, public library
personnel and school crossing guards.
A.
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, this article shall not apply
to temporary or seasonal help employed by any City agency, bureau,
department or board or the Board of Water Supply, or to City employees
paid on a per diem or hourly basis.
B.
To City officers and employees receiving a fixed annual salary whose
workweek is less than the normal workweek of 40 hours per week, eight
hours per day, inclusive of one hour per day for lunch.
A.
To temporary City employees who are employed on a per diem basis
but who are continuously employed for at least six months in a calendar
year and whose normal workweek includes eight hours per day and 40
hours per week, inclusive of one hour per day for lunch.
B.
For the purpose of this article, the following, among others, shall be
deemed full-time City officers: Civil Defense Director, Acting City Judge,
A.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:75
§ 50-4. Determination of daily salary.
For the purpose of salary deductions the daily salary shall be considered
as the annual salary divided by the actual number of working days in each
year. Legal holidays shall be deemed working days.
§ 50-5. Vacations.
Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation,
Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Buildings, City Clerk,
Deputy City Clerk, City Engineer, City Marshal and Deputy City
Marshal, Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels,
First and Second- Deputy Comptrollers, Court Clerk and Deputy Court
Clerk, Director and Deputy Director of the Veterans Service Agency,
Health Commissioner, Public Works Commissioner, Deputy Public
Works Commissioner, Recreation and Assistant Recreation
Superintendent, Registrar and Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics,
Sealer of Weights and Measures, physicians employed by the
Department of Public Works, Department of Public Safety and Fire
Department, Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent of the Board
of Water Supply, Director of Urban Renewal, Police Commissioner,
First Deputy Police Commissioner and Fire Commissioner. [Amended
6-13-1984]
For the purpose of this article the following, among others, shall be
deemed part-time City officers: dentists, pediatricians and tuberculosis
physicians.
B.
Vacations of all City officers and employees shall be determined by the
number of months or calendar years of continuous service with the City
as follows:
Vacations during first calendar year of continuous employment.
Full-time City officers and employees who have worked six or more
continuous months during their first calendar year of employment
shall receive one calendar week of vacation with full pay during
such calendar year.
(1)
Vacations during second calendar year of continuous employment.
Full-time City officers and employees in their second continuous
calendar year of employment who have completed more than six
months but less than 12 months of continuous service shall receive
one calendar week of vacation with full pay during their second
continuous calendar year of employment, and those who have
completed 12 or more months of continuous service shall receive
an additional one week's vacation with full pay during such second
calendar year of employment.
(2)
Vacations during third and subsequent calendar year of continuous
employment. Full-time City officers and employees in their third
or subsequent calendar year of continuous employment who have
(3)
A.
§ 50-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-5
1:76
§ 50-6. Scheduling and accumulation of vacation time.
completed more than 12 but less than 24 months of continuous
service shall receive two weeks with full pay during their third
continuous calendar year of employment, and those who have
completed more than 24 months of continuous service shall receive
an additional week's vacation with full pay during their third
continuous calendar year of employment and in each subsequent
year of continuous employment.
Vacations after 15 continuous years of City employment or
membership in State Retirement Fund. Full-time City officers and
employees who have completed 15 continuous years of service,
computed from the date of their appointment, or have held
membership in the New York State Retirement Fund for 15
continuous years and have completed two calendar years of
continuous employment with the City of Mount Vernon, shall be
entitled to an additional week's vacation each year with full pay.
(4)
Part-time City officers and employees. Part-time City officers and
employees, as hereinbefore defined, with at least six months' prior
continuous service with the City as of the date their vacation is
to commence, shall receive not exceeding five working days of
vacation with full pay during any one year; those with 12 or more
continuous months of prior service as of the date their vacation
is to commence shall receive not exceeding 10 working days of
vacation during any one calendar year.
(5)
All employees shall be deemed to have commenced work on the first
day of the month in which they were appointed.
B.
Vacation periods of City officers and employees directly appointed by
the Mayor, City Council or City Judge shall be approved by the Mayor,
the President of the City Council and City Judge, respectively.
C.
Nothing hereinbefore contained shall be deemed to diminish or reduce
the number of weeks of vacation earned and unused by any City officer
or employee as of January 1, 1962.
D.
Vacations shall be scheduled in periods of not less than one week,
except upon approval of the department and/or bureau head.
A.
Employees who are entitled to four weeks' vacation in any one year
shall not take more than three weeks consecutively without the prior
written approval of the bureau and/or department head.
B.
Vacations may, with the prior written approval of the department head,
which shall be filed with the Civil Service Commission, be accumulated
up to a maximum of four calendar weeks; however, not more than four
weeks' vacation may be taken in any one year unless authorized in
writing by the bureau and department head.
C.
§ 50-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-6
1:77
§ 50-7. Holidays during vacations.
If a legal holiday as herein designated is observed by the City of Mount
Vernon and such holiday occurs during an employee's vacation period, such
employee shall be entitled to an additional day's vacation by reason of such
holiday.
§ 50-8. Effect of leaves of absence on vacations and sick leave.
When computing prior continuous service of a City officer or employee
in order to ascertain the employee's vacation or sick leave allowance,
any period the employee is absent on leave with or without pay shall
be deducted from such computation but shall not otherwise interrupt
continuity.
§ 50-9. Vacations upon termination of employment.
The choice of vacation period shall be given City officers and employees
with the longest periods of continuous service in the City employ,
without regard to their classification, provided that such choice shall
not, in the opinion of the bureau and department head, adversely affect
the operation of the department. Vacation preference schedule shall
be prepared and approved by the department head in the order of
employee's starting dates of last continuous employment.
D.
If an employee intends to terminate his employment with the City
for reasons other than dismissal from service, he shall be granted
vacation with full pay equivalent to the vacation and overtime credits
earned and not taken at the time of terminating employment, provided
that sufficient advance notice of such termination is submitted to the
department head to enable such vacation, with full pay, to be scheduled
prior to the effective date of termination, and provided that at least
four weeks' notice is given to the department head prior to commencing
such vacation.
A.
In the case of the death in office of a City officer or employee, including
members of the Police and Fire Departments, the Comptroller is
authorized and directed to pay to his next of kin or estate, in
accordance with law, the full amount of salary due such City officer or
employee for all of the vacation time to which he was entitled at the
time of his death. The voucher shall be approved by the department
head and the Civil Service Commission prior to the payment by the
Comptroller.
B.
If any City officer's or employee's services are terminated by reason
of the abolishment of his job or position or for any reason other than
dismissal from service and if there will be insufficient time to enable
him to take his earned vacation period following written notice to him
by his department head of the abolishing or termination of his job or
position, he shall be entitled to receive the full amount of salary due
C.
§ 50-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-9
1:78
§ 50-10. Regulations for firemen, policemen and public library
employees.
Vacations and sick leaves and overtime pay or allowances for firemen,
policemen and public library employees shall be granted as provided in the
rules of the Fire Department, Department of Public Safety and the Library
Trustees, respectively.
§ 50-11. Sick leave.
§ 50-12. Sick leave accumulation.
Commencing January 1, 1961, the unused portion of the sick leave
allowance for the preceding year shall be accumulated as an allowance for
additional days of sick leave absence at full pay. All sick leave accumulation
shall be limited to 180 days.
him as of the date his services are terminated for vacation time earned
but not taken by him as of said termination date.
Sick leave rests entirely upon grace and humanitarian consideration.
It is a privilege granted to take care of the more common period of
illness and to make some provisions for periods of prolonged illness and
disability.
A.
Accumulated sick leave credited to City employees as of December 31,
1960, shall remain in full force and effect.
B.
Commencing January 1, 1961, sick leave shall be earned by full-time
City officers and employees at the rate of 1 1/4 days per month. In
his sole discretion and upon a proper finding of illness or injury
necessitating medical care, a department head may permit up to 15
days of sick leave to be taken by any employee during a calendar
year, notwithstanding the fact that the employee has not earned such
sick leave at the time it is granted, provided that appropriate payroll
adjustments shall be made in the case of any such officer or employee
who fails or refuses to return to work after being granted such
unearned sick leave.
C.
Commencing January 1, 1961, sick leave shall be earned by part-time
City officers and employees at the rate of 1/2 day per month for every
month of continuous service.
D.
For the purpose of calculating sick leave, the time recorded on the
payroll records at the full rate of pay shall be considered as the time
the employee was continuously employed.
E.
F. The unit for computation of sick leave shall not be less than 1/2 day.
G. Sick leave credits shall be based upon actual working days only.
§ 50-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-13
1:79
§ 50-13. Reporting procedure and recording of leave time.
In order that absence because of personal illness may be charged to
accumulated sick leave, such absence must be reported by the officer or
employee at or prior to the commencement of each working day of such
absence, and absence for illness on Saturday or Sunday shall not be charged
unless Saturday or Sunday is a designated working day for the employee. If
an employee is designated to work a half day on Saturday or Sunday, then
only a half day shall be charged for absence on such day.
§ 50-14. Medical verification.
§ 50-15. Leave of absence without pay for illness. [Amended
10-11-2000, approved 10-12-2000]
A City officer or employee who has contracted an illness or has suffered an
injury which would, in the normal course of events, necessitate his or her
being absent for an extended period of time over and above his accumulated
sick leave, vacation and overtime credits may, with the approval of the
City Council, be granted a leave of absence, without pay, for a period not
exceeding one year.
§ 50-16. Physical examination after sick leave absence.
The department head may require an officer or employee who has been
absent because of personal illness, prior to and as a condition of his return
to duty, to be examined by a physician designated by the department head,
to establish whether he is physically or mentally able to perform his normal
duties and that his return to duty will not jeopardize his health, safety or
welfare or the health, safety or welfare of other employees.
An officer or employee who fails to report for duty due to personal
illness or injury may be required to submit a written report from his
physician which shall include a statement of the nature of the illness
and a statement as to whether or not the employee was sufficiently ill
to justify the absence. Failure on the part of the officer or employee
to furnish such statement or to submit to a medical examination, as
hereafter provided, within 48 hours after requested shall constitute
insubordination and misconduct and shall be cause for disciplinary
action.
A.
In the event of failure to submit proof of illness upon request, or in
the event that, upon such proof as is submitted by the department
physician or other City medical officer, the department head finds that
there is not satisfactory evidence of illness sufficient to justify the
employee's absence from the performance of his duties, such absence
shall be considered as unauthorized leave and the employee shall not
be paid for such absence and such absence shall not be charged against
accumulated sick leave credits. Abuse of sick leave privileges shall be
cause for disciplinary action.
B.
§ 50-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-17
1:80
§ 50-17. Occupational injury or disease.
§ 50-18. Sick leave for school crossing guards.
§ 50-19. Absence for illness without sick leave credits.
If an officer or employee is absent due to illness or injury and the employee
has no sick leave credit but does have accrued vacation or overtime credits,
each day's absence may be deducted from such credits at the employee's
written option. In the absence of written notification, such deduction shall
be made as of course from the accumulated vacation time and overtime
balances and the officer or employee shall receive full pay for each absence
so deducted to the extent of such accumulated but unused vacation and
overtime credits.
Any City officer or employee who is necessarily absent from duty
because of occupational injury or disease sustained within the course
of his duties and within the scope of the Workmen's Compensation Law
may, pending adjudication of his case and while his disability renders
him unable to perform the duties of his position, be granted leave with
full pay for a period not to exceed six months, exclusive of accumulated
sick leave credits and other time credits, on written approval of the
department head, after satisfactory evidence has been submitted that
the injury or disease was service-incurred and after full consideration
of all of the facts involved. Vacation and sick leave credits shall not be
earned under these circumstances for periods that an employee is on
such discretionary leave with pay.
A.
The department head shall promptly notify the Civil Service
Commission of any officers or employees who have been injured in the
course of employment and are filing a compensation claim and the date
on which payment of salary is to be stopped by the City, and shall file
a claim for reimbursement with the Workmen's Compensation Board,
pursuant to Workmen's Compensation Law, Article 2, § 24, Subsection
4, if wages or salary are paid to an officer or employee while on such
leave. When the officer or employee has been awarded compensation
for the period of his leave with pay, such compensation award for loss
of time for such period shall be paid over to the City.
B.
The school crossing guards employed in the Police Department of
Public Safety on a per diem basis shall each be entitled to receive six
days of sick leave with pay in the event that he or she is unable to attend
to his or her duties because of sickness or disability during each school
year beginning in September and ending in June.
A.
Every school crossing guard shall give prompt notice of inability to
attend to his or her duties because of sickness or disability to the Chief
Inspector of Police, who shall request the Police Department physician
to make an investigation of absence and report on the alleged sickness
or disability and shall use said report as his basis for allowing or
disallowing sick leave pay.
B.
§ 50-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-20
1:81
§ 50-20. Leave for death or illness in employee's family.
Full-time City officers and employees may be granted an absence with full
pay of not more than five working days in any calendar year on account
of death or serious illness in such City officer's or employee's immediate
family, upon submission of satisfactory evidence thereof. Such absence may
be extended to a maximum of 10 full days, but the excess above five
days shall be charged to unused sick leave, vacation or overtime credits.
The "immediate family" of any City officer or employee shall include
grandparents, brothers, sisters, spouse, children or parents of the officer or
employee or of his or her spouse. One day's absence with full pay may be
granted to all City officers and employees in case of death or serious illness
to members of their family other than their immediate family.
§ 50-21. Leave of absence relating to pregnancy and childbirth.
[Amended 5-23-1979, approved 5-24-1979; 1-24-1990, approved
1-25-1990; 6-27-1990, approved 6-28-1990]
Absences due to pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth and recovery
therefrom shall be considered as and credited as sick leave absences as set
forth in § 50-11, Sick leave, § 50-12, Sick leave accumulation, and § 50-15,
Leave of absence without pay for illness.
§ 50-22. Leave for quarantine.
If an officer or employee who is not ill himself is required to remain absent
because of quarantine and presents a written statement of the attending
physician or the Commissioner of Health proving the necessity of such
absence, he shall be granted leave with pay for the period of his required
absence, said leave to be charged against accumulated sick leave, vacation
or overtime credits in the same manner as if he were sick himself. Prior to
return to duty, there shall be a certification by the Commissioner of Health
that his return to duty will not jeopardize the health of other employees.
§ 50-23. Court attendance and jury service.
On the submission of proof to the department head of the necessity of jury
services or attending court under subpoena other than in connection with
actions or proceedings involving the City, leave of absence shall be granted
with pay to all officers and employees less the amount received for jury
service or witness fees which shall be paid over to the City.
§ 50-24. Military duty. [Amended 2-25-2004, approved 2-26-2004;
6-25-2004, approved 6-25-2004]
Paid military leave. Members of the Armed Forces Reserves will be
entitled to a leave of absence with pay, not to exceed a total of 30 days
in any one calendar year, for military-related training or active service
ordered or authorized by the commanding officer or other appropriate
authorities.
A.
§ 50-20 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-24
1:82
An employee on paid military leave will continue to receive all City
of Mount Vernon benefits for which the employee is enrolled at the
time of leave, including accrual of sick and vacation leave.
(1)
An employee taking paid military leave must submit military leave
orders and pay vouchers to payroll within 30 days of returning
home from leave.
(2)
Salary differential. An employee ordered to active military duty which
is not part of their regular reservist duties in any calendar year or
continuous period of absence exceeding the paid military leave as
provided in Subsection A, shall receive from the City a salary equal to
the difference, if any, between the employee's City salary and the salary
paid for the performance of such ordered military duty.
Payments of such salary differential, as provided under this article,
shall be paid up to 18 months, to each employee upon
documentation of payment received for military service or other
service compelled by state or federal law or regulation.
(1)
"Salary" is defined as base pay and longevity, as approved in the
applicable collective bargaining agreements or in the City's
Compensation Ordinance.
(2)
B.
Military leave without pay. An employee who performs military service
in excess of 30 days is entitled to a leave of absence without pay for the
period of required service.
C.
Benefits during a military leave without pay. During an unpaid military
leave, an employee may elect to continue participation in any benefit
program in which the employee was enrolled at the commencement of
leave by paying the employee's and the City of Mount Vernon's share of
premiums for those benefit programs. During such leave, the employee
will accrue retirement service credits as permitted by the New York
State Retirement Board.
D.
Return from military leave without pay. An employee returning from
unpaid military leave of absence will be returned to a position in the
same or higher class at the same or higher pay grade. An employee
seeking to return to work after an unpaid military leave must request
reemployment within 90 days of discharge from military service and
submit certification of satisfactory completion of military service signed
by the commanding officer or other appropriate military official.
If an employee is unable to work after discharge from military
service due to physical or mental conditions resulting from military
service, military leave without pay will be extended for a period not
to exceed one year after discharge. An employee seeking to return
to work under these circumstances must provide the City of Mount
Vernon with notice of satisfactory completion of military service,
and request reemployment within 90 days of regaining physical or
mental ability to resume work.
(1)
E.
§ 50-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-24
1:83
§ 50-25. Leave of absence without pay. [Amended 10-11-2000,
approved 10-12-2000]
An employee who returns to work after an unpaid military leave of
absence with restrictions due to physical or mental conditions may
seek reasonable accommodations subject to the approval of his or
her Commissioner or department head.
(2)
A returning employee must be made whole by:
Being allowed to contribute to the pension plan any amount
that would have been contributed had the employee not been
absent. The employee has three times the length of service, not
to exceed five years, to make payments and the City of Mount
Vernon will fund its resulting obligation under the plan within
the same time frame.
(a)
Being reinstated with privileges and status the employee
earned by length of service.
(b)
(3)
Unless precluded by military necessity, advance notice must be
provided, either orally or in writing, to the employee's supervisor as
soon as the employee becomes aware of the need to be on military
leave.
F.
In the event that any section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the
remaining provisions of this article shall not be affected thereby.
G.
In the event that any section, paragraph, clause or phrase of the Code
of the City of Mount Vernon conflicts with the provisions established
herein, this article's provisions shall be controlling.
H.
Any City officer or employee who desires to engage in a course of study
intended to increase his or her usefulness to the City service, or who for
any other reason considered beneficial by the head of the department
desires to secure a leave of absence from his regular duties, may, with
the written approval of the City Council and the head of the department
in which he or she is employed, be granted a leave of absence without
pay for a period not to exceed one year. Upon the termination of
such leave of absence without pay, such officer or employee may be
reinstated in his or her position. When a leave of absence without pay
for a year has been granted, no similar leave shall be granted to the
same officer or employee within two years after reinstatement.
A.
Any City officer or employee who is required to render ordered military
or naval duty shall be granted leave of absence without pay as
authorized by the laws of the State of New York.
B.
§ 50-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-26
1:84
§ 50-26. Overtime.
In case any full-time City officer or employee is required to work overtime or
under conditions involving extraordinary hazards to health, he may, in the
discretion of the department head, if the work of the department permits,
be credited with supplemental time off by the department head, which must
be used within one year of the dates credited and of which not more than
one week may be taken in conjunction with the annual vacation. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the payment of overtime pay where the same
is provided for in the department budget or funds therefor are appropriated.
§ 50-27. Accounting procedures; notification of department head;
failure to notify.
§ 50-28. Legal holidays.
The following are the legal holidays: New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday,
Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Election Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Day.
Accounting procedures.
(1) Absences shall be charged on the basis of a half day.
Reporting for work more than two hours but less than four hours
after the regular time shall be charged as a half day's absence.
Reporting after the fifth hour shall be charged as a full day's
absence.
(2)
Since payrolls are made up from five to six days preceding the
issuance of checks, unauthorized absences during such period shall
be deducted from the next payroll check.
(3)
If a City officer or employee, upon termination of his service with
the City, has been overpaid by reason of any of the provisions of
this article, such City officer or employee shall reimburse the City
for the amount of such overpayment within 30 days after receipt of
written demand therefor by the City Comptroller.
(4)
A.
The officer or employee shall be responsible for notifying his
department head in advance of a planned absence. In case of
unexpected absence, such as illness or death in the family, he shall
be responsible for notifying his department head before the
commencement of his regular working day.
B.
An officer or employee absent without notification and/or adequate
explanation to the department head shall not be paid for such absent
time and shall be subject to dismissal.
C.
§ 50-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-29
1:85
§ 50-29. Time for lunch or supper.
All City officers and employees shall be entitled to a full hour for lunch or
supper, in accordance with their working hours.
§ 50-30. Records required.
§ 50-31. Transfer of credits.
Credits for vacation and sick leave only shall be transferred with the
employees from one City department to another City department, board,
commission or office.
§ 50-31.1. Catastrophic leave program. [Added 4-24-2002, approved
4-25-2002]
The catastrophic leave program is a voluntary program that allows
employees to donate a portion of their accrued sick leave to assist another
employee who is experiencing an unusual or catastrophic illness and/or
injury.
Each department head shall establish a vacation schedule including all
members of the department who shall be entitled to a vacation and
shall post a copy of such schedule in a conspicuous place or places in
the office of the department, giving names and starting dates of last
continuous employment and indicating the approved vacation period
for each employee of the department.
A.
Each department head shall keep a daily record showing the absence
record of each employee, including dates and times thereof, and shall
indicate the reason for such absences.
B.
It shall be the duty of every department head to make a report in
writing to the Civil Service Commission of the names of all officers and
employees, their vacation, sick leave or time off granted, or absences
during the period between the employee's last pay and the date of such
report.
C.
Any employee who is not otherwise covered by a collective bargaining
agreement, who is eligible to accrue sick, vacation, personal or
compensatory time, may participate in the catastrophic leave program.
Donated accrued sick leave by an employee may be used by any other
eligible employee affected by a catastrophic illness and/or injury, as
defined below, who has exhausted his or her sick, vacation, personal or
compensatory paid leave accruals.
A.
A "catastrophic illness and/or injury" is defined as a medical or
psychological event experienced by an employee, that is likely to
require an employee's absence from his/her job for a prolonged period
of time.
B.
§ 50-29 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-31.1
1:86
This program does not cover time off due to a job-incurred injury
covered by workers' compensation benefits, disability benefits,
statutory 207A benefits, no-fault insurance or any other collateral
sources.
C.
To request assistance, the employee or the employee's supervisor
(acting on behalf of the employee at the employee's request) must
submit a catastrophic leave application and the physician/psychologist
statement to his or her department head. The physician/psychologist
statement must include a statement of the employee's inability to work,
the diagnosis, and the prognosis including the anticipated date of
return.
Requests for assistance will be approved only after all sick,
vacation, personal and compensatory leave accruals to which that
person is otherwise entitled have been exhausted. An employee
must be facing at least five or more days of unpaid leave, before an
application may be submitted.
(1)
The department head reserves the right to request a second
physician/psychologist statement.
(2)
D.
Donated sick leave days, up to the amount indicated on the physician/
psychologist statement, will be transferred from donating employee(s)
to the recipient employee as sick leave in full-day increments.
A donating employee may donate up to three sick leave days in
one calendar year. In addition, the employee donating annual leave
must have a balance of not less than 10 days remaining of sick
leave accruals after the donation.
(1)
Donations shall only be made at the time of an authorized request
for assistance. The donated annual leave days will be reported
through an approved catastrophic leave donation form. This allows
the Payroll Department to make the necessary adjustments to
annual leave balances. Donations made will be transferred to the
recipient employee as sick leave. If the employee returns to work
earlier than first expected, any significant number of unused days
may be transferred back on a pro rata basis to the employees who
donated the days.
(2)
E.
The catastrophic leave program shall be administered by the
department where the employee requesting assistance works. The
department must complete the following steps:
The department head will review the application to determine
if the applicant qualifies for assistance and the duration of that
assistance. Applications that are denied must be reviewed by
Management Services in consultation with the Corporation
Counsel within 10 days of the issuance of a denial.
(1)
F.
§ 50-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-31.1
1:87
§ 50-32. Effective date.
This article shall take effect January 1, 1961, except that the provisions
of § 50-5 pertaining to vacation periods for full-time City officers shall be
effective January 1, 1962.
The department head will inform other employees of the request
for assistance. The only information released will be the employee's
name and number of hours needed.
(2)
The department will send the approved application and donation
forms to the Payroll Department. The application and donation
forms should be sent to the Payroll Department within 10 working
days of receipt of the application to allow the employee to be paid.
(3)
G. The donated time will have no cash value.
All information received on catastrophic leave applications, physician/
psychologist statements, annual leave donation forms and any
additional information is confidential except to the extent necessary to
effectuate the terms of this article.
H.
I. When effective. This section shall take effect immediately.
§ 50-31.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-32
1:88
ARTICLE II
Grievance Procedure
[Adopted 7-23-1963, approved 7-24-1963]
§ 50-33. Definitions.
As used herein the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DAYS — All days other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in computing the
number of days within which action must be taken or notice given within
the terms of this article.
DEPARTMENT — Any department or other agency of the government of the
City of Mount Vernon other than the legislative or judicial branches thereof.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — The officer in full charge of said department as
prescribed by the City Charter of Mount Vernon or other applicable law.
EMPLOYEE — Any person directly employed and compensated by the City
of Mount Vernon, except persons employed in the legislative or judicial
branch thereof.
GRIEVANCE — Any claim of violation, misinterpretation or inequitable
application of the existing laws, rules, procedures, regulations,
administrative orders or work rules of the City of Mount Vernon or a
department thereof which relate to or involve employee health or safety,
physical facilities, materials or equipment furnished to employees or
supervision of employees; provided, however, that such term shall not
include any matter involving an employee's rate or amount of compensation,
retirement benefits, disciplinary proceeding or any other matter which is
otherwise reviewable pursuant to law or any rule or regulation having the
force and effect of law.
IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR — The employee or officer on the next higher
level of authority above the employee in the department wherein the
grievance exists and who normally assigns and supervises the employee's
work or evaluates his work performance.
§ 50-34. Policy.
Every employee of the City of Mount Vernon shall have the right to present
his grievance in accordance with the procedures provided herein, free from
interference, coercion, restraint, discrimination or reprisal, and shall have
the right to be represented by a person of his own choosing at all stages of
the grievance procedure.
§ 50-35. First stage: initial presentation.
An employee who claims to have a grievance shall present his grievance
in writing to his department head within two days after the grievance
occurs and request a review and determination of his grievance and
may also request a hearing on his grievance.
A.
§ 50-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-35
1:89
§ 50-36. Second stage: Grievance Board.
§ 50-37. Appeals.
Such request shall contain a statement setting forth the specific nature
of the grievance and the facts and circumstances relating to it.
B.
Such request shall be served upon both the department head and the
employee's immediate supervisor.
C.
Thereupon and within two days after receiving such request, the
immediate supervisor shall submit to the department head a written
statement of his information concerning the specific nature of the
grievance and the circumstances and facts relating to it.
D.
The department head or his nominee may, and at the request of the
employee shall, hold a hearing within five days after receiving the
written request for said hearing and statement from the employee.
E.
The employee and his representative, if any, may appear at the hearing
and present oral arguments or statements.
F.
Within five days after the close of the hearing or within eight days
after the grievance has been submitted to him if there be no hearing,
the department head or his nominee shall make his decision and
communicate the same to the employee presenting the grievance and
to the employee's representative, if any.
G.
A Grievance Board of three members is hereby established to hear
appeals from decisions of department heads on grievances.
A.
The members of this Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, to serve at
his pleasure, and shall serve without pay.
B.
A hearing of any matter before the Grievance Board may be conducted
by any one or more members of the Board designated by the Board
to act on its behalf; provided, however, that if less than the full Board
presides at such a hearing, the member or members thereof conducting
such hearing shall render a report thereon to the full Board and the full
Board shall thereupon make its report.
C.
D. Two concurring votes shall be necessary for any binding decision.
Necessary funds, supplies, facilities and personnel to implement the
operation of the Grievance Board shall be provided by the City of Mount
Vernon.
E.
The Grievance Board may make and amend rules and regulations for
the conduct of its proceedings, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this article. A complete and up-to-date set of such rules and
amendments shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office.
F.
§ 50-35 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-37
1:90
An employee may appeal from the decision of the department head or
nominee of the department head within 15 days after notice of such
decision. The appeal shall be taken by submitting to the Grievance
Board a written statement signed by the employee taking the appeal,
containing:
The name, residence address and department of employment of the
employee presenting the grievance.
(1)
The name, residence address and department of employment of
each other employee or official involved in the grievance.
(2)
The name and address of the employee's representative, if any, and
his department of employment if he is a fellow employee.
(3)
A concise statement of the nature of the grievance, the facts
relating to it and the proceedings and decisions on the grievance
up to the time of the appeal.
(4)
A request for a review of the decision of the department head or his
nominee.
(5)
A.
The Grievance Board may request the department head to submit a
written statement of facts, including a summary of the record of the
hearing, if there was a hearing, and the original or a true copy of any
other record or document used by the department head or his nominee
in making his decision. Such written statement shall be submitted
within three days after request by the Grievance Board.
B.
The Grievance Board shall hold a hearing within 10 days after receiving
the written request for review. It shall give at least three days' notice
of the time and place of such hearing to the employee, the employee's
representative, if any, and the department head or his nominee, all of
whom shall be entitled to be present at the hearing.
C.
The hearing on the appeal may be held in public or in private as
determined by the Grievance Board.
D.
New evidence, testimony or argument, as well as any documents,
exhibits or other information submitted to the department head or his
nominee at the hearing held by him, may be introduced at the hearing
by the employee, by the department head or his nominee or upon the
request of the Grievance Board.
E.
The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the Grievance
Board if in its judgment such adjournment is necessary in order to
obtain material evidence. The total of all such adjournments, however,
shall not exceed 10 days, except that adjournments consented to by
both the employee and the department head shall not be counted in
determining the total days of adjournments as herein limited.
F.
G. The Grievance Board shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence.
§ 50-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-37
1:91
A written summary shall be kept of each hearing held by the Grievance
Board.
H.
The Grievance Board shall make its report in writing within five days
after the close of the hearing. It shall immediately file its report and
the written summary of the proceedings with the City Clerk and shall at
the same time send a copy of its report to the employee, the employee's
representative, if any, the department head, the Mayor and the local
Civil Service Commission, if appropriate. The report shall include a
statement of the Board's findings of facts, conclusion and advisory
recommendations.
I.
J. The report of the Grievance Board shall be final.
§ 50-37 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-37
1:92
ARTICLE III
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 5-22-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974, approved 6-7-1974]
§ 50-38. Applicability of state law.
In accordance with § 15 of the Charter of the City of Mount Vernon, no
person shall be appointed as an officer of the City of Mount Vernon unless
he complies with the residence requirements contained in the Public
Officers Law of the State of New York pertaining to the appointment of local
public officers. Every local office of the City of Mount Vernon shall become
vacant if the person holding such office shall cease to be an inhabitant of
the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 50-39. Residency within certain part of county required.
No person shall be appointed as an employee of the City of Mount Vernon
or continue to hold such employment unless he shall reside within that part
of the County of Westchester lying between the southerly boundaries of the
county and the northerly boundary lines of the Village of Tarrytown, Town of
Greenburgh, City of White Plains and the Town of Harrison. Any person who
after employment by the City of Mount Vernon ceases to be an inhabitant of
that part of the County of Westchester hereinabove described shall forfeit
his employment.
§ 50-40. Applicability of provisions to Department of Public Safety.
The provisions of this article pertaining to residency of an employee
prior to his or her appointment or employment shall not apply in the
case of an applicant to the Department of Public Safety who may reside
in:
(1) The County of Westchester.
A county within the State of New York contiguous to the County of
Westchester.
(2)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to the City of
Mount Vernon.
(3)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to a county
described in Subsection A(3) hereof where the former is less than
15 miles from the City of Mount Vernon measured from their
respective nearest boundary lines.
(4)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to a county
described in Subsection A(4) hereof where the former is less than
30 miles from the City of Mount Vernon measured from their
respective nearest boundary lines.
(5)
A.
The provisions of this article pertaining to residency of an employee
subsequent to his or her appointment or employment shall not apply in
B.
§ 50-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-40
1:93
§ 50-41. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
the case of a person appointed as a member of the Department of Public
Safety prior to July 1, 1961, who on such date resided in:
(1) The County of Westchester.
A county within the State of New York contiguous to the County of
Westchester.
(2)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to the City of
Mount Vernon.
(3)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to a county
described in Subsection B(3) hereof where the former is less than
15 miles from the City of Mount Vernon measured from their
respective nearest boundary lines.
(4)
A county within the State of New York contiguous to a county
described in Subsection B(4) hereof where the former is less than
30 miles from the City of Mount Vernon measured from their
respective nearest boundary lines.
(5)
The provisions of this article pertaining to residency of an employee
subsequent to his or her appointment or employment shall not apply to
members of the Department of Public Safety with the rank of patrolman
appointed to the Department of Public Safety subsequent to the
effective date of this article, who are hereby required to reside in
the City of Mount Vernon within six months of said appointment or
employment.
C.
§ 50-40 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-41
1:94
ARTICLE IV
Defense and Indemnification of Officers and Employees
[Adopted 8-27-1980, approved 8-28-1980]
§ 50-42. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the City of Mount Vernon from losses which may
be brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken while
in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting
this article, the City Council finds that the State of New York has enacted
similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers and
employees and further finds that such security is also required for local
personnel. By enactment of this article, the City Council does not intend to
limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of the City
or its employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense. It is solely
the intent of this article to provide similar coverage for local employees as is
presently provided for state employees, so as to continue to attract qualified
individuals to local government service.
§ 50-43. Definitions; adoption of legislation by agencies or
authorities. [Amended 11-22-1988, approved 11-23-1988]
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the term
"employee" shall mean any person holding a position by election,
appointment or employment in the service of the City of Mount Vernon,
the Mount Vernon Urban Renewal Agency or the City of Mount Vernon
Industrial Development Agency, whether or not compensated, or a volunteer
expressly authorized to participate in a municipally sponsored volunteer
program, but shall not include an independent contractor.
§ 50-43.1. Inclusion of elected officials, appointees and officers in
workers' compensation policy. [Added 6-25-1997, approved
6-26-199720]
The City of Mount Vernon hereby elects to include elected officials,
appointees and officers of the City of Mount Vernon under the City's
workers' compensation policy and coverage.
§ 50-44. Right to defense by City.
Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 50-46 of this
article, the City shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court or before any
board, bureau, agency or commission, arising out of any alleged act of
omission or commission which occurred, or is alleged in the complaint
to have occurred, while the employee was acting within the scope of his
A.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of said workers'
compensation coverage shall commence on 1-1-1995, which is the date the City set aside
reserve funds for its self insurance.
§ 50-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-44
1:95
§ 50-45. Right of indemnification.
public employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision
of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983. This duty to provide for a defense shall not
arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf
of the City of Mount Vernon against the employee.
Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the City Corporation
Counsel; provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the Corporation Counsel determines, based upon
his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case,
that representation by the Corporation Counsel would be inappropriate
or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion
or by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists
and that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel
of his choice. The Corporation Counsel shall notify the employee in
writing of such determination that the employee is entitled to be
represented by private counsel of his choice. The Corporation Counsel
may require, as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of
such representation, that appropriate groups of such employees be
represented by the same counsel. If the employee or group of
employees is entitled to representation by private counsel under the
provisions of this section, the Corporation Counsel shall so certify
to the Board of Estimate and Contract. Attorneys' fees and litigation
expenses shall be set by a contract at a flat rate to be established by
the Corporation Counsel and shall be paid by the City to such private
counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or
proceeding subject to the certification that the employee is entitled to
representation under the terms and conditions of this section by the
head of the department, commission, division, office or agency in which
such employee is employed.
B.
Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or the
reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by the court upon
motion or by way of a special proceeding. [Added 10-14-1981,
approved 10-15-198121]
C.
Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to
the Corporation Counsel as required by § 50-46 of this article, the
Corporation Counsel shall take the necessary steps, including the
retention of private counsel under the terms and conditions provided in
Subsection B of this section on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of
a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provided for a defense. [Amended 6-10-1981, approved
6-11-1981]
D.
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that former Subsection C be relettered as
Subsection D.
§ 50-44 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-45
1:96
§ 50-46. Conditions.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this article
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Corporation Counsel or his
assistant, at his office, by the employee, of the original or a copy of any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five days
after he is served with such document and the full cooperation of the
employee in the defense of any action or proceeding and in defense of any
action or proceeding against the City based upon the same act of omission
or commission and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be
deemed a request by the employee that the City provide for his defense
pursuant to this article.
§ 50-47. Applicability to employees.
The benefits of this article shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this article be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
The City shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount
of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state or
federal court, board, bureau, agency or commission or in the amount
of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act of omission or
commission from which such judgment or settlement arose occurred
while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage
resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the
employee.
A.
An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Corporation Counsel any proposed settlement which
may be subject to indemnification by the City, and, if not inconsistent
with the provisions of this section, the Corporation Counsel shall certify
such settlement to the Board of Estimate and Contract. The Board of
Estimate and Contract shall review such proposed settlement as to
form and amount and shall give its approval if, in its judgment, the
settlement is in the best interest of the City. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to authorize the City to indemnify or save harmless any
employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by
the Board of Estimate and Contract.
B.
Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy
of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the
Corporation Counsel; and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article, such judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by
the Corporation Counsel to the Board of Estimate and Contract.
C.
§ 50-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-48
1:97
§ 50-48. Rights of insurers.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 50-49. Applicability to actions or proceedings.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 50-50. Effect upon other laws or provisions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions
of this article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon
any unit, entity, officer or employee of the City or any right to defense and/
or indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by,
in accordance with or by reason of any other provisions of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 50-51. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held unconstitutional or invalid in whole or in part by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding of unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall in no way impair any other provisions of this article or the
application of any such provision to any other person or circumstance.
§ 50-48 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-51
1:98
ARTICLE V
Employee Merit Award Board
[Adopted 9-24-1980, approved 9-25-1980]
§ 50-52. Principle and intent.
The basic principle of this article is to reward City employees who have
demonstrated outstanding performance in their work which may have
enhanced the economy or efficiency of the operation of City government.
Accordingly, this City elects to encourage and nourish such employee
incentive by this additional article to Chapter 50 of the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon.
§ 50-53. Members.
Members of the Board shall consist of the Mayor, the Corporation Counsel
and a Councilman selected by the members of the Council.
§ 50-54. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall make rules and regulations to provide for the rewarding of
employees of the City.
§ 50-55. Awards.
The awards by the Board shall consist of additional personal days off with
pay not to exceed three days, and a photograph of said employee with a
citation of his or her accomplishment shall be placed in a prominent place
in the City Hall rotunda.
§ 50-56. Posting of article.
A copy of this article shall be conspicuously displayed by every department
head to disseminate its contents and purpose to all employees.
§ 50-57. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 50-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-57
1:99

ARTICLE VI
Harassment Policy
[Adopted 10-28-1998, approved 10-29-1998; amended in its entirety
9-14-2005, approved 9-15-2005]
§ 50-58. Policy.
Harassment because of race, sex, gender, place of origin, color, ethnic
origin, citizenship, age, sexual orientation, disability or any other legally
protected status is illegal. All City employees, including but not limited to
appointed or elected officials, are forbidden from engaging in any such
activity in any manner. The City of Mount Vernon is committed to providing
a workplace free from any and all forms of harassment or intimidation.
§ 50-59. Definitions and usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
HARASSMENT —
This policy applies to all City employees, including but not limited to
elected or appointed officials, whether related to conduct engaged in
by an employee or someone not directly connected to the City (e.g.,
outside vendors or consultants).
A.
This policy includes, but is not limited to, inappropriate forms of
behavior described below under the definition of "harassment." To
assure compliance with this policy, Commissioners, Deputy
Commissioners and/or any other supervisory or managerial personnel
must take timely and appropriate corrective action when instances
of harassment come to their attention, in consultation with the
Department of Human Resources. [Amended 6-10-2009, approved
6-11-2009]
B.
Appropriate disciplinary action will be taken against any individual who
violates this policy and may include termination.
C.
Employees will be held responsible and accountable for avoiding or
eliminating prohibited conduct.
D.
Retaliation against any individual because he or she has filed a
discrimination or harassment complaint is illegal and will result in
disciplinary action. Intimidation, coercion, threats, reprisals, or
discrimination against any individual resulting from the filing of a
complaint under this policy are all strictly prohibited.
E.
Filing false complaints of harassment, in bad faith, may be the subject
of appropriate disciplinary action, including termination.
F.
When, with the intent to harass, annoy, threaten or alarm another
person, he or she:
A.
§ 50-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-59
1:101
§ 50-60. Procedures.
Either:
Communicates with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by
telephone, mail, e-mail or any other form of written or oral
communication, in a manner likely to cause annoyance or
alarm; or
(a)
Causes a communication to be initiated, by mechanical or
electronic means or otherwise, with a person, anonymously or
otherwise, by telephone, mail, or any other form of written
communication, in a manner likely to cause annoyance or
alarm; or
(b)
(1)
Makes a telephone call or sends an e-mail or a letter, whether
or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate
communication; or
(2)
Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise subjects another to physical
contact, or attempts or threatens to do same, because of a belief
or perception regarding such person's race, color, national origin,
ancestry, gender, religion, religious practice, age, disability or
sexual orientation, regardless of whether the belief or perception
is correct; or
(3)
Follows a person in or about a public or private place or places or
by engaging in a course of conduct or by repeatedly committing
acts which place such person in reasonable fear of physical injury;
or
(4)
Engages in behavior that is not welcome, is or would be offensive
to a person of reasonable sensitivity and sensibilities, and
unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance and
effectiveness, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive
working environment.
(5)
Specific forms of behavior that constitute harassment:
Verbal:
Abusive language, including suggestive, derogatory or
insulting words, sounds, comments, jokes, or threats.
(a)
Any explicit or implicit threat of retribution, or promises of
benefits in return for sexual or any other favors.
(b)
(1)
Physical:
Any contact whatsoever or resulting contact that is not
welcomed, including but not limited to touching, petting,
hitting, grabbing, shoving, striking, kicking or holding.
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 50-59 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-60
1:102
Any person who feels that he or she has been the victim of harassment
is required to immediately report the incident to the Department
Commissioner. (As used hereinafter, this term shall also encompass a
department head.) If reporting to the Commissioner is not practical
or possible, the victim of the harassment shall immediately report the
incident to the department's deputy or other supervisory or managerial
personnel. If such a report is not practical or possible, the victim of the
harassment shall report it directly to the office of the Department of
Human Resources. [Amended 6-10-2009, approved 6-11-2009]
A.
The complaint must be made as promptly as possible and may be
made verbally or in writing. In order to facilitate the processing of the
complaint an employee must submit a complaint form.
B.
C. The complaint must clearly state "Harassment Complaint."
The Department Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, supervisor or
manager in receipt of such a complaint shall promptly forward such
complaint to the Department of Human Resources by delivering it
personally and enclosing such complaint in an envelope only labeled
"Confidential — Department of Human Resources." [Amended
6-10-2009, approved 6-11-2009]
D.
The Department of Human Resources shall confer, if necessary, with
the Corporation Counsel and may hire outside counsel or outside
investigative services. [Amended 6-10-2009, approved 6-11-2009]
E.
F. All complaints will be investigated in a timely manner.
The accused will be afforded an opportunity to present his or her
version of the events.
G.
Both complainant and accused will be given written notice of the
pending investigation and the results of said investigation.
H.
Confidentiality will be maintained to the maximum extent possible,
consistent with the City's obligation to conduct a thorough
investigation.
I.
All individuals requested to be involved in the investigation will be
required and directed to treat the matter confidentially, and a violation
of this directive will, in itself, be grounds for disciplinary action.
J.
Investigation of a complaint will normally include conferring with the
parties involved and any named or apparent witnesses. The particular
facts of the allegation(s) will be examined individually, with a focus
upon the nature of the behavior, the pattern of the conduct, if any, and
the context in which the incident(s) occurred.
K.
Anyone who participates in this procedure may do so without fear of
retaliation. Retaliation against anyone because he or she has filed a
discrimination complaint or has cooperated with an investigation is
illegal and grounds for immediate disciplinary action.
L.
§ 50-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-60
1:103
The Comptroller is directed to distribute a copy of this policy annually
to each member with the first paycheck of each year.
M.
§ 50-60 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-60
1:104
ARTICLE VII
Criminal History Record Search and Fingerprinting for Board of
Water Supply Employees
[Adopted 8-8-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007, approved 8-23-2007]
§ 50-61. Legislative intent.
The City Council finds that to protect the public safety and welfare as an
exercise of its police power, it is necessary to know whether prospective
employees of the Board of Water Supply have a history of criminal activity
which may make them unsuitable as Board of Water Supply employees due
to the nature of such employment or activity.
§ 50-62. Fingerprinting for prospective employees. [Amended
4-23-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008, approved 5-9-2008]
§ 50-63. Convictions precluding employment. [Amended 4-23-2008
by L.L. No. 3-2008, approved 5-9-2008]
If a prospective employee has been convicted of a felony and/or a
misdemeanor, any decision regarding such prospective employee's fitness
for a position must be made upon a review of the factors contained in New
York State Correction Law §§ 751 through 753.
§ 50-64. Responsibilities of Chief of Police.
The Chief of the City of Mount Vernon Police Department, or designee,
shall be responsible for obtaining the fingerprints of said applicants on
the appropriate DCJS cards and forwarding same to said Division with
the appropriate fees for identification processing. Said Chief shall be
responsible for reviewing the criminal history record information provided
by DCJS and ensuring the confidential use of such information only for the
purpose of employment, as applicable.
Any applicant for employment by the Board of Water Supply shall sign
a release authorizing the City to submit such applicant's fingerprinting
to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) and
to receive the results or reports of such criminal history record search.
A.
Further, any applicant shall submit his/her fingerprints on cards
provided for that purpose used by the DCJS. Said fingerprintings shall
be taken by a member or authorized representative of the City of Mount
Vernon Police Department at the time of application and submitted to
said DCJS for processing for criminal record history check:
All prospective employees of the Board of Supply. The requirements
of this section shall apply to prospective employees who apply on
or after March 30, 2008.
(1)
B.
§ 50-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-65
1:105
§ 50-65. Fees.
The applicant shall pay for any fees associated with the criminal history
record search and fingerprinting.
§ 50-65 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-65
1:106
ARTICLE VIII
Anti-Nepotism Policy
[Adopted 12-9-2015, approved 12-10-2015]
§ 50-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
CITY AGENCY — All departments, boards, committees, commissions or
bureaus of the City, but not including the judicial officers of the courts of
the City.
CITY EMPLOYEE — Includes all persons employed by the City full-time
or part-time, including temporary, provisional, classified and unclassified
employees.
CITY OFFICER — Includes all persons elected or appointed to any office of
the City of Mount Vernon established or authorized to be established by the
Charter of the City of Mount Vernon or otherwise by local law, resolution
or ordinance, persons performing services under contract with the City, and
members of City boards, agencies, bureaus, committees, or commissions
who serve with or without pay, but shall not include Commissioners of
Deeds, volunteer firemen or civil defense volunteers.
CLOSE RELATIVE — Includes the parent, spouse, domestic partner,
siblings, children, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, grandparent, grandchild, and
first cousin of a City employee or officer.
This definition also applies whether the relationship is by blood, adoption,
or created by marriage.
DEPARTMENT — Includes agency, bureau, committee, or commission.
§ 50-67. Policy.
As the Code of Ethics prohibits City employees from attempting to
use their positions or influence to obtain financial gain, privilege, or
personal advantage for themselves or for people or firms with whom
they are related or intimately associated, it is the policy of the City
to prevent not only actual conflicts of interests, but to dispel the
appearance of impropriety and nepotism of any sort in all City
contracts, including employment contracts.
A.
In order to maintain order and avoid workplace violence, disruption,
and conflict, employees should not influence the hiring of close relatives
or relations and other family members.
B.
Prohibited employment: Hiring a close relative of a City employee or
officer within the same department and/or within the same chain of
authority shall be prohibited.
C.
§ 50-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-67
1:107
Notwithstanding Subsection C, the best qualified candidate for a
position will be employed.
D.
This policy shall not apply to employees whose hiring precedes the
election and candidacy of a close relative to a City office.
E.
This policy shall not apply to the service of paid-on-call firemen,
auxiliary police officers, any volunteer positions within the City, or any
employee candidates whose employment falls within the jurisdiction of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
F.
This nepotism policy shall be subject to all anti-discrimination
requirements and affirmative action obligations as may be applicable
to the City under federal or state laws or regulations, or with respect
to particular projects. Similarly, this nepotism policy is subject to all
federal and state laws, including civil service laws.
G.
H. This policy shall take effect immediately.
§ 50-67 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 50-67
1:108
Chapter 53
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCE
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 53-1. Creation.
A Planning Board of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby created pursuant to
Article 3 of the General City Law.
§ 53-2. Organization.
§ 53-3. Powers and duties.
Membership. The Planning Board, as heretofore established by the City
Council pursuant to § 27 of the General City Law of the State of New
York, is hereby maintained. The Planning Board shall consist of seven
members.
A.
Meetings and records. The presence of four members of the Board shall
be necessary for a quorum, and the concurring vote of four members
shall be necessary to effect any decision before the Board. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
on every question or, if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. Every rule, determination, regulation, amendment or
appeal thereof, and every order, requirement and decision of the Board
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board.
B.
General. The Planning Board shall have all of the powers and duties
prescribed by General City Law and by this chapter, which powers and
duties are summarized and more particularly specified in the following,
provided that none of the following sections shall be deemed to any of
tie powers of the Planning Board that are conferred by the General City
Law. In passing upon any matter before it, the Board shall take into
specific consideration the goals as well as the specific standards of this
chapter.
A.
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board may adopt such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary and proper to the performance of its
powers and duties hereunder and may amend or repeal the same.
B.
Amendments. Amendments to the rules and regulations adopted for the
governance and procedures of the Board shall be made in the form of a
resolution to place such amendments on the next agenda of the Board.
No changes shall take effect until placed upon such agenda, reviewed
C.
§ 50-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:109
by the City staff and adopted pursuant to these regulations and any
requirements of applicable local and state law.
Subdivision control. The Planning Board is authorized to approve any
change of lot line, except where only the dimensions of two existing lots
are changed and additional building lots are not created, as more fully
set out in § 267-12 of the City of Mount Vernon's Municipal Code and in
accordance with Article 3, § 28-a(5), of General City Law.
D.
Site plan review. The Planning Board is authorized to approve the
construction or enlargement of any principal use, other than a one-,
two- or three-family dwelling where such dwelling is permitted by right
and where the natural grade is not changed by more than four feet at
any point on the site, and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for any change of use or occupancy which would result in an increase in
the requirement for off-street parking or loading spaces in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 267, Article VIII, of the Zoning Code and
as more fully set out in Chapter 267, § 267-31, of the City of Mount
Vernon's Municipal Code.
E.
Special use permit review. The Planning Board is hereby authorized to
regulate the conformity of uses for which additional requirements are
mandated as identified in Chapter 267, Article VI.
F.
Official Map. The Planning Board is empowered to review and
recommend changes to the Official Map pursuant to Article 3, § 29, of
General City Law.
G.
Master plan. The Planning Board is empowered to review and
recommend the Master Plan pursuant to Article 3, § 28-a(5), of General
City Law.
H.
Recommendations.
Recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning
Board may make recommendations to the Zoning Board on use/
area variance applications regarding the assessment of the
arrangement, layout and design of a proposed use of a single parcel
of land.
(1)
Recommendations to The City Council. The Planning Board is
empowered to review and make recommendations on matter or
class of matters referred to the Board by the City Council prior
to final action by the City Council being taken on said matter(s)
pursuant to Article 3, § 27, Subdivision 14, of General City Law.
(2)
Recommendations to the Real Estate Committee. The Planning
Board will make recommendations to the Real Estate Committee on
the disposition of City owned property.
(3)
I.
J. Ancillary powers.
§ 53-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 53-3
1:110
§ 53-4. Procedure.
Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans as
required by City Council, state or federal regulation pursuant to
§ 236 of General Municipal Law.
(1)
Perform such other advisory duties pursuant to § 236 of General
Municipal Law.
(2)
Conditions and safeguards. The Planning Board may prescribe such
conditions or restrictions applying to the granting of site plans,
subdivisions and special use permits as it deems necessary in each
specific case in order to minimize the adverse effects of such
developments upon other property in the neighborhood and to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions or restrictions
shall be incorporated in the building permit and certificate of
occupancy. Failure to comply with such conditions or restrictions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and may constitute the basis for
denial or revocation of a building permit or certificate of occupancy and
for all other applicable remedies.
K.
Application. All applications to the Board shall be made by the owner
or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on forms prescribed
by the Board. Each application shall fully set forth the circumstances
of the case, shall refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved
and shall exactly set forth, as the case may be, the details of any and all
waivers or deviations that are applied for and the grounds for which it
is claimed that the same should be granted.
A.
Review by other agencies. Upon a receipt of a completed application,
the Planning Board shall forward copies for review and report such
to the Planning Department, Building Department, Fire Department,
Police Department, Department of Public Works and any other officials
and agencies as it deems appropriate. In addition, copies shall be
forwarded with a notice of public hearing to the Westchester County
Planning Board and to the clerks of abutting municipalities when
required by law.
B.
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing
on any application or request made pursuant to this chapter. The
deliberations of the Board shall be conducted publicly and all votes on
any matter before the Board must be taken at a public meeting.
Publication in the official newspaper. The applicant shall give
public notice of such hearing and of the substance of the
application shall be given by publication in the City's official
newspaper at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. The
applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting
that such notification was completed.
(1)
C.
§ 53-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:111
§ 53-5. Certificate of failure of Planning Board to take action.
The City Clerk is hereby specified as the officer who shall issue in behalf
of the City the certificate of failure of the Planning Board to take action as
prescribed in § 32 of the General City Law.
§ 53-6. Reapplication.
After an application has been decided, no matter presented to the Planning
Board shall again be presented to or entertained by said Board within a
period of three years from the date of such decision or determination or, if
renewed by the courts, within the same period after the final adjudication
thereof, except upon a showing by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board, that there has been a material change in the circumstances
under consideration in the original proceeding.
§ 53-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Mailing to abutting and adjacent property owners. The applicant
must notify all property owners in an affected area as determined
by the Board, but, at a minimum, the applicant shall notify all
property owners within 250 feet of any boundary of the property
which is the subject of an application for all single-, two- and
three-family properties and must notify any property owners within
500 feet of any boundary of the property which is the subject
of an application for all multifamily, nonresidentially zoned and
nonresidential uses. Such notice shall be given by registered mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to such
property owners whose names appear as the owners of record in
the office of the Assessor of their respective municipality. Such
notice shall be mailed not more than 21 days prior to and not less
than 10 days before the date of the public hearing. The applicant
shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
property owners were so notified.
(2)
Sign posting. A sign as prescribed in the Planning Board's rules
and regulations shall be posted along all street frontages of the
subject site at least 14 days prior to the hearing date. The applicant
shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
notification was completed.
(3)
Affidavit submission. All required affidavits shall be filed not less
than nine days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(4)
Action. Every decision of the Planning Board shall be by resolution,
shall be recorded and shall fully set forth the facts of the case and the
findings and conclusions on which it was based. Such resolution shall
be prepared. Such decision shall be made within 62 days of the date of
the public hearing.
D.
§ 53-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 53-7
1:112
Chapter 56
POLICE AND FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
§ 56-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean and include:
BASIC ANNUAL SALARY — The annual salary as fixed and determined
annually for officers and members of the Police and Fire Departments by
resolution of the Board of Estimate and Contract of the City of Mount
Vernon, but not including the cost-of-living adjustment compensation fixed
therein. No part of said cost-of-living adjustment compensation shall be
regarded as part of the basic annual salary, and such cost-of-living
adjustment compensation shall not be deemed to change or increase the
basic annual salary of any member of this fund.[Added 6-14-1950 by L.L.
No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950; amended 5-28-1952 by L.L. No.
1-1952, approved 6-16-1952]
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees hereinafter provided for in
§ 56-3.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety and the Fire
Commissioner.
FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION — The highest average basic annual
salary, including the cost-of-living adjustment compensation, earned by a
member during any five consecutive years of service.[Added 5-28-1952 by
L.L. No. 1-1952, approved 6-16-1952]
FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND — The pension fund for the paid officers and
members of the uniformed force of the Fire Department of the City of
Mount Vernon existing prior to the time when this chapter shall take effect,
pursuant to Chapter 432 of the Laws of 1914, as amended by Local Law No.
2 for the year 1932.
FORCE — The police force and the uniformed force of the paid Fire
Department of the City.
MEMBER — A person who was a member of the police force in the
Department of Public Safety or a paid officer or paid member or a
probationary paid member of the uniformed force of the Fire Department of
the City of Mount Vernon at the time when this chapter shall take effect.
PENSION FUND — Except where otherwise specifically designated, the
Mount Vernon Police and Paid Firemen's Pension Fund.
POLICE PENSION FUND — The Police Pension Fund for the police force of
the City of Mount Vernon existing prior to the time when this chapter shall
take effect, pursuant to Chapter 375 of the Laws of 1902, as amended by
Chapter 81 of the Laws of 1919, Local Law No. 3 for the year 1928, Local
Law No. 3 for the year 1930, Local Law No. 3 for the year 1932 and Local
Law No. 1 for the year 1935.
§ 53-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:113
WIDOW — Surviving spouse married to a member prior to and at the time
of his retirement on a pension or at the time of death while in active service
in either of said departments.
§ 56-2. Consolidation of funds.
The Police Pension Fund for the police force of the City existing pursuant
to Chapter 375 of the Laws of 1902, as amended, and the pension fund
for the paid officers and members of the Fire Department of the City
existing pursuant to Chapter 432 of the Laws of 1914, as amended, are
hereby consolidated into one pension fund to be known as "Mount Vernon
Police and Paid Firemen's Pension Fund." The said Police Pension Fund and
pension fund for the paid officers and members of the Fire Department
of the City are continued as herein consolidated and provided for in this
chapter.
§ 56-3. Board of Trustees.
The pension fund shall be controlled and administered by a Board of
Trustees, which shall, subject to the provisions of law, establish rules
and regulations for the administration and transaction of the business
of such fund and for the control and disposition thereof. Such Board
shall consist of:
The Mayor, who shall be the Chairman of the Board, with a vote
thereon.
(1)
(2) The Comptroller, who shall be the Treasurer of the fund.
A member of the police force of the City chosen from the members
of the pension fund by the members of such fund in the police
force. At such time when there is no member of the police force
who is a member of the pension fund, this Trustee shall be the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
(3)
A paid fireman in the Fire Department of the City designated from
the members of the pension fund by the members of such fund in
the Fire Department. At such time when there is no paid fireman
in the Fire Department who is a member of the pension fund, this
Trustee shall be the Fire Commissioner.
(4)
A citizen of the City appointed by the City Council of the City for a
period of five years and who shall serve without compensation.
(5)
A.
The foregoing Board of Trustees shall be the successor to the respective
Trustees and Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund and the
Firemen's Pension Fund merged into the pension fund under this
chapter.
B.
Every act of the Board of Trustees shall be by resolution which shall
be adopted by at least a majority vote of all the members of the Board,
except that all acts on the part of the Board of Trustees in relation to the
C.
§ 56-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-3
1:114
investment of funds shall be upon the unanimous vote of the members
of the Board present.
The Board of Trustees shall receive all moneys applicable to the pension
fund and deposit the same to the credit of such fund in banks or trust
companies to be selected by it and continue to receive and deposit
the funds applicable to the same, as received, to the credit of such
fund and to invest the same only in such investments as savings banks
are authorized by the laws of the State of New York to make, except
as hereinafter provided, as such Board of Trustees may deem most
advantageous for the object of such fund, and such Board of Trustees
shall have the power to make all necessary contracts and to take all
necessary remedies and proceedings in the premises. The Board of
Trustees is empowered to make payment from such fund, or otherwise,
as hereinafter provided, of pensions granted in pursuance of this
chapter. Investments in bonds and mortgages, except those which the
Federal Housing Administration has insured or has made a commitment
to insure, shall be limited to loans not in excess of $20,000 each,
secured by mortgages on improved, unencumbered real property in
Westchester County used for nontransient residential purposes. If the
purpose of any such loan is to purchase improved real property, the
amount of such loan shall not exceed 75% of the appraised value or
the purchase price being paid, whichever is less; if the purpose of any
such loan is refinancing of improved real property, the amount of such
loan shall not exceed 75% of the appraised value or the last purchase
price paid, whichever is less. The lien of the mortgage held by the
pension fund on any such loan shall be superior to all other interests in
the real property except taxes and assessments duly levied against the
property. No investment shall be made in loans secured by mortgage
on real estate when the total amount of such investments held by
the pension fund exceeds, or by the making of such investment will
exceed, 50% of the assets of the fund. [Amended 11-12-1959 by L.L.
No. 3-1959, approved 12-4-1959; 7-28-1965 by L.L. No. 3-1965,
approved 8-11-1965]
D.
No payment whatever shall be allowed to be made by the Board of
Trustees as reward, gratuity or compensation to any person or persons
for salary or service rendered to or for said Board, except payment
for legal, appraisal, clerical and auditing services. The Board shall
have power to incur other expenses than rewards, gratuities or
compensation, as aforesaid, necessary to the administration of the fund.
E.
On or before the first day of February of each year, the Board of
Trustees shall make a detailed verified report to the City Council and
Board of Estimate and Contract of the City of the condition of the
pension fund, how invested and the items, and the disbursements of
and an account of the same. Said report shall include a full and detailed
statement of the actual income of the pension fund for the preceding
calendar year.
F.
§ 56-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-3
1:115
§ 56-4. Composition of pension fund.
The pension fund shall consist of the following:
The First Deputy Comptroller shall be Secretary to the Board of
Trustees. [Added by L.L. No. 1-1960, approved 5-9-1960]
G.
The capital, interest, income, dividends, cash deposits, securities and
credits in the Police Pension Fund and the Firemen's Pension Fund at
the time when this chapter shall take effect.
A.
A sum of money equal to 6% of the semimonthly proportion of the
highest basic annual salary and cost-of-living adjustment compensation
of each member of the police force and paid officer and paid member
or probationary paid member of the uniformed force of the Fire
Department entitled to membership in the pension fund, which sum
shall be deducted semimonthly by the Comptroller from the basic
annual salary and cost-of-living adjustment compensation of each such
member and forthwith paid to the Board of Trustees of the pension
fund. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to such
deductions and shall receipt in full for his basic annual salary and costof-
living adjustment compensation, and payment less such deductions
shall be full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and
demands whatsoever for the services rendered by such member during
the period covered by such payment, except his claim to the benefits
to which he may be entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950;
5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved 6-16-1952]
B.
Such sum or sums as the Board of Estimate and Contract shall
determine annually or more often to be necessary for the proper
maintenance and operation of the Police and Paid Firemen's Pension
Fund shall be appropriated by the City of Mount Vernon and included
in the annual estimate and in the annual general tax levy, and the
Comptroller shall pay over the moneys so appropriated each year to the
Board of Trustees of the pension fund. [Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L.
No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952,
approved 6-16-52, 2-10-1954 by L.L. No. 1-1954, approved
3-27-1954; 12-17-1960 by L.L. No. 17-1960, approved
12-30-1960]
C.
All rewards in money, fees, gifts, testimonials and emoluments that may
be paid or given for extraordinary services by any members, except
such as have been or shall be allowed by the Commissioner to be
retained by such member or members and such as have been or shall
be given to endow a medal or other permanent or competitive reward.
D.
All gifts, grants, devises or bequests to such fund of any money, real or
personal property, right of property or other valuable thing.
E.
§ 56-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-4
1:116
§ 56-5. Limit of City's liability. [Amended 12-17-1960 by L.L. No.
18-1960, approved 12-30-1960]
The liability of the City to contribute to the pension fund and for the
payment of any benefits thereunder shall be confined to such sums as are
hereinabove provided for in § 56-4C, F and G of the preceding section,
and the City shall not be liable beyond said sums. Nothing in this chapter
contained shall be construed as in any manner binding or holding the City
for any pension or other moneys payable from the pension fund beyond the
amounts hereinabove provided in said § 56-4C, F and G.
§ 56-6. Membership.
No member of the police force or paid Fire Department of the City
appointed after this chapter shall take effect, except probationary members
who shall have been appointed for the probationary period prior to the time
when this chapter shall take effect, shall be or become a member of any
pension system of the City or shall be required to pay any money or part of
any salary or compensation to a City pension fund, and no such person, his
widow, children or dependents shall be entitled to receive or be granted or
paid any pensions, annuity, allowance or moneys from such pension fund.
§ 56-7. Payment of benefits upon disability or retirement.
If the amount of the actual income of the fund received from
investments shall not equal 3% of the moneys invested, the City shall
provide a sum equal to but not greater than the difference between
the amount which would have been received during such year had
the moneys invested earned an income of 3% and the actual income
received. Such difference shall be determined annually at the close of
each fiscal year and certified by the Board of Trustees to the Board
of Estimate and Contract and the City Council of the City and shall
be included in the following annual estimate and tax levy after such
certification, and the Comptroller shall pay over the moneys so
appropriated to the Board of Trustees of the pension fund. [Amended
6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950; 12-17-1960
by L.L. No. 17-1960, approved 12-30-1960]
F.
In addition to all other payments, commencing January 1, 1966, the City
of Mount Vernon shall pay a sum of money equal to 6% of the basic
annual salary of each member of the police force and paid officer or
paid member of the uniformed firemen of the Fire Department entitled
to membership in the pension fund, which sum shall be paid by the
Comptroller to the Board of Trustees of the pension fund in the same
manner as other payments are made by the City, and the payments
required to be made under § 56-4B shall be reduced accordingly.
[Added 12-17-1960 by L.L. No. 18-1960, approved 12-30-1960;
amended 4-20-1966 by L.L. No. 1-1966, approved 5-4-1966]
G.
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:117
Upon the recommendation in writing of the Commissioner, the Board
of Trustees shall retire any member who, upon an examination as
provided hereinafter in this section, may be found to be disqualified,
physically or mentally, for the performance of his duties. Such member
so retired shall receive from said pension fund an annual allowance
or pension as provided in this section. In every case such Board shall
determine the circumstances thereof, and such pension or allowance
so allowed is to be in lieu of any salary received by such member
at the time of his being so retired. The Department or the City shall
not be liable for the payment of any claim or demand for services
thereafter rendered, and the amount of such pension or allowance shall
be determined upon the following conditions:
In case of total permanent disability at any time caused in or
induced by the actual performance of the duties of his position,
the amount of annual pension to be allowed shall be 3/4 of the
final average compensation received by such member during his
service as a member of the Police or Fire Department of the City.
[Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved
6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved
6-16-1952; 1-11-1961 by L.L. No. 1-1961, approved
1-25-1961]
(1)
In case of partial permanent disability at any time caused in or
induced by the actual performance of the duties of his position
which disqualifies him only from performing active duty in the
force, the member so disabled may be relieved by the
Commissioner from active service and assigned to the performance
of such light duties as the Police Surgeon in the case of the
members of the police force, or a medical officer ordered by the
Fire Commissioner in the case of a member of the uniformed force
of the paid Fire Department, may certify him to be qualified to
perform, or he shall be retired by the Board of Trustees upon the
written recommendation of the Commissioner at 3/4 of his final
average compensation received by him during his service in the
Police or Fire Department, on a medical examination showing that
his disability is permanent. [Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L. No.
2-1950, approved 6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952,
approved 6-16-1952; 1-11-1961 by L.L. No. 1-1961, approved
1-25-1961]
(2)
In case of total permanent disability not caused in or induced by
the actual performance of the duties of his position which shall
occur after the expiration of five years' service but prior to the
expiration of 10 years' service in such Department, the amount of
the annual pension to be allowed shall be 1/3 of the final average
compensation received by such member during his service in the
Department but not less than $2,000 per annum. In case such total
permanent disability shall occur after the expiration of 10 years'
service in such Department, the amount of the annual pension to
(3)
A.
§ 56-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-7
1:118
be allowed shall be 1/2 of the final average compensation received
by such member during his service in the Department but not
less than $2,000 per annum. [Amended 9-23-1942 by L.L. No.
4-1942, approved 10-7-1942; 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950,
approved 6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved
6-16-1952; 9-25-1963 by L.L. No. 3-1963, approved
10-9-1963]
In case of partial permanent disability not caused in or induced
by the actual performance of the duties of his position which may
occur after five years' service in such Department, the member so
disabled may be relieved by the Commissioner from active service
but shall remain a member of the force subject to the rules
governing such force and be assigned to the performance of such
duties as the Police Surgeon in the case of police officers, or the
medical officer ordered by the Fire Commissioner in the case of
paid officers or paid firemen, may certify him to be qualified to
perform, or if such member be retired by the Board of Trustees
after the expiration of five years' service but prior to the expiration
of 10 years' service in such Department, the amount of annual
pension to be paid to such member shall be 1/3 of the final average
compensation received by such member during his service in the
Department. If such member is retired by the Board of Trustees
after the expiration of 10 years' service in such Department, the
annual pension to be paid to such member shall be 1/2 of the
final average compensation received by such member during his
service in the Department. [Amended 9-23-1942 by L.L. No.
4-1942, approved 10-7-1942; 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950,
approved 6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved
6-16-1952]
(4)
No member shall receive or draw any benefit for total or partial
permanent disability not caused in or induced by the actual
performance of the duties of his position which may occur before
the expiration of five years' service in the Department.
(5)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be
compulsory for a member to retire upon reaching the age of 65 years.
B.
Any member who shall have performed service in the police force or
as a paid officer or paid member of the uniformed force of the Fire
Department of the City for at least 25 years, upon his own application
in writing, shall be, or upon the written recommendation of the
Commissioner, may be, retired from such force and service and be
placed on the roll of the pension fund and awarded and granted, to be
paid from such fund, an annual pension during his lifetime of an amount
equal to 1/2 his annual compensation earnable upon the date of his
retirement but not less than $2,250 per annum. Said minimum sum of
$2,250 shall be payable to those members who have already retired or
who shall hereafter retire. [Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950,
approved 6-29-1950; 5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved
C.
§ 56-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:119
6-16-1952; 9-25-1963 by L.L. No. 3-1963, approved 10-9-1963;
8-10-1966 by L.L. No. 3-1966, approved 8-23-1966; 12-14-1966
by L.L. No. 7-1966, approved 12-30-1966]
All medical examinations required by or made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the Police Surgeon
in connection with members of the police force, and by a medical
examiner ordered by the Fire Commissioner in connection with paid
officers and paid members of the uniformed force of the Fire
Department, who are members of the pension fund; provided, however,
that any member, within 30 days after receipt of the decision of such
Police Surgeon or medical examiner, as the case may be, may request
in writing that the decision of such Police Surgeon or medical examiner
be reviewed by a special medical board which shall consist of such
Surgeon or medical examiner and a doctor selected and compensated
by such member. The decision of such special board shall supersede
the decision of such Police Surgeon or medical examiner. In the event
that the two doctors of the special board shall disagree, a recognized
specialist on the condition, disease or injury for which such member
has been examined or for which disability is claimed shall be selected
by such doctors to be a third member of the special board. The decision
of a majority of the three members of such special board shall be
final and conclusive as to the matters involved in such examination.
The specialist selected by the two doctors of the special board shall
be compensated by the City. Such compensation shall be fixed by the
Board of Estimate and Contract.
D.
The Board of Trustees shall have the power to grant, award or pay
a pension on account of physical or mental disability or disease, only
upon a certificate of the surgeon or medical officer, as the case may
be, after examination as provided in Subsection D of this section. Such
certificate shall set forth the cause, nature and extent of the disability,
disease or injury of such member.
E.
Every member hereafter retired on a pension under and pursuant
to this section shall submit to examination by the Police Surgeon in
the case of police officers, or the medical officer in the case of paid
officers or paid firemen of the uniformed force, from time to time
whenever required to do so by the Board of Trustees. If said Police
Surgeon or medical examiner, as the case may be, shall certify to the
Board that the member's disability has ended and that such member
is again able to perform active service, the member's pension shall,
as soon thereafter as there is a vacant position on the force of the
kind held by such member at the time of his retirement, cease or be
suspended, as the Board of Trustees may by resolution determine; and
the said member shall thereupon be restored to active duty by order
of the Commissioner, with the same force and effect as if such member
had never been pensioned or certified for disability. The provisions of
Subsection D of this section shall also apply to such case hereinabove
provided in this subsection.
F.
§ 56-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-7
1:120
No pension shall be awarded or granted on account of the physical or
mental disability or disease when disability or disease is caused by the
culpable negligence or misconduct of the disabled or diseased member.
G.
The granting of a pension on severance from service for fault or
delinquency shall not be a matter of right, but a pension may be granted
in consideration of special circumstances by the Board of Trustees
and a vote of at least 2/3 of all the members of such Board. No
member who shall otherwise be entitled to retirement and the granting
of a pension shall be entitled to a pension as a matter of right if
such retirement is applied for during the pendency of charges brought
against such member while performing active service in the force for
fault or delinquency.
H.
The terms "total permanent disability" and "partial permanent
disability," as used in this section, may be defined in the rules and
regulations of the Board of Trustees.
I.
Except as otherwise provided, the pensions granted under this section
shall be for the life of the pensioner and shall not be revoked, repealed
or diminished. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, in no
event shall any pension allowed or granted under this chapter exceed
an amount equal to 1/2 the annual compensation earnable upon the
date of retirement plus an additional pension of 1/60 of his or her
final compensation as additional retirement benefits for each year of
additional service only as provided for in Subsection N of this section.
[Amended 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950;
5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved 6-16-1952; 1-11-1961
by L.L. No. 2-1961, approved 1-25-1961; 12-14-1966 by L.L. No.
7-1966, approved 12-30-1966]
J.
In computing the 25 or more years of service of a member, full credit
shall be given and full allowance shall be made for service of such
member for the period he served as a member of the Armed Forces
of the United States within the period commencing July 1, 1940, and
terminating December 31, 1946, if such member has been honorably
discharged or released under honorable circumstances and who was at
the time of his entrance into the Armed Forces of the United States a
member of his pension fund. Contributions heretofore paid by any such
member into this pension fund in order to receive credit for service
in World War II for the period aforestated shall be treated as excess
contributions, and such contributions may be withdrawn by a member
at any time prior to retirement. [Added 11-26-1947 by L.L. No.
4-1947, approved 12-8-1947]
K.
Any member resigning or being dismissed for any reason whatsoever
before being eligible to receive a pension hereunder shall have all
moneys, without interest, contributed by such member to the pension
fund returned to him. [Added 6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950,
approved 6-29-1950]
L.
§ 56-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:121
§ 56-8. Payment of benefits upon death.
Any member dying before being eligible to receive a pension hereunder
and having no dependent widow, father, mother, child, brother or sister
shall have all moneys, without interest, contributed by such member
to the pension fund returned to his estate. [Added 6-14-1950 by L.L.
No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950]
M.
Final compensation. [Added 1-11-1961 by L.L. No. 2-1961,
approved 1-25-1961]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FINAL COMPENSATION — The highest average annual
compensation earned during any three consecutive years for
services as a member of the police force or a paid member of
the uniformed force of the Fire Department of the City of Mount
Vernon.[Amended 12-23-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1976, approved
1-5-1976]
MINIMUM PERIOD — A period of 25 years as prescribed by
Subsection C of this section.
(1)
Notwithstanding any other provisions herein and in lieu of any
lesser amount provided herein, effective March 24, 1960, in the
event that a member of the police force or a paid officer or paid
member of the uniformed force of the Fire Department of the
City of Mount Vernon has served as such for his minimum period
and thereafter continues in such service upon his subsequent
retirement, there shall be added to the amount of the annual
pension or retirement allowance to which a member of the police
force or a paid officer or paid member of the uniformed force of the
Fire Department was entitled upon completion of such minimum
period an additional amount computed at the rate of 1/60 of such
policeman's or fireman's final compensation for each year of such
additional service.
(2)
N.
The Board of Trustees of the pension fund shall grant pensions out of
said pension fund as follows:
To the widow, if any, or other dependent of any member of the
force killed while in the actual performance of police or fire duty,
as the case may be, and by reason of the performance of such
duty, without fault or misconduct on his part, or who shall have
died from the effect of injuries received in the actual discharge of
such duty, a sum equal to 1/2 of the final average compensation
received by such member during his service as a member of the
Police or Fire Department of the City. If there be also any child or
children of such member under the age of 16 years, then the said
sum may be divided between said widow and child or children or
other dependent in such proportions and in such manner as the
(1)
A.
§ 56-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-8
1:122
said Board of Trustees may determine, the granting or refusing
of any pensions under this subsection to any person other than
the dependent widow, father, mother, child, brother or sister to
rest entirely in the discretion of the Board of Trustees. [Amended
6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950;
5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved 6-16-1952]
To any child or children under 16 years of age of such member
killed or dying as aforesaid in the performance of duty but leaving
no widow, a sum equal to 1/2 of the final average compensation
received by such member during his service as a member of the
Police or Fire Department of the City, which shall be apportioned
among several children, if there be more than one, as determined
by the Board of Trustees of the pension fund. [Amended
6-14-1950 by L.L. No. 2-1950, approved 6-29-1950;
5-28-1952 by L.L. No. 1-1952, approved 6-16-195222]
(2)
To the widow of any member of the force who shall die of natural
causes after five years on said force or who shall have been retired
on a pension, if there be no child or children of any such member
under 16 years of age, effective January 1, 1962, a sum not
exceeding $900 per annum, and effective January 1, 1963, a sum
not exceeding $1,200 per annum; for the year 1971, a
supplemental allowance of $300 payable as soon as practicable,
and effective January 1, 1972, and thereafter, a sum not exceeding
$1,800 per annum, and effective January 1, 1973, and thereafter, a
monthly sum computed at a rate not exceeding $2,400 per annum,
but if there be any child of such member under the age aforesaid,
then the said sum may be divided between such widow and child
or children in such proportions and in such manner as the Board
of Trustees may determine. [Amended 10-11-1961 by L.L. No.
55-1961, approved 10-26-1961; 7-1-1971 by L.L. No. 7-1971,
approved 7-13-1971; 1-12-1972 by L.L. No. 2-1972, approved
1-27-1972; 12-27-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1973, approved
1-12-1973]
(3)
To the person depending for support on such member dying of
natural causes as aforesaid, leaving no widow or child, a sum to be
paid in such manner as the Board of Trustees may direct, not to
exceed an aggregate of $600 per annum to all such dependents of
any member dying as aforesaid.
(4)
Pensions to widows shall terminate upon the death or remarriage of
the widow, and pensions to children shall terminate when each shall
respectively arrive at the age of 16 years or upon the death or marriage
B.
22.Editor's Note: L.L. No. 1-1952, adopted 5-28-1952 and approved 6-16-1952, as amended by
L.L. No. 2-1952, adopted 9-10-1952 and approved 9-25-1952, stated that the benefits
provided in the preceding sections of the local law should be applicable to any member
who had retired subsequent to January 1, 1952, and who had made or thereafter made the
necessary contributions to said fund, but should not be applicable to any member in
retirement from service on a pension or retirement allowance prior to January 1, 1952.
§ 56-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-8
1:123
§ 56-9. Method of payment.
All pensions and allowances payable out of the pension fund pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be paid in equal monthly installments, each
1/12 in amount of the sum allowed as the annual pension or allowance or in
ratably smaller amounts when the benefit begins after the first day of the
month or ends before the last day of the month.
§ 56-10. Deductions. [Added 5-24-1961 by L.L. No. 53-1961,
approved 6-6-1961]
A member may authorize the Trustees to pay premiums on his City health
insurance coverage by delivering to the Secretary of the Board of Trustees,
in person or by mail, a notice of election in writing, on a form to be furnished
by the Comptroller, authorizing the Trustees to make monthly deductions
from such member's retirement allowance of the amount required to pay his
premium for City health insurance coverage.
§ 56-11. Accrued rights.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to deprive any person of any
accrued right to benefits in the Police Pension Fund or the Firemen's
Pension Fund existing immediately prior to the date on which this chapter
takes effect, and any such right shall be allowed in accordance with the
provisions of law then in force.
§ 56-12. Remaining assets.
Any assets of the pension fund remaining after all pensions, benefits and
other liabilities of the fund, as provided under this chapter, shall have been
paid and discharged, shall thereupon become the property of the City and
shall be turned over to the City Comptroller for payment into the City
treasury.
§ 56-13. Penalty for false information; exemption of funds.
of the child; pensions to dependent parents shall terminate at death. If
such payment to the widow of such member shall cease by reason of her
death or remarriage, the said Board shall make payment to the child
or children or dependent parent or parents of such member, if any, as
though he had died without leaving a widow surviving him.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Board of Trustees of the pension
fund is hereby authorized to administer oaths and take
acknowledgments, and any person who shall willfully swear falsely
in any oath or affirmation in obtaining or procuring any pension or
payments thereof under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
perjury.
A.
Every person who knowingly or willfully procures the taking or
presentation of any false affidavit or affirmation concerning any claim
B.
§ 56-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 56-13
1:124
§ 56-14. Errors in payment.
Any person who shall knowingly make any false statement or who shall
falsify or permit to be falsified any record or records of this pension fund
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Should any change or error of records
result in any member or beneficiary receiving from the pension fund more
or less than he would have been entitled to receive otherwise, on the
discovery of any such error such Board shall correct such error and, as
far as practicable, shall adjust future payments in such a manner that the
equivalent of the benefit to which he was entitled shall be paid.
§ 56-15. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 56-16. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended or shall be construed as
creating any officers' or employees' retirement system.
§ 56-17. Prior commitments.
for pension thereof shall in every such case forfeit a sum not exceeding
$250, to be sued for and recovered by and in the name of the Board
of Trustees. The amount so recovered, exclusive of costs, shall be paid
over and become a part of the pension fund.
The moneys, securities and effects of the pension fund and all pensions
granted and payable from said pension fund shall be and are exempt
from execution and from all process and proceedings to enjoin and
recover the same by or on behalf of any creditor or any person having
or asserting any claim against or debt or liability of any pensioner of
said fund.
C.
Where any bond or undertaking has been given to or in favor of the
people of the State of New York, the City, the Police Pension Fund or
the Firemen's Pension Fund, such bond and undertaking shall not in
any manner be impaired but shall continue in full force until the Board
of Trustees of the pension fund as defined in this chapter shall have
adopted rules and regulations with respect to the furnishing of such
bonds and undertakings, and the powers of the Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund and the Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund
shall hereafter be exercised and discharged by the Board of Trustees of
the pension fund as defined in this chapter.
A.
§ 56-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-17
1:125
§ 56-18. Repealer.
Chapter 375 of the Laws of 1902, entitled "An Act to Provide for a Police
Pension Fund for the Police Force of the City of Mount Vernon," as amended
by Chapter 81 of the Laws of 1919, by Local Laws No. 3 for the year 1928,
No. 3 for the year 1930, No. 3 for the year 1932 and No. 1 for the year
1935, and Chapter 432 of the Laws of 1914, entitled "An Act to Establish a
Pension Fund for the Paid Officers and Members of the Fire Department of
the City of Mount Vernon," as amended by Local Law No. 2 of 1932, and all
parts thereof, insofar as inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, are
hereby repealed.
§ 56-19. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 45 days after its adoption, pursuant to the
provisions of the City Home Rule Law.
Chapter 58
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Shall be deemed to refer to any one of the
following: the laying out, opening, constructing, extending, widening,
altering, straightening, altering of grade, grading, regrading, paving,
surfacing, narrowing and discontinuing of public streets, the construction
and altering of drains, gutters, crosswalks, sidewalks and curbs in the
public streets, laying out, opening, enlarging, improving and ornamenting
public squares and parks and acquiring the land necessary therefor; the
constructing, reconstructing, extension and alteration of public sewers and
drains within or without the limits of the City; the construction of bridges,
arches and culverts and the extension of mains and pipes and
appurtenances for the supplying of water for public purposes and for
private consumption; the construction, reconstruction, extension and
enlargement of off-street parking spaces, lots, garages or facilities, the
construction of buildings, structures, garages, spaces or facilities for offstreet
parking purposes for the relief of traffic congestion and the
Where any contract has been entered into by the Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund or Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund prior
to the time of taking effect of this chapter, such contracts shall not
in any manner be impaired but shall continue in full force, and the
powers conferred and the duties imposed with reference to the same
upon such Trustees and Board of Trustees shall hereafter be exercised
and discharged by the Board of Trustees of the pension fund as defined
in this chapter.
B.
§ 56-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 58-1
1:126
acquisition of real property or any interest therein necessary for or
incidental to the construction or operation of parking garages, parking
spaces or parking facilities for such purpose; the acquisition of real
property, rights-of-way or any interest therein which may be required or
necessary in connection with the construction of state arterial highways
within the City limits as well as the cost of preparing any such real property
so acquired for such public use.
§ 58-2. Content of public improvement ordinance.
An ordinance authorizing a public improvement shall contain:
§ 58-3. Supervision.
All public improvements shall be executed under the supervision and
control of the Commissioner of Public Works. Upon the completion of each
local improvement, the Commissioner of Public Works shall immediately
notify the City Council, Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation and the
Comptroller.
§ 58-4. Statement of cost; apportionment and assessment.
Upon receipt of notice of the completion of a public improvement, the
Comptroller shall cause to be prepared a statement of the entire cost
thereof, including any interest paid or accrued at the time of the
computation on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the City to
pay the expenses of such public improvement and interest on the total
amount computed to the time at which the assessment or first installment
thereof becomes due. Such statement shall thereupon be presented to
the City Council, and the City Council shall consider the said statement
presented by the Comptroller and shall, by ordinance, fix the total cost for
the public improvement and direct the Commissioner of Assessment and
Taxation to prepare the proper assessment roll and report to apportion,
assess and charge said entire cost, or such portion as has been determined
by the City Council, upon the several lots or parcels of land within the
district of assessment designated in such ordinance in proportion to the
benefits derived by such lots or parcels respectively from the making of
such improvements. Such assessment roll and report shall be filed with the
City Council.
§ 58-5. Assessment roll and report notice; objections; confirmation.
A. A description of the improvement or work to be done.
B. The limits of the district of assessment.
C. A designation of the amount of the cost to be borne by the said district.
A statement of the amount, if any, of the cost chargeable to the City at
large, and the manner in which it shall be financed and paid.
D.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-5
1:127
§ 58-6. Final assessment roll; collection of charges.
The City Clerk shall deliver a copy of such report, together with a copy of
the ordinance of the City Council confirming the same, each duly certified
by him, with the proper warrant attached thereto, to the Comptroller, and
such certified copy of said report and ordinance of confirmation shall be
deemed the assessment roll for said public improvement, and the amounts
stated therein, as chargeable to the respective persons or properties, shall
be collected by the Comptroller at the time, in the manner and in the
amounts, together with interest, if any, as provided in the ordinance
adopted by the City Council confirming the assessment roll.
Chapter 63
SEAL
§ 63-1. Seal adopted.
The Seal of the City of Mount Vernon adopted pursuant to Chapter 182 of
the Laws of 1892 is hereby declared to be continued as the Seal of said City.
Chapter 70
VETERANS SERVICE AGENCY
The City Council shall give notice, to be published in the official
newspaper, that such assessment roll and report has been filed, and
that at a time to be specified therein, which shall not be less than 10
days from the first publication thereof, it will proceed to a consideration
of such assessment roll and report and hold a public hearing with
reference thereto.
A.
Any person may file with the City Clerk written objections to such
assessment roll and report or any part thereof, which objections shall
be read before the City Council before action shall be taken on such
assessment roll and report. At the time so appointed or at such other
time to which it may adjourn for that purpose, the City Council may
hear the allegations of any person interested, who shall have filed such
objections and may take proof in relation thereto. Such allegations
and proofs shall be confined to the matters stated in such written
objections. The City Council may thereupon confirm such assessment
roll and report, or with such alterations therein as they may deem
proper. The confirmation of such report by the City Council shall be
final and conclusive unless an appeal be taken therefrom, as provided
by the Charter of the City of Mount Vernon, and the City Council shall
direct the proper warrant for collection to be attached to a certified
copy of such report.
B.
§ 58-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 70-1
1:128
§ 70-1. Establishment; Director.
A City Veterans Service Agency is hereby established in and for the City
of Mount Vernon, pursuant to § 357 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York, to be known as "Mount Vernon Veterans Service Agency." There
shall be appointed a City Director of such City Veterans Service Agency.
The Mayor shall appoint and may at pleasure remove the City Director. The
salary or compensation to be paid to the City Director shall be fixed by the
Mayor and the City Council.
§ 70-2. Powers of Agency and Director.
The City Veterans Service Agency and the City Director shall possess the
following powers, duties and functions:
A. To maintain a centrally located office.
To provide facilities for the dissemination to the members of the armed
services, war veterans and their families of information concerning the
existence or availability of educational training and retraining services
and facilities; health, medical and rehabilitation services and facilities;
provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations affording
special rights and privileges to members of the armed forces, war
veterans and their families; employment and reemployment services;
and any other matters pertaining to the services for war veterans.
B.
To utilize the facilities, assistance or data of any department, division,
board, bureau, commission or agency of the state that is made available
to the City Veterans Service Agency by the New York State Director of
Veterans' Affairs or by the Veterans' Affairs Commission of the State of
New York.
C.
To maintain liaison with other public officials and agencies and
organizations concerned with the development or execution of plans
for war veterans and to cooperate with federal agencies in the vicinity
engaged in similar work.
D.
To adopt, as far as practicable, uniform procedures recommended by
the State Director of Veterans' Affairs.
E.
To furnish statistical data to the State Director of Veterans' Affairs as to
the veterans services needed and the veterans services rendered.
F.
To report to the State Director of Veterans' Affairs at least once a month
and whenever requested.
G.
To act in conjunction with and under the advice of the local Veterans'
Service Committee appointed by the Mayor.
H.
To perform such other functions and duties as may from time to time be
prescribed by law.
I.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3
1:129
§ 70-3. Appointment of staff.
The City Director may appoint such deputies, assistants and employees as
he may deem necessary other than those, if any, supplied by the State of
New York; he shall prescribe the duties of those appointed by him and fix
their salaries within the appropriations made available for that purpose
by the City Council and may at pleasure remove any such assistant or
employee.
§ 70-4. Veterans Service Committee.
The Mayor shall appoint a local Veterans Service Committee to assist the
City Director and shall appoint a Chairman thereof; the members of such
Committee shall serve without compensation. The powers, duties and
functions of the local Veterans Service Committee shall consist of advising
the City Director and organizing local authorities, citizens and facilities in
order to assist the City Director of the City Veterans Service Agency in his
work.
Chapter 75
YOUTH BUREAU
§ 75-1. Establishment.
The Mount Vernon Youth Bureau, hereinafter referred to as "the Bureau," is
hereby established in and for the City of Mount Vernon, in accordance with
Article 19-A of the Executive Law of the State of New York.
§ 75-2. Composition.
The Bureau shall consist of 14 members. Twelve members shall be
appointed by the Mayor; the remaining two members shall be the
Commissioner of Public Safety and the Chairman of the Committee on
Parks, Recreation and Youth of the City Council, who shall serve as
members of the Bureau by virtue of their office but shall not be eligible to
become an officer of the Bureau.
§ 75-3. Term of office.
Of the members first appointed, four shall be appointed for terms of office
of one year each, four for terms of office of two years each and four for
terms of office of three years each. Thereafter, all appointments, except to
fill vacancies for unexpired terms, shall be for terms of office of three years
each.
§ 75-4. Compensation.
All members of the Bureau, including the Chairman, shall serve without
salary or compensation but shall be reimbursed for their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 70-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 75-5
1:130
§ 75-5. Qualifications.
In making appointments to the Bureau, the Mayor shall take into account
professional competence and/or distinguished service rendered in any and
all areas of youth work.
§ 75-6. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Bureau occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
§ 75-7. Meetings; quorum. [Amended 11-22-1978, approved
11-24-1978]
The Bureau shall meet at least once each month on a stated day to be
selected by the Bureau and may hold such other meetings as it may
determine from time to time. Eight members shall constitute a quorum.
Whenever the approval of the Bureau is required, the affirmative vote of a
majority shall be required.
§ 75-8. Director; deputy. [Amended 11-9-1977, approved
11-10-1977]
The Bureau shall have the duty, subject to applicable civil service
requirements, to screen and interview all candidates for Executive Director
of the Youth Bureau, to evaluate the qualifications and recommend to
the Mayor candidates for Executive Director of the Youth Bureau, and
the Mayor shall appoint an Executive Director and deputy as may be
determined and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Bureau of Estimate and
Contract.
§ 75-9. Estimate of expenditures; fiscal year.
On or before the 15th of September in each year, the Chairman shall furnish
to the Mayor estimates in writing of the amount of expenditure for the next
fiscal year, including a statement of the salaries of all his subordinates. The
fiscal year of the Bureau shall commence on the first day of January.
§ 75-10. Powers of Bureau.
The Bureau is hereby authorized and empowered to:
Work with existing City youth agencies so as to encourage a greater use
of the facilities of such agencies.
A.
B. Determine youth problems and needs.
C. Bring about community awareness of their problems and needs.
Develop an effective overall program for the prevention of delinquency,
youth crime and neglect.
D.
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:131
§ 75-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 80
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
Art. IX.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 106.
§ 80-1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to work caused to be performed
by the Commissioner of Public Works pursuant to § 105-b of the Charter of
the City of Mount Vernon. The procedures authorized herein apply after the
Commissioner of Public Works has abated the nuisance and billed the owner
in accordance with the provisions of § 105-b. Definitions of the terms used
herein shall be in accordance with the definitions of such terms as provided
in § 105-b unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to abrogate the duties of the Commissioner of
Public Works as prescribed in § 105-b of the Charter.
§ 80-2. Powers and duties of Commissioner of Public Works.
In the event that the Commissioner of Public Works has caused to remove
a nuisance pursuant to § 105-b of the Charter of the City of Mount Vernon,
he shall seek to collect the expense of abating such nuisance in the manner
provided herein:
Encourage close cooperation between employers, labor, schools,
churches, federal, state and local employment bureaus, service groups
and other public and private agencies so as to stimulate employment
for youth at fair wages and initiate sound youth programs in the
community.
E.
Foster educational programs in connection with youth, including
parental and adult education in relation to prevention of crime, neglect
and delinquency among youth.
F.
Apply for, receive and expend municipal, federal and state moneys for
the purpose of carrying out its objectives.
G.
Do all things necessary and desirable to carry out the powers and duties
herein granted.
H.
§ 75-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 80-2
1:132
§ 80-3. Hearing; decision.
Chapter 81
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boilers and other equipment — See Ch. 98.
§ 81-1. Legislative intent.
It is hereby declared that the unnecessary emission of smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious gases, dust or fly ash from buildings using fuel-oil-burning
equipment in the City of Mount Vernon is detrimental to the health of
the inhabitants of the City and their property, and the same is hereby
prohibited. For the purpose of controlling and reducing atmospheric
pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to establish
In accordance with § 105-b, if after a period of 10 days the owner fails
to pay the expense of abating such nuisance, the Commissioner shall
deliver to the City Council a statement certifying the cost of the work
performed.
A.
The Commissioner shall thereupon notify the owner in the manner
described in § 105-b that the cost of abating such nuisance has been
certified to the City Council and that such expense shall be chargeable
and become a lien upon the premises unless the owner requests a
hearing within five days after receipt of such notice.
B.
In the event that the owner fails to request a hearing in the prescribed
period of time, the Commissioner shall certify to the City Council that
the owner has been notified and has failed to request a hearing. The
Council may thereafter proceed to charge the property, create a lien
thereon and seek to cause the collection of same.
C.
The Deputy Commissioner or his designee shall serve as Hearing
Officer. The owner, his authorized representative or attorney may
appear at such hearing and present evidence in his own behalf.
A.
Not later than seven days following such hearing, the Hearing Officer
shall recommend that the Commissioner confirm the amount of the
expense or modify the expense or vacate same and the reasons therefor.
B.
Within five days after receipt of the Hearing Officer's recommendation,
the Commissioner shall make a decision as to the cost, if any, to be
charged and levied on the property and shall forthwith notify the owner
and City Council. The Council may thereafter proceed to charge the
property, create a lien thereon and seek to cause the collection of same.
C.
§ 80-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:133
and maintain active and continuing supervision of combustion processes
and of the emission of certain harmful or objectionable elements into the
atmosphere. The necessity for legislative intervention by the enactment of
the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared as a matter of legislative
determination, and this title shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate
the above purposes. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge
the emergency powers of the Department of Health or the right of the
Department of Health to engage in any of its necessary or proper activities,
including the enforcement of the Sanitary Code.
§ 81-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
COMMISSIONER — The Fire Commissioner of the City of Mount Vernon.
DENSE SMOKE — Smoke of a density to or in excess of No. 3 of the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart or the Microringelmann Smoke Chart.
DUST — Air- or gasborne solid particles, including fly ash and soot.
FLY ASH — Solid particles resulting from combustion or incomplete
combustion of coal, wood or other fuels.
FUEL — Combustible materials, solid, liquid or gaseous, used primarily
either to kindle or sustain fire or produce heat.
FUEL-OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater,
oven stove, kiln or other apparatus using fuel oil.
MICRORINGELMANN CHART — A chart on file in the office of the
Department of Health and the Fire Department of the City of Mount Vernon,
prepared from the Ringelmann Chart of the United States Bureau of Mines.
SMOKE — Solid particles emitted from a chimney, stack, flue or open fire as
a result of the combustion of fuel or refuse.
SOOT — Agglomerated particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material.
STACK — A smokestack, chimney, flue, duct or other conveyor for carrying
products of combustion or incomplete combustion, smoke, dusts or odors
into the open air.
TEST — An accepted technical procedure for determining the amount of
solids, smoke, dust or fly ash in the stack gases or atmosphere.
§ 81-3. Smoke.
No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted into the open air
from any building using fuel-oil-burning equipment, smoke the shade
or appearance of which is equal to or darker than No. 2 of the
Microringelmann Chart, except:
Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not
darker than No. 3 of the Microringelmann Chart for more than four
(1)
A.
§ 81-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 81-3
1:134
§ 81-4. Hearings.
§ 81-5. Access to premises; conduct during inspection.
continuous minutes when building a new fire or when breakdown
of equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the emission
was not reasonably preventable.
Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker
than No. 2 of the Microringelmann Chart for a period or periods
aggregating two minutes in any hour.
(2)
When the Commissioner shall declare a nuisance to exist, it shall be
deemed to have been created, and it may be summarily ordered to be
abated by the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative.
B.
After any owner, agent, occupant, manager or lessee in charge of any
premises has been previously notified of a violation of this chapter in
respect to the emission of dense smoke, soot, cinders or noxious gases
caused by fuel-oil-burning equipment, the owner, agent, occupant,
manager or lessee in charge of said premises shall be notified to show
cause before the Commissioner on a day certain, not less than 10 days
from the date of notice, why the equipment causing such violations
should not be sealed. The notice herein provided for may be given by
mail directed to the last known address of the party to be notified, or if
said party or his whereabouts is unknown, then by posting a notice on
or near the premises at which the violations have occurred. Upon said
date, the violator may appear and be heard. Upon such hearing, if the
authorized official finds that adequate corrective means and methods
have not been employed to correct the cause of such condition, then it
shall be his duty to seal said equipment until such time of correction.
A.
The Commissioner or any person delegated by him may make general
and specific investigations on behalf of the City and may determine
when a violation of this chapter exists. If as a result of any inspection,
including the first, the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative deems an emergency situation to exist, a violation of this
chapter may be declared and the fuel-oil-burning equipment may be
sealed forthwith.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to break a seal of any fuel-oil-burning
equipment that has been duly sealed by an authorized official, unless
permitted by the authorized official in writing.
C.
No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent or in any way
interfere with the Commissioner or any individuals to whom his
authority has been duly delegated in the performance of any duty
herein enjoined or refuse to permit such personnel to perform their
duty by refusing them or any of them entrance at reasonable hours to
property or premises containing fuel-oil-burning equipment.
A.
§ 81-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:135
§ 81-6. Testing of installations; smoke alarms.
The Commissioner or his delegated representatives shall observe the
general rules and practices of the person whose property is entered for
the purpose of making inspections, tests and investigations.
B.
Tests.
Tests by owners or operators. At his discretion, the Commissioner
may require the owner or operator of any fuel-oil-burning
equipment to submit to him a test, performed at the expense of the
owner or operator, of such equipment by a licensed professional
engineer or a qualified chemist or chemical engineer; may require
an owner or operator to submit to him an analysis of the quantity
and character of the matter discharged from a stack, duct, vent or
other exhaust conduit or system, at the expense of the owner or
operator, by a qualified chemist or chemical engineer; may require
an owner or operator to submit to him an analysis of the fuel used
in the fuel-oil-burning equipment, at the expense of the owner or
operator, by a qualified chemist.
(1)
Test by City. At his discretion, the Commissioner or persons duly
authorized by him may conduct tests concerning the same subject
matters described in the aforesaid Subsection A(1).
(2)
A.
Smoke alarms. Oil-burning equipment using residual oil as a fuel and
which has been declared a nuisance under § 81-3B shall provide for an
approved-type smoke detection and control device commonly known as
a "smoke alarm." [Added 6-24-1964, approved 6-25-1964]
A device capable of being adjusted to detect the presence of
varying densities of smoke and to cause the operation of audible
and visible signals when producing smoke equivalent to or greater
than No. 2 of the standard smoke chart. The smoke detection and
control device shall be equipped, installed and operated so as to
automatically cause the combustion process being monitored to
cease operation after the production of such smoke for a period
in excess of two minutes. This portion of the smoke detection
and control device shall be known as the "automatic shutoff." The
automatic shutoff shall prevent the operation until the fuel-burning
equipment is adjusted to abate illegal emissions and the smoke
detection control device is manually reset.
(1)
The signals produced by a smoke detection and control device to
indicate the production of smoke shall be the sounding of a bell
and the illumination of a red light, each of sufficient intensity and
in such location as to be capable of attracting the attention of
the person in charge or in control of the combustion equipment
being monitored. The signals shall be so installed as to operate
during the entire period that smoke equivalent to or greater than
No. 2 of the standard smoke chart is produced and to continue to
(2)
B.
§ 81-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 81-6
1:136
§ 81-7. Repealer.
All previous ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 81-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 83
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 83-1. Purpose.
An intolerable amount of police resources are being expended in responding
to alarms that have been activated other than by the commission of a crime.
The purpose of this chapter is to avoid the current waste of police resources
by reducing the number of false alarms to which the Department of Public
Safety must respond.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person or corporation
that engages in the selling, leasing, maintaining, installing, repairing,
altering, moving, replacing or servicing of an alarm device or system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or assembly of equipment and devices
designed or intended to signal the presence of a situation requiring the
urgent attention of the Department of Public Safety.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is used,
operated or maintained, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles.
operate after the combustion process may have been halted by the
automatic shutoff and until the smoke detection and control device
is manually reset and the combustion process restored to proper
operation.
Where a smoke detection and control device is required on an
installation consisting of more than one complete combustion unit
on a single stack, the shutoff or shutoffs shall be so designed and
installed as to halt the operation of that unit or units responsible
for smoke.
(3)
The automatic shutoff may be replaced by fully automatic
combustion controls so devised and installed as to be actuated by
the smoke alarm in such a manner as to automatically maintain
proper operation.
(4)
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:137
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — Any alarm system which automatically
sends over the telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility operated by a private
corporation that owns or leases a system of alarm devices, which facility
is manned by operators who receive, record or validate alarm signals and
relay information about such validated signals to the Department of Public
Safety when appropriate.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety of the City of Mount
Vernon.
COUNTY — The County of Westchester.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The Department of Public Safety of
the City of Mount Vernon.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, improper usage or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or through the error
or negligence of employees, guests or agents of the owner or lessee of
the premises. It shall include all alarm signal activation incidents in which
investigation by the Department of Public Safety reveals no evidence of the
existence of an emergency condition. Those alarm signals that investigation
reveals to have been triggered by physical damage to the protected
premises as a result of hurricane, tornado, earthquake or other violent
natural phenomenon and line trouble signals received via dedicated
telephone lines are excluded from the definition of "false alarm."
PERSON — Any person, partnership, corporation or unincorporated
association.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — Any alarm system that does not transmit signals
to a monitoring system off premises or to a law enforcement agency but
sounds at a control center on the protected premises and is under the
supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. When such an
alarm monitors conditions that may require the response of the Department
of Public Safety personnel, it becomes an alarm system as defined in this
chapter.
§ 83-3. Automatic cutoff of audible alarms; standby power supply
system.
Every alarm system maintained within the City equipped with an
externally audible local signaling device shall be provided with an
automatic cutoff to silence the audible external signal at the end of a
period not to exceed 15 minutes from the time at which the signaling
device is activated in residential systems and 30 minutes in commercial
systems.
A.
§ 83-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 83-3
1:138
§ 83-4. Alarm identification cards.
All alarm business personnel who engage in selling, installing, servicing or
maintaining alarm systems within the City, when engaged in their trade,
shall carry a county alarm agent identification card issued pursuant to
Article XV of Chapter 863 of the Laws of Westchester County.
§ 83-5. Regulations.
§ 83-6. False alarms.
§ 83-7. Penalties for offenses.
The following shall be penalties for the offense of a violation of provisions of
this chapter:
After June 1, 1987, every alarm system installed within the City shall be
equipped with a rechargeable, standby power supply system sufficient
to maintain the alarm system in a state of readiness to detect the
conditions it was installed to monitor for a period of at least four hours
in the event of a loss of power supplied by either the public utility
system or the customary power system provided for the premises. Such
standby power supply must also retain sufficient energy to power local
audible or visible signaling devices at rated volume or intensity for at
least 10 minutes.
B.
After June 1, 1987, it shall be unlawful to maintain any automatic
dialing device programmed to access any Department of Public Safety
telephone number.
A.
Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may program the
device to transmit its signal to a central alarm station, an answering
service or any other consenting third party.
B.
The Department of Public Safety shall not be required to respond to any
alarm signal transmitted in violation of this section.
C.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit the activation
of a false alarm signal. The alarm owner, lessee or user shall be held
accountable for all false alarms originating from the alarm user's
system and shall be fully liable for all charges and penalties arising
therefrom.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be empowered to take
whatever action is reasonably necessary to prevent an activated false
alarm signaling device from interfering with the Department of Public
Safety's ability to receive any additional alarm signal or from
interfering unnecessarily with the tranquility of the surrounding
community.
B.
§ 83-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-7
1:139
§ 83-8. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall
be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision other than the
part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 83-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect June 1, 1987.
Chapter 84
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 95.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 113.
Shooting ranges — See Ch. 218.
For operation or maintenance of an alarm system without the automatic
cutoff or standby power supply required by § 83-3A or B, a fine of up to
$50 for each day such offense continues.
A.
For maintaining an automatic dialing device or system programmed
to access a telephone number of the Department of Public Safety in
violation of § 83-6A, a fine of $50 for each time a signal is received from
such device.
B.
For failure of alarm business personnel to obtain an alarm identification
card as required by § 83-4, a fine of not less than $75 nor more than
$250.
C.
For false alarms as defined in § 83-2, which may occur, the owner or
lessee of the premises shall be subject to a fine of $100. [Amended
9-13-2006, approved 9-14-2006]
D.
§ 83-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 83-9
1:140
ARTICLE I
Amusement Devices
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 5 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the payment of a
charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may
be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include but is
not limited to such devices as electronic video games, marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic bowling
machines, electronic driving machines, electronic baseball, football, hockey
or basketball machines, any and all air-propelled machines or games,
shooting games, billiard tables and pool tables and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated,
whether or not electronically operated. This article, however, shall exclude
any device, the possession or use of which is otherwise prohibited by
law.[Amended 6-27-2001, approved 6-28-2001]
JUKEBOX — Any manually, mechanically or electrically operated music
vending machine, contrivance or device which is caused to operate or may
be operated upon the insertion of a coin into any slot or other opening or
by the payment of any fee, charge or other consideration for the emission
of songs, music or similar entertainment.[Added 5-14-1969, approved
5-15-1969]
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
corporation, association or society, and any officer, agent, servant or
employee of the foregoing in responsible charge of premises hereinafter
mentioned.
PREMISES — Includes any parcel of land, building, structure, vehicle, boat,
airplane or any other property or part thereof.
§ 84-1.1. Findings of fact and legislative purpose. [Added
6-27-2001, approved 6-28-2001]
The City Council of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, hereby finds
that studies prepared by the County of Westchester establish that
arcades cause deleterious effects on the communities in which they
operate. Frequently, areas in which amusement devices operate suffer
from overcrowding in the buildings housing video games, excessive
noise and traffic congestion comprised of large numbers of youths and
bicycles blocking the sidewalks and entrances of other buildings and
businesses.
A.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1.1
1:141
§ 84-2. License required. [Amended 5-14-1969, approved
5-15-1969]
No person shall keep, maintain, use or exhibit, or permit to be kept,
maintained, exhibited, used or operated, in or upon any premises in his
possession or under his control within the City, a manually or mechanically
or electrically operated amusement device or jukebox used or designed
in whole or in part for the amusement, entertainment or recreation of
the public, without first obtaining a license therefor from the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 84-3. License application.
The Mayor is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to issue such license upon
the following terms and conditions:
The City of Mount Vernon is currently undergoing a major revitalization
effort to reverse the trend of urban deterioration and decay, particularly
in the downtown and commercial areas. The City Council is advancing
major urban renewal projects throughout the City, expending
significant efforts and resources toward improving the quality of life
and character of the City. The City is redeveloping major portions of
blighted and degraded commercial areas to strengthen its commercial
tax base and revive its downtown retail areas. The unrestrained
proliferation of amusement devices is inconsistent with the City's
redevelopment and revitalization efforts. It is therefore necessary to
regulate the installation of amusement devices to control the adverse
secondary effects associated with such uses and to mitigate any
adverse consequences to the urban renewal and revitalization effort of
the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
A verified application in duplicate for said license shall be made by
such person to the City Clerk, upon blanks to be furnished by him,
giving the name and address of the applicant; the name and address
of the manufacturer of the device; the manufacturer's number, if any;
a complete detailed description of the device, including all the
mechanical features thereof; the method of its operation; the exact
location, nature and use of the premises in which the device is proposed
to be kept, maintained, exhibited or operated; the number of such
devices already licensed and sought to be licensed in the same
premises; and such further information as the City Clerk or the
Commissioner of Public Safety may require.
A.
The application shall also contain a complete statement indicating
whether or not any previous application has been made hereunder and
whether any license has been issued, refused, suspended or revoked,
with the circumstances thereof.
B.
Upon receipt of the application by the City Clerk, the applicant may
be issued a temporary permit pending the approval of the license
application. This permit may be issued for a period not to exceed 60
C.
§ 84-1.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 84-3
1:142
§ 84-4. Regulation by Department of Public Safety. [Amended
5-27-1981, approved 5-28-1981]
days. If the license application is denied prior to the end of the sixty-day
period, then the permit is immediately revoked. This temporary permit
may be obtained upon payment of a nonrefundable fee of $10 for each
machine, which fee does not apply to any part of the license application
fee. The permit shall have clearly printed on its face the date of issue
and the date of expiration. The issuance of a temporary permit is in no
way to be construed as approval of the application for an amusement
device license. The temporary permit is nonrenewable and may not be
transferred or assigned. Maintenance, use or exhibit of an amusement
device after the expiration date stated on the permit or after notice of
the denial of the license application shall be considered a violation of
§ 84-2 of this chapter. [Added 12-22-1982, approved 12-23-1982;
amended 11-29-2001, approved 11-29-2001]
Said application shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Commissioner
of Public Safety for his investigation and recommendation in writing to
the City Clerk. No such license shall be issued without the approval
of the Commissioner of Public Safety, who shall cause such inquiries,
inspections and investigations to be made as he deems necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this article, including but not limited
to the device sought to be licensed or which shall be licensed, the
premises upon which said device is proposed to be or shall be located
and the moral character of the applicant or any person in responsible
charge of said premises. In order that the intent and purpose of this
article shall be carried out, the control and regulation of such devices
shall be under the supervision of the Department of Public Safety, and
members of said Department may at any and all times, when such
premises are open, visit the same and make an inspection thereof.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Safety may disapprove an application for
an amusement device license if he determines that:
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact relating to his application;
(1)
The applicant has been convicted of a felony or of any crime
involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or
moral turpitude; or
(2)
The location of the amusement device in the applicant's premises
would be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare and
detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood.
(3)
B.
An applicant whose application for a license is denied shall be advised
in writing by the City Clerk stating the reason therefor.
C.
§ 84-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:143
§ 84-5. License or permit required; posting. [Amended 5-14-1969,
approved 5-15-1969; 4-10-1981, approved 4-13-1981; 5-27-1981,
approved 5-28-1981; 12-22-1982, approved 12-23-1982]
A license or permit shall be procured for each said device. No amusement
device or jukebox shall be kept, exhibited, used or operated until and unless
said license or permit is conspicuously posted upon the premises.
§ 84-6. Fees; expiration of license; transfer of license; number of
devices permitted. [Amended 5-14-1969, approved 5-15-1969;
4-10-1981, approved 4-13-1981; 5-27-1981, approved 5-28-1981;
4-27-1983, approved 4-28-1983; 7-10-1985, approved 7-11-1985;
7-12-2000, approved 7-13-2000; 11-14-2001, approved 11-15-2001]
Prior to the issuance of such license, the City Clerk shall collect the sum of
$100 therefor for each amusement device licensed and $30 for each jukebox
licensed. Each such license shall expire on the 31st day of May next after
issue, unless sooner revoked by the Mayor; and the expiration date shall
appear on the face of the license. All valid existing licenses issued prior to
May 31, 1985, shall expire on December 1, 1985. For new licenses issued
after November 30th of any license year, the license fee shall be prorated.
No such license shall be transferred from one device to another, except as
hereinafter provided, nor to any person or location other than that stated in
the application therefor. No more than four such amusement devices shall
be licensed for maintenance, exhibition or use in the same premises at any
one time.
§ 84-7. Transfer requirements; fee. [Amended 1-22-1969, approved
1-23-1969]
A license and seal issued under the provisions of this article may be
transferred either to another device identical in every respect or to a device
of the same general character as that licensed. The provisions of this article
with respect to applications, investigations and approval shall apply to all
transfers, and no transfer shall be effective until the Mayor has issued a
certificate therefor. Prior to the issuance of such certificate, the City Clerk
shall collect the sum of $7 for each transfer.
An aggrieved applicant may request a hearing by submitting a request
for same in writing within seven days after receipt of notification of
such denial. [Amended 12-8-1982, approved 12-9-1982]
D.
Upon the receipt of the written request for a hearing, the City Clerk
shall notify the Commissioner of Public Safety, who shall hold or cause
his designee to hold a hearing at such time and place as he shall
prescribe. The applicant shall be given due notice thereof in writing
and may be represented by counsel. In each case, a decision shall
be reached without unnecessary delay, and such decision may affirm,
modify or reverse the determination appealed from.
E.
§ 84-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 84-8
1:144
§ 84-8. Age restriction for operation. [Amended 5-14-1969,
approved 5-15-1969; 6-27-2001, approved 6-28-2001]
§ 84-9. Unlawful use prohibited. [Amended 5-14-1969, approved
5-15-1969]
No such amusement device shall be operated or permitted to be operated
by the licensee or by any person in responsible charge of said premises or
to be put to any use or purpose prohibited by law.
§ 84-10. Revocation of license and seal.
No person, firm, corporation or association or any agent, servant,
employee or representative of a licensee shall permit the operation or
use of any amusement device, as defined herein, by persons 15 years of
age or under at the premises where such amusement device is located,
unless such persons 15 years of age or under are accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
A.
Notwithstanding § 84-8A, no person, firm, corporation or association
or any agent, servant, employee or representative of a licensee shall
permit the operation or use of any amusement device, as defined
herein, by persons 17 years of age or under between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on days when schools are officially open.
B.
Any license granted hereunder may be revoked by the Mayor and any
seal issued under such license recalled and destroyed for any of the
following:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this article.
The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any
governmental officer, agency or department governing or
applicable to the maintenance or conduct of the premises upon
which said device is located.
(2)
The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or
applicable to the maintenance, possession, use or operation of the
licensed device.
(3)
The conviction of the licensee, holder of a license or any person in
responsible charge of said premises of a crime.
(4)
The recommendation of the Commissioner of Public Safety in
writing, stating the reasons therefor.
(5)
(6) Otherwise for cause.
A.
This section shall in no way limit or impair the power otherwise vested
in the Mayor by law to revoke such licenses.
B.
§ 84-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-11
1:145
§ 84-11. Counterfeit seal. [Amended 5-14-1969, approved
5-15-1969]
Any person attaching a fictitious or counterfeit seal or maintaining,
operating or in responsible charge of premises in which a manually or
mechanically operated amusement device or jukebox is kept, exhibited or
used, to which device a fictitious seal purporting to be issued by the City
Clerk or a counterfeit of said seal is attached, shall be guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 84-12. Separate offenses.
Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any manually or mechanically
operated amusement device in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 84-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 84-12
1:146
ARTICLE II
Amusement Devices for Children
[Adopted 11-27-1957 as Ch. 5A of the General Ordinances, approved
11-28-1957]
§ 84-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes amusement devices designed for and
used exclusively by children, such as but not limited to any mechanically or
electrically operated pony, horse, boat, airplane, rocket and/or equipment
of similar design which may be placed on a stationary platform within any
premises to which the public is invited, and which devices are to provide
an up-and-down, rocking and/or circular motion for the enjoyment of one or
more children.
§ 84-14. License required.
It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, offer to the public or operate any such
amusement device unless the person desiring to keep, maintain, offer to the
public or operate same shall, before doing so, obtain a license from the City
Clerk.
§ 84-15. License application; insurance.
Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk upon such
forms as he shall prescribe. Such application shall contain the name and
residence of the person, and if a partnership, the names and addresses
of the partners, and if a corporation, the names and residence addresses
of the officers of such corporation; the place of business at which such
amusement device is to be located and the type of amusement device to be
used. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall furnish a policy or
duplicate policy or certificate of public liability insurance with limits of not
less than $25,000 for injury to one person and not less than $50,000 for one
accident, which policy or certificate or copy thereof shall be approved as to
form and sufficiency by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 84-16. Inspection by Building Commissioner.
Before issuing such license, the City Clerk shall request an inspection to
be made of each such amusement device by the Building Commissioner
to determine whether such device is so constructed mechanically and
electrically as to permit its operation safely and without danger to the users
thereof.
§ 84-17. Approval by Building Commissioner.
No license shall be issued by the City Clerk unless the application shall have
endorsed upon it the approval of the Building Commissioner. Subsequent to
§ 84-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-17
1:147
the issuance of the license the City Clerk shall cause periodic inspections to
be made of all such devices and may, if any such device is found defective
or unsafe, revoke the license therefor.
§ 84-18. Additional inspection.
The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized, empowered and directed
to inspect amusement devices as defined in this article and to cause same
to be inspected by the Electrical Bureau of the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters.
§ 84-19. License fee. [Amended 12-26-1968, approved 12-27-1968;
6-10-1992, approved 6-11-1992]
The applicant for a license shall pay to the City Clerk before the issuance
thereof an annual license fee of $50 for each device operated by him, it or
them.
§ 84-20. License expiration and renewal; fee. [Amended 12-26-1968,
approved 12-27-1968; 6-10-1992, approved 6-11-1992]
All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of May in each year. Written
application for renewal shall be filed within 30 days prior to the expiration
date. No license shall be renewed by the City Clerk without the endorsed
approval of the Building Commissioner and payment of the renewal fee of
$50.
§ 84-21. Placement on public places prohibited.
No amusement device as defined herein shall be located, placed, maintained
or operated on any public street, highway or other public place in the City
of Mount Vernon.
§ 84-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 84-21
1:148
ARTICLE III
Baseball Games on Sunday
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 8 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 84-22. Permit required.
Baseball games may be played in the City the first day of the week,
commonly called Sunday, after 2:00 p.m., provided that a permit specifying
the place of holding the same shall be first obtained from the Mayor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 84-23. Issuance and revocation of permit.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to issue a permit under his hand and to
which the corporate seal shall be affixed to such persons and at such places
as he shall deem proper, and he is hereby empowered to revoke at his
pleasure any permit so issued.
§ 84-24. Admission fee.
It shall be lawful to charge an admission fee at any baseball game so held.
§ 84-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-24
1:149

ARTICLE IV
Use of Bowling Alleys by Children
[Adopted 2-8-1961, approved 2-9-1961]
§ 84-25. When permitted.
It shall be lawful for the owner, lessee, proprietor, operator, attendant or
employee of any public bowing alley to admit or allow to remain in any
such public bowling alley and to bowl therein any child between the ages
of nine and 16 daily, except Sunday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. when school is not in session and on Sunday between the hours of
1:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. and when accompanied to, from and at such public
bowling alley by a parent or by a responsible adult or when a member of an
organized group under the supervision of a responsible adult, provided that
no alcoholic beverages of any kind are dispensed on such premises during
the time that such child is on the premises as a member of such organized
group.
§ 84-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-25
1:151
Chapter 88
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 189.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
Special sales — See Ch. 215.
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — Any person who sells or offers goods, wares and chattels
at public auction.
GOODS, WARES AND CHATTELS — Includes but shall not be limited to all
commodities, compounds, chattels, merchandise, watches, clocks, jewelry
and all other personal property which may be lawfully kept or offered for
sale, but shall not include goods damaged at sea or by fire and sold or to
be sold for the benefit of the owner's insurers or for the account of whom it
may concern or goods sold by virtue of judicial decree.
§ 88-2. License required.
No person shall carry on the trade of auctioneer or shall act as an
auctioneer without having first secured a license therefor, and no sale
at public auction of goods, wares and chattels shall be held within the
City unless such sale shall be directly conducted by a licensed auctioneer
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 88-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by or for
the account of executors or administrators, by trustees under deed of
assignment, by lienors or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 88-4. License application.
Every person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the City Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared and
furnished by the City. Such application shall contain the name, business and
residence address of the applicant; his previous employment and whether
he has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony, and if so, what
offense, when and in what court; whether he has, either alone or with
someone else, ever engaged in the business of auctioneer, and if so, when
and where. Such application shall be signed and verified before a notary
public or other officer authorized to administer oaths in the State of New
§ 84-25 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 88-4
1:152
York. Such application shall be accompanied by a photograph of applicant,
in triplicate, taken in such position as the City Clerk may direct, within 30
days preceding the filing of the application.
§ 88-5. Investigation of applicant. [Amended 4-24-1991, approved
4-25-1991]
When an application is filed, the City Clerk shall request the Commissioner
of Public Safety to investigate whether the applicant is of good character.
Every applicant for a license must file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
the Commissioner's supervision by a senior police officer designated to do
so, at such place as the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner
of Public Safety shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the
applicant, together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice
Services or other appropriate agency for processing and investigation. No
application for an auctioneer's license shall be approved nor any license
issued until after investigation and examination of the fingerprints of the
applicant. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been
convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence, dishonesty
or deceit. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall furnish to the City Clerk,
in writing, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by
a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted or refused.
§ 88-6. Bond. [Amended 9-24-2003, approved 9-25-2003]
Such application shall be accompanied by a bond in favor of the people
of the City of Mount Vernon, approved as to sufficiency, form and manner
of execution by the Corporation Counsel, in the penal sum of $5,000,
conditioned that the applicant will faithfully perform his duties as such
auctioneer as required by law and ordinances now or hereafter enacted and
render such accounts and pay such duties as may be required of him by law.
§ 88-7. Issuance of license; denial.
Upon the filing of the application, bond and information as herein provided
and upon the payment to the City Clerk of the license fee herein provided
for, the Mayor is hereby authorized to grant to the applicant, under his
hand, to be sealed with the corporate seal and countersigned by the City
Clerk, a license to engage in the business of auctioneer, as hereinbefore
provided. No license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for
the protection of the public safety, good order and morals. All licenses shall
be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly
the dates of issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the
name and business address of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license
has been refused shall make further application until a period of at least
six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless such
applicant can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists or
unless such application was erroneously refused.
§ 88-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:153
§ 88-8. License fee. [Amended 9-24-2003, approved 9-25-2003]
The annual fee for an auctioneer's license or any renewal thereof shall be
the sum of $200.
§ 88-9. Expiration and renewal of license.
Every license shall expire on the 31st day of December next after its
issuance. Every license may be renewed as of the first day of January upon
payment of the required fee.
§ 88-10. Transfer prohibited.
§ 88-11. Lost or destroyed licenses.
If a license shall be lost, stolen or destroyed without fault on the part of
the holder, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be
issued by the Mayor upon the filing of an affidavit satisfactorily explaining
the facts of such loss or theft and upon the payment of $1 for such duplicate
license. No person shall destroy, deface or injure a license in any manner or
change the name, numbers or dates thereon.
§ 88-12. Revocation of license.
The City Clerk, at any time, for such cause as he, upon investigation, may
deem sufficient, may suspend or revoke any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter. Violation of any of the prohibitions set forth in
§ 88-13 of this chapter shall be deemed sufficient cause. Whenever any
license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the
license fee shall be made, and no license shall be granted to any person
whose license has been revoked, within a period of two years from the
date of such revocation. Notice of the suspension or revocation and the
reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the City Clerk
upon the person named in the application by mailing the same to the
business address given in the application and upon filing a copy of same
with the Mayor. Within 48 hours after service of the notice of suspension or
revocation, the licensee may apply to the Mayor to hear and review the act
of the City Clerk, and the Mayor shall affirm or disaffirm said suspension or
revocation.
No license under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred or
assigned to any person or used by any person other than the licensee to
whom it was issued.
A.
No person having a license granted under this chapter shall delegate
his power to any Clerk, servant, agent, employee, partner or person,
but the privilege given shall be personal to the person named in the
license and shall be exercised by him alone.
B.
§ 88-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 88-13
1:154
§ 88-13. Prohibited acts.
No auctioneer shall:
§ 88-14. Recordkeeping.
Every auctioneer shall, upon the receipt or acceptance by him of any goods
for the purpose of sale at auction and before offering the same or any
part thereof for sale at auction, write or cause to be written in a book to
be kept by him for the purpose the name and address of the person who
employed him to sell such goods at auction; the name and address of the
person for whose benefit, behalf or account such goods are to be sold at
auction; the name and address of the person from whom such auctioneer
received or accepted such goods; the name and address of the person who
was the owner, the authorized agent of the owner or the consignor of such
goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance for the purpose of
sale at auction of the same by such auctioneer; the location, with street and
number, if any, of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance
of the same by such auctioneer for the purpose of sale at auction; the
date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of such goods for the
purpose of sale at auction; the place, with street and number, if any, in
which such goods are to be held, kept or stored until sold or offered for sale
at auction; the place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods
are to be sold or offered for sale at auction; a description of such goods,
the quantity thereof and the distinctive marks thereon, if any; and the terms
and conditions upon which such auctioneer receives or accepts such goods
for sale at auction. Such book and the entries therein made as provided for
herein shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the City
Clerk, the Commissioner of Public Safety or their duly authorized agents.
Make any false representation as to the character, quality, condition,
previous history, value or ownership of any property offered for sale.
A.
B. Substitute any other article for the article sold to the bidder.
Bid in any property offered for sale by himself, and no person shall act
as an accomplice or "capper" for the purpose of making mock bids at
any auction.
C.
Employ a bellman, crier, musical instrument or device, loudspeaker or
other means of attracting the attention of any passersby, other than a
sign or flag, which shall bear the license number.
D.
Conduct any auction sale for a transient merchant or other person who
has not procured a permit as required by law or ordinance or whose
permit has expired or been revoked.
E.
Refuse to exhibit his license to any police officer upon demand at the
place where an auction is being conducted.
F.
Receive for sale by auction or sell by auction any goods, wares or
merchandise from or to any minor, knowing him to be such.
G.
§ 88-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-15
1:155
§ 88-15. Permit to conduct sale.
Any person intending to sell at public auction any goods, wares or chattels
shall make application to the City Clerk for a permit to hold such sale and
shall not hold such sale until issuance of such permit by the Mayor.
§ 88-16. Application for permit.
Such application for a permit shall be in writing and shall be verified and
filed not more than 15 nor less than five days before the commencement
of such sale. It shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the
name and address of the auctioneer, the street and number of the premises
in which it is proposed to conduct such sale and the place of business of the
applicant for the two years next preceding the date fixed for the sale.
§ 88-17. Inventory.
There shall be attached to the application a verified inventory, in triplicate,
showing in detail the quality, quantity, kind of grade of goods, wares and
chattels proposed to be sold and the established current retail prices, if any,
of the said goods, wares and chattels, and specifically stating the ownership
of the items or articles. The inventory shall be verified by the applicant if
he is an individual, by one of the partners if a partnership, or by a duly
authorized officer if a corporation. No goods, wares or chattels shall be
added to the verified inventory after same has been filed, nor shall any
goods, wares or chattels be sold which are not included in such verified
inventory.
§ 88-18. Investigation of inventory.
The City Clerk or the duly authorized agent of the City Clerk, before issuing
a permit, shall examine and investigate the goods, wares and chattels
specified in the inventory to be offered for sale, to determine whether said
inventory correctly sets forth the items to be sold and their true value.
The City Clerk may, upon examination of the inventory filed, require such
additional information as may be necessary to ascertain the correctness of
the items set forth in said inventory.
§ 88-19. Inspection of auction sales.
All auction sales conducted hereunder shall be subject to inspection by
any police officer or duly authorized agent of the licensing authority to
determine whether the provisions of law and the conditions of this license
are being complied with. Any such agent or officer, upon complaint or
reasonable suspicion of violation, may temporarily interrupt any such
auction sale for the purpose of making such an inspection where such
interruption is reasonably necessary to ascertain compliance with the law
and the conditions thereof.
§ 88-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 88-20
1:156
§ 88-20. Permit fees. [Amended 9-24-2003, approved 9-25-2003]
Upon filing the application for a permit to conduct such sale at public
auction, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee in the sum of $100
for a one-day permit and a fee in the sum of $100 per day for a permit in
excess of one day but not to exceed 10 days in duration. If any application
is disapproved, said payment shall not be returned but shall be retained by
the City to cover the cost of investigating the statements contained in such
application.
§ 88-21. Duration of sale; exception.
§ 88-22. Sales on holidays and Sundays. [Amended 10-5-1979,
approved 10-5-1979; 10-10-1979, approved 10-11-1979]
No permit shall be issued and no person shall conduct a sale at public
auction on legal holidays. However, on Sundays, sale at public auction is
only permitted between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ 88-23. Hours of sale. [Amended 3-28-1962, approved 3-29-1962]
No permit shall be issued for and no person shall conduct a sale at public
auction except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
No sale at public auction of the goods, wares and chattels specified in
the inventory shall continue for a longer period than that for which the
permit was issued, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, except that the
City Clerk may extend such sale for an additional period not to exceed
the period for which the permit was originally issued upon the payment
of an additional fee of $100 per day; nor shall the same person, firm or
corporation, after the expiration of said permit to conduct an auction
sale or any renewal thereof, dispose of his goods, wares or chattels at
public auction either by himself or another for a period of 12 months
from the last day of the former sale. [Amended 9-24-2003, approved
9-25-2003]
A.
The twelve-month period between sales, hereinbefore provided, shall
not apply to auction sales of used household or office furniture and
effects purchased from or sold on account of a householder or the
owner of office furniture who has actually used such furniture and
effects in his household or office, provided that a complete list of said
furniture and effects, with the name and address of the person from
whom they were received or purchased, shall have been previously filed
with the City Clerk.
B.
§ 88-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-23
1:157
Chapter 92
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLES — Includes any vehicle consisting of an arrangement or
combination of two wheels, 22 inches or more in diameter, one following the
other, supported by a frame propelled wholly or in part by the feet acting
upon pedals.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations and joint-stock companies residing
in or having a place of business in the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 92-2. through § 92-7. (Reserved)23
§ 92-8. Compliance with local and state regulations.
Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon a public roadway in the
City of Mount Vernon shall be subject to the provisions of all ordinances of
the City of Mount Vernon and § 79 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York.24
§ 92-9. Lamps.
Every bicycle operated upon the streets and the public highways of the City
during any of the time between a half hour after sunset until a half hour
before sunrise shall be equipped with a lighted lamp on the front which
shall be visible from a point 500 feet ahead of such bicycle and which shall
project either a white or yellow light.
§ 92-10. Reflectors.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a front and a rear reflector, each of
a type approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety, to be applied and
adjusted to the bicycle in such a manner as to be visible for at least 200
feet when opposed by a motor vehicle displaying lawful and undimmed
23.Editor's Note: Former §§ 92-2 through 92-7, regarding registration of bicycles, as
amended, were repealed 9-26-2012, approved 9-27-2012.
24.Editor's Note: See now § 1231 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 88-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 92-10
1:158
headlights at night on an unlighted highway. Reflectors shall be yellow or
amber on the front and red on the rear.
§ 92-11. Brakes and steering.
Every bicycle operated upon the streets and the public highways of the City
shall be provided with adequate brakes and steering mechanism in good
working order and sufficient to control such bicycle at all times.
§ 92-12. Horn or bell.
Every bicycle operated upon the streets and public highways of the City
shall be provided with a suitable and adequate horn, bell or other device
other than a siren, which shall produce a sound sufficiently loud to serve as
a danger warning but which shall not be used other than as such warning
nor be unnecessarily loud or harsh.
§ 92-13. Riding on sidewalks.
No such bicycle shall be operated upon any public sidewalk or upon any
pedestrian paths in the public parks. This section is not applicable to
children under 10 years of age nor to invalids or cripples who cannot walk.
§ 92-14. Riding on right required.
Every bicycle, when operated on a public highway, shall be kept as close to
the right-hand curb as possible.
§ 92-15. Riding single file required.
Every person when operating a bicycle upon a public highway shall ride
such bicycle in single file only, and at no time shall bicycles be operated two
or more abreast.
§ 92-16. Attachment to other vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to cling or attach himself
or his bicycle to any other moving vehicle upon a public street or highway.
§ 92-17. Carrying passengers.
The operator of a bicycle shall not carry another person on the bicycle when
operating such bicycle upon any public highway in the City unless such
bicycle is equipped with a seat securely fastened to the bicycle in the rear
of the driver and provided with footrests or pedals and handgrips.
§ 92-18. Towing.
The operator of a bicycle shall not tow or draw any coaster, sled or person
on roller skates, toy vehicle or other similar vehicle on a public street or
highway.
§ 92-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-19
1:159
§ 92-19. Acrobatics.
No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or feet
from the pedals or practice any acrobatics or fancy riding on any public
street or highway.
§ 92-20. Stop signs and traffic signals.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a public highway shall stop before
entering all arterial highways where full-stop signs are posted and shall
obey all traffic light signals.
§ 92-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-26-2012, approved
9-27-2012]
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter may
be punished by a fine of $15.
Chapter 95
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 84. Dance and dance halls — See Ch. 113.
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes only bona fide religious,
charitable and nonprofit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen and
similar nonprofit organizations.
BINGO or GAME — A specific game of chance, commonly known as "bingo"
or "lotto," in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers
or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION — The State Lottery Control Commission.
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 95-2. Authorization to conduct games. [Amended 4-24-1963,
approved 4-25-1963]
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor, as hereinafter provided, to conduct the game of bingo within the
territorial limits of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 14-H (§§ 475-499) of the
General Municipal Law and the provisions of the State Lottery Control Law.
§ 92-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-3
1:160
§ 95-3. General restrictions. [Amended 4-24-1963, approved
4-25-1963]
Any game or games licensed hereunder shall be subject to the following
restrictions in addition to such other restrictions as may be provided herein
or contained in the rules and regulations of the Control Commission:
§ 95-4. License application.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
A.
No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under the lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
B.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
C.
The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
D.
No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250 in any single game of
bingo.
E.
No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $1,000.
F.
No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
G.
No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
H.
The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
I.
Each applicant for a license shall file with the Commissioner of Licenses
of the City of Mount Vernon a written application in the form prescribed
in the rules and regulations of the Control Commission, duly executed
and verified.
A.
B. Each application shall include the following:
§ 95-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:161
The name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the
governing body of the municipality to determine whether or not it
is a bona fide authorized organization.
(1)
(2) The names and addresses of its officers.
The specific kinds of games of chance intended to be held, operated
or conducted by the applicant and the place or places where, the
date or dates and the time or times when such games of chance
are intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant
under the license applied for.
(3)
The items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection
with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of
chance, and the names and addresses of the persons to whom and
the purposes for which they are to be paid.
(4)
The specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such
games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner.
(5)
That no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense
will be paid to any person for holding, operating or conducting such
game or games of chance or for assisting therein except as in this
chapter otherwise provided.
(6)
That no prize or aggregate of prizes will be offered or given under
such license of a value in excess of the sum or value authorized to
be offered or given by this chapter, and a description of all prizes
to be offered and given in all such games of chance to be held,
operated and conducted under such license.
(7)
Such other information as shall be prescribed by the rules and
regulations of the Control Commission.
(8)
In each application there shall be designated an active member or
members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games
of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and
conducted, and there shall be appended to the application a statement
executed and verified by the applicant and by the member or members
so designated that he, she or they will be responsible for the holding,
operation and conduct of such games of chance in accordance with the
terms of the license and the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 854 of
the Laws of 1957, as amended, and the rules and regulations of the
Control Commission, if such license is granted.
C.
In the event that any premises upon which any such game of chance is
to be held, operated or conducted or which is to be used for any other
purpose in connection with the holding, operation or conduct thereof
is to be leased or rented from any person, persons or corporations, the
application shall be accompanied by a written statement signed and
verified under oath by such person or persons or on behalf of such
D.
§ 95-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-4
1:162
§ 95-5. Investigation of applicant; disposition of fees; issuance and
duration of license.
corporation, stating his or its address and the amount of rent to be
paid for such premises, and stating that such lessor, lessors or, if a
corporation, all of its officers and each of its stockholders who hold 10%
or more of its stock issued and outstanding are of good moral character
and have not been convicted of a crime.
The Commissioner of Licenses of the City of Mount Vernon shall cause
to be investigated the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of
each application with due expedition after the filing of the application.
The Commissioner of Licenses shall deliver to the Chief Inspector of
Police the application, together with the supporting documents therefor
and a detailed report of the results of his investigation, including the
due qualifications of the applicant to be licensed, the relationship of the
members under whom such games are to be conducted to the applicant,
whether such persons are of good moral character or have ever been
convicted of a crime, whether the conduct of such games will comply
with all the provisions of law and rules and regulations applicable
thereto, whether a commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense of any nature will be paid to any person conducting or
assisting in conducting such games of chance, whether a prize will be
offered or given in excess of the sum or value of $250 in any single
game or an aggregate of all prizes given in a series of games on a
given occasion will exceed the sum or value of $1,000 and such other
questions or inquiries as the Chief Inspector of Police may direct.
A.
If the Chief Inspector of Police shall determine that the requisite
conditions have been met by the applicant, he shall so inform the
Commissioner of Licenses, who shall issue a license to the applicant
for the holding, operation and conduct of the specific kinds of games
of chance applied for upon payment of a license fee or fees of $10 for
each occasion upon which any games of chance are to be conducted
under such license, which fees are to be paid to the Comptroller of the
City of Mount Vernon. Said license shall be countersigned by the Chief
Inspector of Police.
B.
On or before the 30th day of each month, the Comptroller of the City
of Mount Vernon shall transmit to the State Comptroller a sum equal to
50% of all license fees collected by the City of Mount Vernon pursuant
to this chapter during the preceding calendar month.
C.
No license for the holding, operation or conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one year.
D.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, the
Commissioner of Licenses shall not issue a license to any applicant
where there is found to be a violation of any state law or City ordinance
respecting premises where it is intended that such games of chance
E.
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-5
1:163
§ 95-6. Denial of application; amendment to license.
§ 95-7. Control and supervision.
The Commissioner of Licenses of the City of Mount Vernon issuing any
license under this chapter shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all games of chance held, operated or conducted under such license, to
the end that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance
with the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Control Commission and the provisions of this chapter governing
the holding, operation and conduct of the same, and the said Commissioner
of Licenses and the Control Commission shall have the power and the
authority to suspend any license and to revoke the same, after notice
and hearing, for violation of any provision of such license, this chapter,
§§ 475 to 499 of the General Municipal Law, as amended, or the rules and
regulations of the Control Commission, and shall have the right of entry by
their respective officers and agents, at all times, into any premises where
any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted or where
it is intended that any such game of chance shall be held, operated and
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the
conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
§ 95-8. Days for holding games. [Amended 2-9-1972, approved
2-10-1972]
Such games may be held on any day provided for in such license, to include
the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday,"
after 1:05 p.m.
§ 95-9. Age restriction for participation.
No persons under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any
license issued under this chapter unless accompanied by an adult.
are to be held, operated or conducted by said applicant. [Added
12-10-1958, approved 12-11-1958]
No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the
Commissioner of Licenses until after a hearing, held on due notice to
the applicant, at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard, upon
the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
A.
Any license issued under this chapter may be amended upon
application made to the Commissioner of Licenses where the subject
matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have
been included in the original license and upon payment of such
additional license fee, if any, as would have been payable if it had been
so included.
B.
§ 95-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-10
1:164
§ 95-10. Frequency of games; alcoholic beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter oftener than on six days in any one
calendar month or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 95-11. Persons operating and conducting games; equipment and
expenses; compensation.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of
the authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person
shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games
of chance under such license except an active member or a member of an
organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a member
of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or
a member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the
licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association
and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided. No such
game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as
shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation
therefor by the licensee, and no item of expense shall be incurred or paid
in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of
chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount
for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which
are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding,
operating or conducting thereof under any circumstances whatever. No
rental shall be paid for the use of any premises for holding, operating or
conducting any such game of chance thereon or for any other purpose in
connection with the holding, operating or conducting thereof unless the
amount of such rental is stated in a statement annexed to the application
for the license as provided in § 95-4 of this chapter or which is in excess of
the sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement; and
no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall
be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating
or conducting, or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of, any
game of chance so held, operated or conducted, except that reasonable
compensation may be paid to bookkeepers or accountants for bookkeeping
or accounting services rendered according to a schedule of compensation
prescribed by the rules of the Control Commission.
§ 95-12. Admission charge; prizes.
Not more than $1 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any game or games of chance are to be held,
operated and conducted under any license issued under this chapter, which
admission fee, upon payment thereof, shall entitle the person paying the
same to a card entitling him to participate without additional charge in all
§ 95-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-12
1:165
regular games of chance to be played under such license on such occasion,
and no charge in excess of $1 shall be made for a single opportunity to
participate in all special games to be played under such license on such
occasion. No prize greater in amount or value than $250 shall be offered
or given in any single game conducted under any such license, and the
aggregate amount or value of all prizes offered or given in all games
played on a single occasion shall not exceed $1,000. All winners shall be
determined and all prizes shall be awarded in any game played on any
occasion within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was
played. No alcoholic beverages shall be offered or given as a prize in any
such game.
§ 95-13. Advertising.
No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be
or has been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded, by means of
newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards,
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public,
except that one sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area may be displayed
on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be played, and an
additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the
prize or prizes are displayed; provided, however, that said signs shall fully
comply with the Building Code and Zoning Ordinances of the City of Mount
Vernon, New York.25
§ 95-14. Statement of receipts and expenses.
Within 15 days after the conclusion of the holding, operating and
conducting of any such game of chance, the authorized organization which
held, operated or conducted the same and its members who were in charge
thereof shall furnish to the Commissioner of Licenses of the City of Mount
Vernon a duly verified statement showing the amount of the gross receipts
derived from each game of chance, which shall include receipts from the
sale of shares, tickets or rights in any manner connected with participation
in said game or the right to participate therein, each item of expense
incurred or paid and each item of expenditure made or to be made, the
name and address of each person to whom each such item has been paid or
is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or
the services rendered therefor, the net profit derived from each such game
of chance, the use to which such net profit has been or is to be applied and
a list of prizes offered and given, with the respective values thereof, and
it shall be the duty of such licensee to maintain and keep such books and
records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such
report.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 95-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-15
1:166
§ 95-15. Examination of books and records.
The Commissioner of Licenses and the Control Commission shall have the
power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any
authorized organization to which any such license is issued so far as they
may relate to any transactions connected with the holding, operating and
conducting of any game of chance thereunder, and to examine any manager,
officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation
to the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license, but
any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be
necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 95-16. Appeals.
Any applicant for or holder of any license issued or to be issued by the
Commissioner of Licenses, aggrieved by any action of the Commissioner
of Licenses to which such application has been made or by which such
license has been issued, may appeal to the Control Commission from the
determination of said Commissioner of Licenses by filing with the
Commissioner of Licenses a written notice of appeal within 30 days after
the determination or action appealed from, and upon the hearing of such
appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before the Commissioner of Licenses
and any additional evidence may be produced and shall be considered
in arriving at a determination of the matters in issue, and the action
of the Control Commission upon said appeal shall be binding upon said
Commissioner of Licenses and all parties to said appeal.
§ 95-17. Immunity from prosecution; exemption.
No person or corporation lawfully conducting or participating in the
conduct of, or possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it, of any game of chance conducted or to
be conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter,
shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision
of Article 130 of the Penal Law26 or any other law or ordinance to the
extent that such conduct is specifically authorized by this City Council,
but this immunity shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly
conducting or participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any
license obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application
for such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it, of any game of chance conducted under any
license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense
or statement.
26.Editor's Note: See now Article 225 of the Penal Law and §§ 5-415, 5-417 and 5-423 of the
General Obligations Law.
§ 95-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-18
1:167
§ 95-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto, or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof unless the amount of such rental is stated in a statement
annexed to the application for the license as provided in § 95-4 of this
chapter, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess of the
sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement executed
by him or on its behalf, or shall fail to keep such books and records as
shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding,
operating and conducting of games of chance under any such license, or
shall falsify or make any false entry in any book or record so far as it relates
to any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of
any game of chance under any such license, or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any term of such license, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued to it under this chapter for
one year thereafter.
§ 95-19. Amendment and repeal.
This chapter may be amended from time to time or repealed by the City
Council of the City of Mount Vernon and such amendment or repeal, as
the case may be, made effective and operative not later than 30 days
following the date of the ordinance effecting such amendment or repeal, as
the case may be; and the approval of a majority of the electors shall not be
a condition prerequisite to the taking effect of such chapter.
§ 95-20. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
municipality, person or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction thereunder, the remainder of this
chapter or the application thereof to such municipality, person or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby, and the City Council hereby
declares that it would have enacted this chapter without the invalid
provision or application, as the case may be, had such invalidity been
apparent.
§ 95-21. Submission of proposition to electors.
The proposition that this chapter be adopted shall be submitted to the
electors of the City of Mount Vernon at the general election to be held on
the fourth day of November 1958. If the proposition shall be approved by
a vote of the majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, this chapter
shall be deemed adopted and shall become effective January 1, 1959, but
if the proposition shall not be approved by a vote of the majority of the
§ 95-18 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-21
1:168
qualified electors voting thereon, no provision of this chapter shall become
effective.27
§ 95-22. Notice.
This chapter, including the following notice, shall be published by the City
Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, in the Daily Argus, the
official newspaper of the City of Mount Vernon, twice a week in each of
three calendar weeks prior to November 4, 1958, the date of such general
election:
OFFICIAL NOTICE
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Council of the City of Mount
Vernon, New York, DID on the 9th day of July 1958, adopt an ordinance
which was thereafter approved by the Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon,
New York, described in the following proposition and directed that, at the
general election of the qualified voters of the City of Mount Vernon, to be
held at the regular designated polling places of the City of Mount Vernon,
New York, on the 4th day of November 1958, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (Eastern Standard Time), the following proposition shall
be voted upon:
"Shall the ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Mount
Vernon, New York, on the 9th day of July 1958, and thereafter approved
by the Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, entitled: AN
ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE CONDUCT OF BINGO GAMES IN THE
CITY OF MOUNT VERNON, NEW YORK, PURSUANT TO THE
PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE 1, SECTION 9, OF THE CONSTITUTION OF
THE STATE OF NEW YORK, AND CHAPTER 854 OF THE LAWS OF 1957,
AS AMENDED, be approved?"
The following is an abstract of said ordinance:
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor, to conduct the game of bingo within the territorial limits of
the City of Mount Vernon, New York, subject to the provisions of this
ordinance, the provisions of Article 14-H (§§ 475-499) of the General
Municipal Law and the provisions of the State Lottery Control Law.
All persons having the qualifications of a voter as prescribed by the
Election Law of the State of New York shall be qualified to vote at said
election.
DATED: Mount Vernon, N.Y.
July 9, 1958 Walter Meyer (Signed)
CITY CLERK
27.Editor's Note: The proposition was approved by a majority of the qualified electors at the
general election of 1958.
§ 95-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-23
1:169
§ 95-23. When effective.
This chapter shall be dated July 9, 1958, and shall take effect upon its
approval by the Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
Chapter 98
BOILERS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 81.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
§ 95-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 95-23
1:170
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Firemen and Engineers
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 12 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOILER, POWER-PRODUCING UNIT or POWER-DEVELOPING UNIT —
FIREMAN — Any person operating a stationary boiler for the generation
of steam under 50 horsepower or 75 pounds' steam pressure, except that
this article shall not apply to any person so operating a boiler under the
direction and supervision of a person licensed either under this article or
under the provisions of the municipal ordinance of this City relating to the
licensing of engineers for the operation of steam boilers and engines.
PORTABLE ENGINEER — Any person who operates a portable powerproduced
or power-controlled equipment, including but not limited to the
operation of derricks, pile drivers, hoisting equipment, road rollers,
excavating equipment and cableways, whenever such equipment is
operated by a unit producing 50 horsepower or more.
STATIONARY ENGINEER — Any person who operates a stationary boiler
or power-producing unit for the generation of power of more than 50
horsepower. Stationary engineers licensed hereunder shall be classified
A steam boiler or battery of steam boilers having a single or combined
rating of 75 or more horsepower at all times when the furnace or
furnaces attached to said boiler or boilers contain fire or other
generating elements.
A.
A steam boiler or battery of steam boilers containing, singly or
combined, 825 or more square feet of heating surface at all times when
the furnace or furnaces attached to said boiler or boilers contain fire or
other generating elements.
B.
A steam boiler or battery of steam boilers on which or on any part
of which the safety valve or valves are set to open at a pressure of
15 pounds or more per square inch at all times when the furnace
or furnaces attached to said boiler or boilers contain fire or other
generating elements.
C.
A steam boiler or battery of steam boilers having a single or combined
evaporative capacity of 2,585 pounds of water per hour from and at
212° F. at all times when the furnace or furnaces attached to said boiler
or boilers contain fire or other generating elements.
D.
Any device, apparatus, motor machine or combination thereof used to
operate refrigerating, water-cooling or air-conditioning plants having a
single or combined capacity of 30 tons or over.
E.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-1
1:171
as of First Class or Second Class. There shall be no limitations as to
the capacity of the power-producing unit which a First Class stationary
engineer may operate. A Second Class stationary engineer, however, shall
not operate any unit or units for the generation of power, the aggregate of
which is in excess of 150 horsepower, unless under the direct supervision of
a First Class stationary engineer.
§ 98-2. Violations.
§ 98-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as fireman, stationary engineer or
portable engineer of any boiler or other power-producing unit in the City
of Mount Vernon unless such person shall be at least 21 years of age, a
citizen of the United States, a resident of Westchester County for at least
one year immediately preceding and shall have been examined as to his
qualifications and ability as herein provided and received a license then in
force and effect, issued by the Board of Examining Engineers, authorizing
him to act as such fireman, stationary engineer or portable engineer, as
the case may be; and it shall be unlawful to so act after the revocation of
such certificate or license and until the restoration thereof or during the
suspension of his right so to act.
Proof of the failure to have a safety valve attachment which is set
at not more than 15 pounds, together with proof that such powerproducing
unit was found in actual operation by one not a licensed
stationary engineer or a fireman duly licensed under this article and
operating under the direct supervision of such duly licensed stationary
engineer, shall be deemed presumptive proof of a violation of this
article. Proof that the manufacturer's stamping indicates that the safety
valve attachment is regulated at more than 15 pounds shall be deemed
conclusive proof that such boiler does not have a safety valve
attachment which is set at not more than 15 pounds.
A.
Proof that any person operating a boiler or other power-producing unit
failed to exhibit a license issued by this City authorizing him to operate
such boiler or power-producing unit under such circumstances, after
demand made upon him for the production thereof by a City inspector,
or that, in lieu thereof, a person under whose direct supervision such
party was so operating had failed to produce any such license
authorizing such supervising person to act as such, shall be
presumptive evidence of a violation of this article by such person
so operating a boiler and by the owner, user, lessee, agent and
superintendent and any other person in charge of such building or
establishment.
B.
§ 98-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 98-4
1:172
§ 98-4. Examination; fees; license renewal. [Amended 12-14-1977,
approved 12-15-1977; 3-12-1986, approved 3-13-1986]
Any person desiring to be employed as a fireman, stationary engineer
or portable engineer in the City of Mount Vernon shall make written
application to the Board of Examining Engineers of the City, which Board
shall examine the applicant as to his knowledge, his character and habits
with respect to the use of intoxicating liquors and narcotics and as to his
general physical and mental fitness to perform the duties of such position
or employment. Each applicant for a fireman's license shall be required to
pay a fee of $25 for the privilege of undergoing such examination, and each
applicant for an engineer's license shall pay a fee of $25 therefor; and if,
in the opinion of the Board, such applicant is a suitable and safe person
to be entrusted with the duties of such position, a license shall be granted
to him as to his proper classification, authorizing him to be employed in
that capacity for a period of one year from the date of the issuance of such
license. Thereafter, unless in the opinion of the Board there is reasonable
ground for refusing such renewal, he shall be granted a renewal of such
license without reexamination, from year to year, upon the filing of proper
application and the payment of a fee of $25 for each renewal, provided that
application for each and every renewal shall be made within 30 days after
the expiration of the original license or renewal thereof.
§ 98-5. Reexamination.
Should any applicant for a license as either a fireman, stationary engineer
or portable engineer fail in the examination herein provided, and if, in
the opinion of the said Board, such applicant shall be found to be a fit
and proper person in other respects to receive such license, he may be
permitted by the Board to be reexamined after the expiration of 30 days
from the date of his first examination, without any additional fee. Should
any applicant fail in such reexamination, he may file a new application upon
payment of a new fee after a period of three months from the date of such
reexamination, unless for sufficient cause, in the opinion of the Board, a
shorter period is prescribed for it therefor.
§ 98-6. Exemptions from examination.
Every person who has been employed as a fireman of a boiler in the City of
Mount Vernon for a period of one year or more next prior to the passage of
this article and who files with his application a certificate of said fact under
oath, accompanied by a statement from his employer or employers verifying
the same, shall, upon payment of the required fee, be entitled to a license
in such classification without examination. Any person who is now licensed
as a stationary engineer of either First or Second Class under the existing
ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon shall be deemed to continue as a
licensed engineer of the specific class and term for which he is so licensed,
and such license shall be deemed to continue as a license issued and valid
under this article for the term issued.
§ 98-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:173
§ 98-7. Revocation and suspension of license. [Amended 2-10-1965,
approved 2-10-1965]
The Chief Examiner of Boilers shall be empowered to investigate any and
all charges of alleged incompetence or misconduct of any licensed fireman,
stationary engineer or portable engineer and to hold hearings thereon,
provided that reasonable notice in writing shall be given to the alleged
delinquent of the general nature of such charge or charges and of the time
and place for the holding of an investigation thereof and of the hearing of
witnesses and receiving evidence thereon, and provided, further that said
alleged delinquent shall have the right to answer said charges in writing
and to be present at said hearing, together with such witness or witnesses
as he may desire to have heard and such counsel as he may desire to
have represent him. If after such hearing the Chief Examiner shall be of
the opinion that such licensee is incompetent, negligent or unskilled in the
performance of his duty or is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors
or narcotics, or has willfully violated any provision of this article or has
endangered life or property or has been convicted of any crime which, in the
judgment of the Chief Examiner, affects the moral character of the licensee,
he shall have authority to suspend the license of the person so offending for
a period not exceeding three months or may revoke such license.
§ 98-8. Appeal. [Amended 2-10-1965, approved 2-10-1965]
From the decision of the Chief Examiner refusing, suspending or revoking
any license as aforesaid, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Examining
Engineers by the person affected by such decision. Written notice of such
appeal shall be given to the Board within five days after notice of the
refusal, suspension or revocation of such license, by service thereof on any
member of the Board, whereupon such Board shall give to such person
an opportunity to be heard by himself or his counsel, or both, and to
produce such proofs as may be pertinent, and the Board, or a majority
of the members thereof, may confirm, reject or modify such decision. The
revocation of any such license shall not bar the former holder thereof from
making a new application for another license after the expiration of six
months from the date of such revocation.
§ 98-9. Limitation of license.
The license herein provided for shall entitle the holder to operate only in
the classification set out on such license and not otherwise. The Board shall
have the power to make any rules and regulations limiting or controlling the
use of such licenses within the purview of the law.
§ 98-10. Distribution of fees. [Amended 2-10-1965, approved
2-10-1965]
The fees charged and payable under § 98-4 of this article shall be paid over
to the Comptroller of the City of Mount Vernon. The Chief Examiner and
Examiners of Engineers shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by
§ 98-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 98-10
1:174
the Board of Estimate and Contract pursuant to provisions of the Charter of
the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:175

ARTICLE II
Gas-Fired Boilers and Other Equipment
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 10 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 98-11. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful to install or use gas heating apparatus for domestic,
industrial or commercial heating purposes in the City except in compliance
with the Plumbing and Building Codes28 and the provisions of this article.
Service and installation must be made by a registered plumber licensed by
the City.
§ 98-12. Word usage.
§ 98-13. Approval of equipment required.
For the purpose of this article, "gas-fired appliances, gas-fired boilers,
furnaces, space heaters and unit heaters" shall mean any appliance,
boiler, furnace, unit heater or space heater supplying heat and using
gas as a fuel.
A.
For the purpose of this article, "gas-fired boilers, furnaces, space
heaters, unit heaters and appliances" shall mean any appliance, boiler,
furnace, space heater or unit heater having a device or so-called burner
of any kind whereby the use of gas as a fuel is attached thereto as
specified in Subsection A of this section.
B.
The Commissioner of Buildings shall be the examiner, empowered to
pass upon all plans which must be submitted prior to the installation of
any gas burner or device or its adjuncts.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or its agents
governed by this article to install any gas burner or device unless an
application in the following form is on file with the Building Department
before an installation is made and a certificate of approval shall have
been issued.
B.
Application for certificate of approval shall be in the following form:
(1) Name of burner or boiler.
(2) Name of manufacturer.
(3) Address of manufacturer.
(4) Kind of gas and pressure required for burner.
(5) Number of years burner has been on the market.
C.
28.Editor's Note: Consult the office of the Department of Buildings for further information
regarding building and plumbing regulations.
§ 98-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-13
1:177
§ 98-14. Applicability.
§ 98-15. Application for installation.
All applications for installation of gas-fired appliances, boilers, furnaces,
space heaters, unit heaters, their auxiliaries, burners and other devices
List of laboratories, states and cities approving same. If approved
by the American Gas Association, give listing.
(6)
(7) Attach blueprint of assembly.
Attach set of specifications and drawings to show construction of
device.
Application filed the _____ day of _____ 19_____ by __________
(8)
The Commissioner of Buildings will issue a certificate of approval or
disapproval according to the provisions of these regulations. The test
of the Commissioner of Buildings shall cover arrangement of parts,
electrical control, thermostatic arrangement, reliability of automatic
features, positiveness of ignition and safeguards against flooding or
other defects. Wherever the gas burner or device has been duly
approved by the American Gas Association, the Commissioner of
Buildings may dispense with such test and issue a certificate of
approval for such equipment.
D.
With the certificate of disapproval, the Commissioner of Buildings will
issue to the applicant and to the manufacturer of the device a clear and
concise statement as to the reason or reasons for disapproval.
E.
New application after disapproval shall not be made until 30 days from
the date of issue of certificate of disapproval.
F.
Any new applications after disapproval shall be accompanied by a clear
and concise statement giving reasons for reconsideration, based on
information received with the certificate of disapproval.
G.
Each manufacturer, in order to install gas-fired boilers or furnaces,
must register his equipment with the Commissioner of Buildings. This
approval will cover all equipment of the manufacturer, provided that
all such equipment has been approved and listed by the American Gas
Association or the local gas utility.
H.
These regulations are intended for application to each heating boiler,
furnace, space heater, unit heater and appliance used for domestic,
industrial or commercial purposes.
A.
No gas appliance as described in § 96-12A for heating a building shall
be installed and no boiler or furnace designed for other fuels shall be
converted to the use of gas fuel unless approved by the Commissioner
of Buildings and the American Gas Association.
B.
§ 98-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 98-15
1:178
shall be made to the Commissioner of Buildings, giving the following
information:
§ 98-16. Inspection and approval.
§ 98-17. Safety devices.
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Location where gas-burning equipment is to be installed.
C. Maximum pressure, BTU input.
D. Name of burner and by whom manufactured.
E. Name of concern making the installation; license number.
Location of buildings or building where burners or burner are located
and nature of construction, dimensions of buildings and purposes for
which used.
F.
No gas-burning equipment except that which has been approved by the
Commissioner of Buildings shall be installed in the City. No gas-burning
apparatus may be used until it shall have been inspected and approved
by the Superintendent of Plumbing.
A.
Application for such inspection shall be in writing on a form furnished
by the Commissioner of Buildings, and a fee of $5 for each inspection
shall accompany the application.
B.
A permit issued pursuant to these regulations shall at all times be
subject to inspection by the Superintendent of Plumbing.
C.
The Commissioner of Buildings may at any time modify, suspend or
revoke any such permit upon certification to him by the Superintendent
of Plumbing of the Building Department.
D.
Whenever an installation is made, it will be necessary that a full-size
shutoff valve be located in a suitable curb box located at the front of
the building near the curb, fully exposed and readily accessible for Fire
Department use.
A.
All gas appliances shall be provided with a manual shutoff valve ahead
of all controls, including the pilot gas valve. A union connection shall
be provided downstream from the manual main shutoff valve to permit
removal of the controls.
B.
A thermostatic pilot light shall be used, so constructed and adjusted
that no gas can flow thorough the main burner unless the pilot light is
burning.
C.
The boiler or furnace shall be equipped with safety devices arranged to
shut off the main burners in case of high steam pressure or low water
(or high temperature) for steam or vacuum vapor boilers or of high
D.
§ 98-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-17
1:179
§ 98-18. Compliance with standards.
All piping shall be installed in compliance with the provisions set down by
the National Board of Fire Underwriters, Code No. 54; the American Gas
Association, as revised 1955; and the Plumbing and Building Codes29 of the
City of Mount Vernon, New York, or other duly adopted rules or regulations
of the City.
§ 98-19. Outside gas piping.
All outside gas piping shall be done in accordance with the rules and
regulations as approved by the American Gas Association and the local gas
utility.
§ 98-20. Ventilation.
No gas-fired boilers or furnaces shall be installed in a room in which the
facilities and ventilation do not permit the proper combustion of the gas
under normal conditions of use. Permanent openings must be made to
provide an adequate supply of air for small enclosed boiler rooms.
§ 98-21. Pilot gas supply.
When installing gas-fired boilers or furnaces, the pilot gas supply shall be
connected so that the pilot can be lighted while the main burner is turned
off by a manually operated valve.
temperature for warm-air furnaces. No devices employing or depending
upon an electrical current shall be used to control or ignite a gas supply
if of such a character that failure of the electrical current could result
in the escape of unburned gas or in failure to reduce the supply of gas
under conditions which would normally result in its reduction unless
other means are provided to prevent the development of dangerous
temperatures, pressures or the escape of gas.
All installations of gas heating equipment in steam plants of both high
and low pressure shall be equipped with low-water cutoff approved by
the Commissioner of Buildings.
E.
An approved gas pressure regulator of sufficient size shall be installed
in the gas line leading to the appliance and properly vented in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
F.
All gas appliances, boilers, furnaces, space heaters and unit heaters
must be installed in accordance with the standards as approved by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters, Code No. 54, Installation of Gas
Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings.
G.
29.Editor's Note: Consult the office of the Department of Buildings for further information
regarding building and plumbing regulations.
§ 98-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 98-22
1:180
§ 98-22. Remote control.
As part of each burner installation, there shall be installed a remote control
switch labeled "gas burner" whereby the electric current may be, in an
emergency, controlled by members of the Fire Department. Such switch
shall be located in a readily accessible location such as the nearest inside
entrance to the cellar, preferably in the cellar stairway door.
§ 98-23. Electrical wiring.
Electrical current wiring and equipment in connection with gas-burning
equipment shall be installed in accordance with the National Electrical
Code or other duly adopted rules or ordinances of the City.
§ 98-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-23
1:181

ARTICLE III
Licensing and Inspection
[Adopted 2-10-1965 as Ch. 11 of the General Ordinances, approved
2-10-1965]
§ 98-24. License required.
No person shall use or permit any other person to use a boiler or powerdeveloping
unit or power-producing unit, as hereinafter defined, until the
same shall have been duly licensed as provided in this article, nor for a
longer period than authorized by such license, nor after such license has
been revoked, nor until duly inspected and the use thereof permitted by
the State of New York, Department of Labor, Division of Industrial Safety
Service.
§ 98-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOILER, POWER-DEVELOPING UNIT, POWER-PRODUCING UNIT — A
closed vessel in which water is heated, steam is generated or steam is
superheated, or any combination thereof, under pressure or vacuum for
uses external to itself by the application of heat from combustible fuels,
electricity, nuclear energy or any other source, but not including a device or
apparatus used solely to heat water for a hot-water supply system. The term
"boiler" shall include the apparatus used by which heat is generated and all
controls and devices related to such apparatus or to the closed vessel. The
term "boiler" also shall include fired units for heating or vaporizing liquids
other than water where these units are separate from processing systems
and are complete in themselves.
§ 98-26. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
§ 98-27. Applicability.
Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, this article shall apply
to any boiler, power-developing unit or power-producing unit when used
in connection with any building wherein is located any theater, school,
A. A boiler located on a farm and used solely for agricultural purposes.
A steam or vapor boiler operating at a gauge pressure of not more than
15 pounds per square inch and which is located in a dwelling occupied
by less than six families.
B.
A hot-water boiler which is located in a dwelling occupied by less than
six families.
C.
D. A boiler subject to inspection or control by a federal agency.
§ 98-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-27
1:183
hospital, nursing home or convalescent home without regard to the amount
of pressure produced thereby.
§ 98-28. Compliance with standards.
All boilers subject to the provisions of this article shall be constructed and
stamped in accordance with the requirements of the New York State Boiler
Code affecting localities over which such state reserves jurisdiction or in
accordance with the requirements of the Code of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers. No such boiler shall be installed in any building
in this City unless there shall first be filed with the Inspector of Steam
Boilers a copy of the manufacturer's data report on the standard form of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
§ 98-29. Pressure limitation.
No person shall subject or permit any other person to subject any boiler to
a higher pressure than that specified for its use in the license to be issued.
§ 98-30. Safety valve.
No power-producing unit shall be used which shall not have a safety valve
of sufficient area to carry off excess pressure as fast as generated and
have attached thereto an escape pipe of like area leading to the open
atmosphere.
§ 98-31. Contents and display of license.
Such license shall, as near as may be possible, describe the boiler inspected,
tested and licensed, the name of the owner, the date when inspected and
tested and the number of pounds per square inch approved, and such
license, when so issued, shall only authorize the operation of such boiler
by such owner or his duly authorized agent to the extent there indicated.
All licenses shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the room where
such licensed boiler is located.
§ 98-32. Automatic revocation of license.
If any boiler shall be removed or reset or any change made in connection
therewith without the previous written authority of the aforesaid New York
State Department of Labor, Division of Industrial Safety Service after any
inspection or test conducted, authorized or accepted by said Department,
such reset or removal or such change shall operate as a revocation of the
license.30
30.Editor's Note: Former § 98-33, Board of Examining Engineers, and former § 98-34, Records
and Reports of Board, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 3-24-1999
by L.L. No. 2-1999, effective 6-30-1999 and 6-14-2000, respectively.
§ 98-27 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 98-32
1:184
Chapter 104
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 104-1. Authority to number and renumber.
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized and empowered
to number, renumber and adjust the numbers of all buildings in the City.
In numbering and renumbering buildings, he shall leave sufficient numbers
on each block so that under any circumstances there would be but one
block where a change would be required in case of renumbering at any
subsequent time.
§ 104-2. Display of numbers.
The owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of any building in the
City upon a street to which street numbers have been assigned by the
Commissioner of Public Works shall cause the proper street number or
numbers of such building to be displayed on the fanlight, transom, door,
entrance steps or gate or at the nearest practicable point to the entrance
of such building in such manner that the street number or numbers may
at all times be plainly legible from the sidewalk in front of such building;
provided, however, that so far as the purpose or intent of this chapter
is concerned, the "front" shall be construed as that side of the building
which faces the street on which the number or numbers of such building
or premises on which such building is situated have been allotted, and that
the number or numbers shall be displayed on such side of such building or
premises.
§ 104-3. Penalties for offenses.
If the owner, lessee, agent or other person in charge of any building upon
a street to which street numbers of buildings have been assigned by the
Commissioner of Public Works shall fail to display the proper street number
or numbers of such building as provided in the foregoing section of this
chapter within 30 days after such numbers have been assigned by the
Commissioner of Public Works, the Commissioner of Public Works shall
forthwith serve upon such person or persons a copy of this chapter, and if
within 30 days after service the owner, lessee, tenant or other person in
charge of such building shall fail or neglect to comply with the provisions
thereof, he shall be subject to a penalty of $50, which shall be sued for and
collected in the name of the City.
§ 98-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:185
Chapter 106
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abatement of nuisances — See Ch. 80.
Boilers and other equipment — See Ch. 98.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 226.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 104-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 104-3
1:186
ARTICLE I
Unsafe Buildings
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
UNSAFE BUILDINGS — All buildings or structures which have any or all of
the following defects shall be deemed "unsafe buildings":
Those which list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle of the third of
the base of the structural part so listing.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of
damage or deterioration of nonsupporting enclosing walls or coverings.
B.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which these are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength
for the purpose used.
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other cause so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, or morals or the general health
and welfare of the occupant or of the people of the City of Mount
Vernon.
D.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to
cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
E.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who are or may live therein.
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic,
or those having insufficient stairways, fire escapes or other means of
communication, or of light or ventilation.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
H.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, moral, safety or general welfare of the people
of the City of Mount Vernon.
I.
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-1
1:187
§ 106-2. Standards for repair, evacuation or demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Commissioner
in ordering repair, vacation or demolition.
§ 106-3. Unsafe buildings declared nuisances.
All unsafe buildings within the terms of § 106-1 are hereby declared to
be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as
hereinbefore and hereafter provided.
§ 106-4. Duties of Commissioner.
The Commissioner, among other things, shall:
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of this chapter
or of any provision of the Fire Prevention Code31 or of the other
ordinances of this City.
J.
If the unsafe building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired.
A.
If the unsafe building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated.
B.
In any case where an unsafe building is 50% damaged or decayed, or
deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished;
and in cases where a building or structure cannot be repaired so that
it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall
be demolished. In all cases where an unsafe building is a fire hazard,
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any
ordinance of this City, it shall be demolished.
C.
Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, theatres, hotels, multiple dwellings,
commercial, manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of
determining whether any conditions exist which render such places an
unsafe building within the terms of § 106-1.
A.
Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that such building, wall or structure is or
may by existing in violation of this chapter.
B.
Inspect any building, wall or structure, repaired as hereinafter provided
for, by the Fire or Police Departments as probably existing in violation
of the terms of this chapter.
C.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Fire Prevention.
§ 106-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 106-4
1:188
Notice. [Amended 1-13-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011, approved
2-23-2011]
Serve written notice upon the owner and all other persons having
an interest in such property or structure, by either personal service
or by registered mail, addressed to his last known address as
shown by the records of the Assessor or the Comptroller and/or
in the office of the County Clerk or county register containing a
description of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which
the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order of the
Commissioner of Buildings requiring same to be changed, altered,
repaired, vacated or demolished within 30 days; and if such service
is to be made by registered mail, for the posting of a copy of such
notice on the premises.
(1)
Provide for the filing a copy of such notice in the office of the
Westchester County Clerk, which notice shall be filed by such
Clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to
Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, and shall have the
same effect as a notice of pendency as therein provided, except
as otherwise hereinafter provided in this subsection. A notice so
filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of
filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order of
a judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the
Corporation Counsel. Westchester County shall mark such notice
and any record or docket thereof as cancelled of record upon the
presentation and filing of such consent or of a certified copy of such
order.
(2)
D.
Set forth in the notice provided for in Subsection D above there shall
be a description of the building, wall or structure deemed unsafe, a
statement of the particulars which make a building, wall or structure
an unsafe building and an order requiring it to be put in such condition
as to comply with the terms of this chapter within such length of time,
not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable.
E.
Place a notice on all unsafe buildings reading as follows:
"This building has been found to be an unsafe building by the
Commissioner of Buildings. This notice is to remain on this building
(or structure) until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance
with the notice which has been given to its owner, occupant,
mortgagee or lessee. It is unlawful to remove this notice until the work
ordered is complied with."
F.
Report to the Corporation Counsel the names of all persons failing,
within a reasonable time, to comply with the notice provided for in
the Subsections D and E, or who remove the notice provided for in
Subsection F hereof.
G.
§ 106-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-4
1:189
§ 106-5. Emergency repair.
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the life or safety of any person unless an unsafe building is immediately
repaired, vacated or demolished, the Commissioner shall cause the
immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such unsafe building. The costs
of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition shall be collected in the
same manner as provided in § 106-4.
Additional duties: [Added 1-13-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011, approved
2-23-2011]
Preside over a hearing, notice of which and time and place thereof
to be specified in the notice to repair or demolish served upon
the owner and such persons having an interest in the property or
structure as is herein prescribed.
(1)
Provide for the removal of such building or structure by the City
in the event such owner fails to or refuses to repair or remove the
same within the time provided.
(2)
Provide for the assessment of all costs and expenses incurred by
the City in connection with the proceedings to repair or remove
such building or structure, including the cost of actually removing
the same, against the land on which such building or structure is
located.
(3)
The powers conferred by this section shall be in addition to all
other powers conferred upon cities in relation to the same subject
matter. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
amend, repeal, modify or affect any existing local law, ordinance
or provision of any charter or administrative code, or to restrict or
limit any power otherwise conferred on any city by law with respect
to the subject matter to which this section relates.
(4)
H.
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the
order provided for in Subsection D hereof, within five days, the
Commissioner may cause such building or structure to be repaired,
vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant under the standards
hereinbefore provided for in § 106-2 hereof, and with the assistance of
the Corporation Counsel shall cause the costs of such repair, vacation
or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building or
structure existed, as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be added
to the tax roll as an assessment or to be levied as a special tax against
the land upon which the building or structure stands or did stand, or
to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner; except in cases
where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will
not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of the City of Mount Vernon. The Commissioner shall notify the
Corporation Counsel to take legal action to force the owner to make all
necessary repairs or to vacate or demolish the building or structure.
I.
§ 106-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 106-6
1:190
§ 106-6. Duties of Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel, among other things shall:
§ 106-7. Where owner is absent from City.
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is absent from the City of Mount Vernon, or the Commissioner
is unable to have served upon them the notice and order provided for in
§ 106-4, the Commissioner shall send such notice by registered mail to the
owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee at the last known address, and a copy
of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe building
to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
§ 106-8. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the City of Mount Vernon shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent,
or employee of the City of Mount Vernon, as a result of any act required
or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter, shall be
defended by the Corporation Counsel until the final determination of the
proceedings thereon.
§ 106-9. Duties of Fire Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall make a report, in writing, to the
Commissioner of Buildings of all buildings or structures which are, may be
or are suspected to be unsafe buildings within the terms of this chapter.
Such reports shall be delivered to the Commissioner of Buildings within
24 hours of the notice of discovery of such building or structure by any
employee of the Fire Department.
§ 106-10. Duties of Police Department.
The Chief Inspector shall make a report, in writing, to the Commissioner of
Buildings of any buildings or structures which are, may be or are suspected
to be unsafe buildings within the terms of this chapter. Such reports shall
be delivered to the Commissioner of Buildings within 24 hours of notice of
Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices and
orders provided for herein in § 106-4.
A.
Appear at all hearings before the Commissioner in regards to unsafe
buildings.
B.
Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred
by the Commissioner in repairing or causing unsafe buildings to be
vacated or demolished.
C.
§ 106-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-10
1:191
the discovery of such building or structure by any employee of the Police
Department.
§ 106-11. Vacating buildings and closing streets.
When a building or structure, or part thereof, is in an unsafe condition
so that life or public safety is endangered thereby, the Commissioner
may order and require the inmates and occupants to vacate the same
forthwith. He may, when necessary for the public safety, temporarily
close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and places adjacent to
such building or structure and prohibit them from being used. The Fire
Chief and Chief Inspector, when called upon by the Commissioner of
Buildings to cooperate, shall assist in the enforcement of such orders
or requirements.
A.
Laborers and materials. For the purposes of complying with the
provisions of this section the Commissioner shall employ such labor
and materials as may be necessary to perform the work as speedily as
possible.
B.
§ 106-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 106-11
1:192
Chapter 113
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 84.
Bingo — See Ch. 95.
Public buildings — See Ch. 200.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC DANCE HALL OR DANCING SCHOOL — Any room or place in
which dancing is freely permitted, practiced or taught, or any room or place
in which dances are held, daily or weekly or at stated times or at regular
recurring intervals, and to which the public is invited or admitted.
§ 113-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful to hold any public dances or to maintain or operate
dance halls or dancing schools or to permit dancing in any place to which
the public is freely admitted, except as hereinafter provided, until the place
in which the same may be held shall first have been duly licensed for such
purposes as a public dance hall or dancing school.
§ 113-3. Issuance of license.
All licenses shall be issued by the Mayor and countersigned by the City
Clerk.
§ 113-4. Compliance with regulations.
No license for a public dance hall or dancing school shall be issued until it
shall be found that such place complies with and conforms to all ordinances
and health and fire regulations of the City, that it is properly ventilated and
supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences and that it is a safe and proper
place for the purposes for which it is to be used. All public dance halls and
dancing schools shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary
condition, and all stairways and other passages and all rooms connected
with such place shall be kept open and well lighted. The Commissioner of
Public Safety or any member of the police force shall have the power, and
it shall be their duty, to cause the place, hall or room where any dance or
ball is held or given to be vacated whenever any provision of this chapter or
of any other ordinance with regard to public dances or public halls is being
violated, or whenever any indecent act shall be committed, or whenever any
disorderly, violent or vulgar act shall take place therein.
§ 106-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-5
1:193
§ 113-5. Revocation of license.
The license of any public dance hall or dancing school may be forfeited or
revoked by the Mayor for disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises,
for permitting dancing on a Sunday or for the violation of any of the rules,
regulations, ordinances or laws governing or applying to public halls or
public places.32
§ 113-6. License fees.
For every license for a public dance hall or dancing school so granted, there
shall be paid to the City Clerk the sum of $50 for a yearly license and $25
for a six months' license. No such license shall be granted for a lesser period
than six months.
§ 113-7. Exemptions.
No public dance hall or dancing school license shall be required for any
hall or room, nor if licensed as such shall it be considered as licensed,
when used and controlled by a religious, benevolent, fraternal, political or
labor organization formed in good faith for religious, benevolent, fraternal
or political purposes; nor of any incorporated volunteer fire company; nor
of any military organization comprising a part of the regular state or federal
military forces; nor of any hall or room owned and controlled by a
responsible gymnastic or athletic organization formed in good faith and
owning its own gymnasium, and which aforementioned organizations shall
have or give occasional public dances as merely incidental to the purposes
for which any such organization was formed; nor of any hall or room not
used for dancing except by community center clubs or associations formed
under the provisions of the Education Law or by organizations of public or
parochial schoolchildren.
§ 113-8. Closing hours.
All licensed public dance halls and dancing schools shall be closed on or
before the hour of 12:30 a.m., except when, on application to the Mayor, he
may grant a permit allowing such place on a particular occasion to remain
open until a later hour. No tickets shall be sold or accepted for admission to
a public dance hall after the hour of 12:00 midnight.
§ 113-9. Owner's consent required.
No license for a public dance hall shall be issued unless the application
therefor is accompanied by the consent in writing of the owner of the real
property where such dance hall is located.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Public Buildings.
§ 113-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 113-10
1:194
§ 113-10. Return checks.
The giving of return checks to public dances or public balls conducted in
a licensed dance hall, permitting holders of such checks to leave the place
where such public dance is being held and to return thereto during the
public dance or public ball, is prohibited.
§ 113-11. Hotels and rooming houses.
No license shall be issued for a public dance hall or dancing school which is
located in a building in which there are rooms for hire, nor in a hotel, nor
in a building having a direct or indirect connection with a rooming house or
hotel.
Chapter 116
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 113-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-11
1:195

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Dogs
[Adopted 1-14-1970 as Ch. 16 of the General Ordinances, approved
1-19-1970; amended in its entirety 6-9-1982, approved 6-10-1982]
§ 116-1. Running at large prohibited.
§ 116-2. Seizure, redemption and fees.
No person being the owner or having custody and control of any dog
shall permit or allow such dog to run or to be at large in the streets or
on the walks or public grounds of the City unless such dog shall wear a
collar or a harness and be effectively restrained by a chain or leash not
exceeding six feet in length. The name and address of such owner or
custodian shall be legibly written, printed or stamped upon the collar
or a tag attached to such collar or harness of such dog, except when on
the premises of the owner or on the premises of another person with
the knowledge and assent of such other person.
A.
Proof of the running or being at large of a dog contrary to the provisions
of this section shall be presumptive evidence that the person in whose
name such dog is registered and/or the person who harbors such dog is
the person who permitted or allowed such dog to run or be at large.
B.
In addition to any other penalty provided by this article, the Animal
Shelter Warden and his deputies and the Commissioner of Public Safety
are empowered to pick up and confine or cause or direct to be seized,
picked up and confined, any dog referred to in § 116-1, whether
licensed or not, that shall be found at large and not on a chain or leash
in the parks, park streets, walks, public grounds, public streets and
public areas in the City.
A.
Each dog so seized which is not identified, whether or not licensed,
shall be held for a period of five days from the day seized, during which
period the dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided that such owner
produces proof that the dog has been licensed and has been identified
pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law, and further provided the owner pays the following impoundment
fees in addition to any other penalties provided in this article:
Ten dollars for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that
person.
(1)
Twenty dollars for the first 24 hours or part thereof for the second
impoundment within one year of the first impoundment of any dog
owned by that person.
(2)
Thirty dollars for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $3 for each
additional 24 hours or part thereof for the third and subsequent
impoundments within one year of the first impoundment of any dog
owned by that person.
(3)
B.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:197
§ 116-3. Nuisances.
Promptly upon seizure of any identified dog, the owner of record of
such dog shall be notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the facts of seizure and the procedure for redemption. If
notification is personally given, such dog shall be held for a period of
five days after the day of notice, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner. If such notification is made by mail, such dog
shall be held for a period of seven days from the date of mailing, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. In either case, the
owner may redeem such dog upon payment of the impoundment fees
provided herein and by producing proof that the dog has been licensed.
C.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the Dog
Warden and his deputies may seek to collect impoundment fees from
any owner, whether or not a dog is redeemed.
D.
An owner shall forfeit title to any dog unredeemed at the expiration
of the appropriate redemption period, and the dog shall then be made
available for adoption or euthanized subject to the provisions of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, provided that no such dog shall be
delivered for adoption unless it has been licensed pursuant to the
provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law prior to its release from
the custody of the shelter.
E.
The Animal Shelter Warden and his deputies are hereby authorized and
directed to charge the following fees: [Added 12-11-1985, approved
12-12-1985; amended 1-8-1986, approved 1-9-1986; 11-23-1993,
approved 11-24-1993]
Service Fee
Dog adoption $30
Cat adoption $15
Immunization $10
Euthanasia $20
Pickup at home or business $25
Volunteer surrender at shelter $20
F.
No person having the right and ability to prevent such act shall
knowingly or carelessly or negligently permit any dog to commit any
nuisance upon any sidewalk of any public street, including that part
of the highway between the sidewalk and the curbline, avenue, park,
public square or place in the City; or upon the floor of any hall of
any tenement house which is used in common by the tenants thereof;
or upon the fences of any premises or the walls or stairways of any
building abutting on a public street, avenue, park, public square or
place; or upon the floor of any theater, store, factory or any building
which is used in common by the public, including all public rooms or
places therewith connected; or upon the floor of any depot or station;
A.
§ 116-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 116-3
1:198
§ 116-4. Defendant's pleas.
§ 116-5. Enforcement.
The Dog Warden, his deputies and police officers of the Mount Vernon Police
Department may issue appearance tickets for violations of any provisions of
this article.
§ 116-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-22-1985, approved
5-23-1985]
or upon the station platform or stairs of any railroad or other common
carrier; or upon the roof of any tenement house used in common by
the tenants thereof; or upon the floor of any hall, stairway or office
of any hotel or lodging house which is used in common by the guests
thereof, or upon the private property of another person without the
owner's consent; nor shall any such person omit to do any reasonable
and proper act or take any reasonable and proper precaution to prevent
any such dog from committing such nuisance in or upon any of the
places or premises herein specified.
It shall be the duty of each owner or person having custody and control
of any dog, except blind persons accompanied by a guide dog, to
remove any feces left by such dog on any area described in Subsection
A above.
B.
Any defendant charged with a violation of this article may himself plead
guilty to the charge in open court. He may also submit to the Judge,
in person, by duly authorized agent, or by registered mail, a statement
that he waives arraignment in open court and the aid of counsel; that
he pleads guilty to the offense charged; that he elects and requests that
the charge be disposed of and the fine or penalty be fixed by the court;
of any explanation that he desires to make concerning the offense
charged; and that he makes all statements under penalty of perjury.
Thereupon, the Judge may proceed as though the defendant had been
convicted upon a plea of guilty, in open court; provided, however, that
any imposition of a fine or penalty hereunder shall be deemed tentative
until such fine or penalty shall have been paid and discharged in full.
If, upon receipt of the aforesaid statement, the Judge shall deny the
same, he shall thereupon notify the defendant of this fact and that he
is required to appear before the Judge at a stated time and place to
answer the charge which shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to the
applicable provisions of law.
A.
If a defendant intends to plead not guilty to the charge, then he must
appear in court at the time and date indicated on the appearance ticket.
B.
A violation of § 116-1 or 116-3 of this article shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $250 for each violation found to have been
committed or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
[Amended 3-14-2001, approved 3-15-2001]
A.
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-6
1:199
§ 116-7. Severability.
If any provision, section, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the
provision, section, paragraph, subdivision or clause so adjudged, and the
balance of this article shall remain valid and effective.
Any other violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $25,; except that when the person was found to have violated
this article, the former Article I or any provision of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law within the preceding five years, the fine
may not be more than $50; and where the person was found to have
committed two or more such violations within the preceding five years,
it shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both.
B.
§ 116-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 116-7
1:200
ARTICLE II
Wild Animals
[Adopted 1-14-1970 as Ch. 16-A of the General Ordinances,
approved 1-19-1970]
§ 116-8. Establishments permitted to keep wild animals.
No person shall keep an animal of a species which is wild, ferocious, fierce,
dangerous or naturally inclined to do harm in any place other than:
§ 116-9. Snakes.
A venomous snake shall not be sold to, given to or kept by any person.
A. A laboratory operated pursuant to § 504 of the Public Health Law.
An establishment of a commercial dealer in animals having protective
devices which are adequate to prevent such animals from escaping
or injuring the public, or a circus having such protective devices and
licensed pursuant to Chapter 240, Article I, of the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon, New York, provided that such establishment or circus
furnishes satisfactory evidence to the Commissioner of Public Safety
that it employs trained personnel and has and employs protective
devices adequate to prevent such wild animals from escaping or
injuring the public.
B.
§ 116-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-9
1:201

ARTICLE III
Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
[Adopted 2-24-1988, approved 2-25-1988]
§ 116-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
DANGEROUS DOG —
KEEPER — Any person other than the owner or a dangerous/vicious dog
who harbors or has in his or her possession a dangerous/vicious dog or
manages, controls or cares for a dangerous/vicious dog.
OWNER — Any person or legal entity having a possessory property right in
an animal or who harbors, cares for or exercises control over an animal or
knowingly permits an animal to remain on premises occupied by him.
UNCONFINED — Outside the confines of a residence or commercial
structure commonly occupied by human beings or an enclosure of at least
six feet in height with secure sides, top and bottom or, if there is no bottom,
with sides which extend at least one foot underground, and which shall be
Any dog:
Which when unprovoked approaches any person upon the streets,
sidewalks or on any public grounds or places in a vicious or
terrorizing manner or in any apparent attitude of attack;
(1)
With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;
(2)
Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human
being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private
property; or
(3)
Which has been ordered confined pursuant to the provisions of
§ 121 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.33
(4)
A.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, except pursuant to Subsection A(4)
above, no dog may be considered to be a dangerous dog by reason
of any injury or damage sustained by a person when such person was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime; any injury or damage sustained
by a domestic animal which, at the time such injury or damage was
sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or
any injury or damage caused by the dog in protecting or defending
a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an
unjustified attack or assault.
B.
33.Editor's Note: See now § 123 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 116-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-10
1:203
locked and designed to prevent the escape of the animal or the entry of
young children.
VICIOUS DOG —
§ 116-11. Restrictions on dangerous dogs.
No person should suffer, permit or allow any dangerous dog to remain
unconfined on property within the City of Mount Vernon or to go beyond
the boundaries of such property unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds
and not exceeding three feet in length and is under the direct control and
supervision of the owner of the dog. The owner or keeper of a dangerous
dog shall post conspicuous notices on the perimeter of the property where
such dog is kept to warn persons of the nature of the dog confined therein.
§ 116-12. Vicious dogs prohibited.
No person shall sell, purchase, possess, rent, lease or harbor a vicious dog
within the jurisdiction of the City of Mount Vernon other than a vicious
dog that has been acquired prior to the effective date of this article and
registered as required pursuant to this article.
§ 116-13. Exceptions.
Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting;
A.
Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part for the purpose
of attacking a human being or domestic animal upon command.34
B.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
Animal shelters designated by the Department of Health to keep
or hold animals, including all shelters operated by the American
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals;
(1)
Facilities which are maintained by or are under the control of the
City;
(2)
Places of public exhibition, contest or show sponsored by a dog
club association or similar organization and persons who have
brought a dog temporarily within the jurisdiction of the City of
Mount Vernon for the purpose of showing a dog to such an
exhibition, contest or show or for other entertainment purposes as
defined in regulations promulgated by the City Council, provided
that the sponsor of the exhibition, contest, show or entertainment
has obtained written permission from the City Council and has
provided protective measures adequate to prevent dogs from
escaping or injuring the public;
(3)
A.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, including pit bulls in the definition of "vicious dog,"
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-8-2001, approved 8-9-2001.
§ 116-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 116-13
1:204
§ 116-14. Registration.
The owner of any dangerous/vicious dog who acquired such dog prior to the
effective date of this article shall register such dog with the office of the
City Clerk no later than 180 days after the effective date of this article.
§ 116-15. Insurance required.
§ 116-16. Enforcement.
Laboratories operated pursuant to § 504 of the Public Health Law
or educational or scientific institutions; and
(4)
(5) Persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
This section shall not be deemed to prohibit any business transaction
concerning a dog that is not physically present in the City.
B.
No owner of any dangerous/vicious dog shall be allowed to register said
animal unless such owner produces proof that he has obtained liability
insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000 covering any damage
or injury which may be caused by such dog during the twelve-month
period for which registration is sought.
A.
The owner of a dangerous/vicious dog shall maintain liability insurance
in full force and effect at all times as required by Subsection A of this
section, unless he shall cease to own, keep or harbor the dog prior to
the expiration of such registration.
B.
Any police officer, animal control officer or Code Enforcement Officer
of the City of Mount Vernon is authorized to issue an appearance ticket
or uniform appearance ticket for the violation of any provision of this
article.
A.
Any animal which is observed running at large in violation of the
provisions of this article may be picked up or captured by a dog warden,
animal control officer, police officer or by any other person or agency
duly designated by the City of Mount Vernon to perform such service.
Any such dog warden, animal control officer, police officer or the
authorized person or agency who picks up or captures such animal shall
be empowered to exercise such degree of force as shall be necessary to
effect such pickup or capture without intentionally injuring or harming
the animal.
B.
When the animal seized is a dog, it shall be held, cared for and disposed
of in a manner consistent with § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law of the State of New York.35
C.
Every reasonable effort will be made by the City of Mount Vernon
to locate and notify the owner of the pickup or capture of his or
D.
35.Editor's Note: See now § 117 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 116-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-16
1:205
§ 116-17. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.
Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 116-18. Severability.
If any provision, section, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the
provision, section, paragraph, subdivision or clause so adjudged, and the
balance of this article shall remain valid and effective.
her animal. Upon such location and notification to the owner, the
Department of Health will return the animal to its owner within a
prompt and reasonable period of time, provided that such return of the
animal is not contrary to the provisions of this article. The City may
require reasonable proof of ownership. The return of such animal to
its owner shall be deemed proof of ownership, unless such animal has
a valid license tag pursuant to the provisions of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York, in which case such tagging shall
be deemed proof of such ownership. The owner shall be subject to the
penalties provided in this article.
§ 116-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 116-18
1:206
Chapter 120
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boilers and other equipment — See Ch. 98.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 227.
§ 120-1. Inspections.
§ 120-2. Record of permits, certificates and inspections.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall keep a record of all applications for
permits to string wires, all certificates of inspection issued by him and all
inspections made by him, with the date thereof, and such books and records
shall be at all times open for public inspection.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Public Works to inspect
all overhead and underground street constructions, poles, brackets,
fixtures, crossarms, subways, wires and electrical constructions of
whatever character, and he shall report to the City Council such as
are defective or need to be repaired, removed or rebuilt whereby in
his judgment life or property is endangered, and it shall be his duty to
see that all laws and ordinances now in force or that may hereafter be
enacted governing electrical power or the construction or the use or
transmission thereof are strictly complied with and that no electrical
work is done or is in use which endangers life or property.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Works or his duly authorized
representative shall have the right, during all reasonable hours, to
enter any manhole or subway in the discharge of his official duties or
for the purpose of making any electrical tests of the electrical apparatus
or appliances therein contained, and for that purpose he shall be given
prompt access to all manholes and subways upon application to the
corporation or individual owning, in charge of or controlling the same.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the power, in the event
of fire within the City limits or upon the occasion of a severe storm
or other emergency or in case of any defective electrical construction,
to turn off or cause to be turned off any electrical current that in his
judgment is dangerous to life or property, and it shall be unlawful to
turn on such current without a permit from said Commissioner of Public
Works or by ordinance of the City Council. The Commissioner of Public
Works shall have authority to remove or cause to be removed all dead
wires or poles found in the streets or public places.
B.
§ 116-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3
1:207
§ 120-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to string, add to, change or alter any wire
for transmission of electric current or cause the same to be done or to make
any electrical construction in any of the streets or public places without first
obtaining a permit so to do from the Commissioner of Public Works, but in
the event said permit is refused, the City Council may, by ordinance, order
the issuance thereof.
§ 120-4. Police signal system.
No person, except those authorized so to do, shall tamper with the police
signal system or cut any wire or break or interfere with any circuit thereof.
§ 120-5. Painting of poles.
All poles now erected or hereafter to be erected within the City to which any
wire may be attached or suspended for the purpose of conducting electricity
shall be kept painted in some uniform style satisfactory to the City Council.
§ 120-6. Repairs.
Every person owning, leasing or operating any wire conducting electricity
shall, within 48 hours after notice so to do by the Commissioner of Public
Works, begin to make such substitution of or repairs to any post, support,
crossarm, stay, subway or conduit as may be required by said Commissioner
of Public Works and shall continue and complete the same as speedily as the
same can be done, and if default be made in either beginning or completing
the same, the Commissioner of Public Works shall forthwith report such
default to the City Council and said City Council may require the same to be
done by the Commissioner of Public Works or under his direction, and the
cost thereof shall be recovered from the person required to do such work,
in a civil action to be brought in the name and on behalf of the City.
§ 120-7. Requests for information.
Upon the request of the Commissioner of Public Works, any person owning
or operating any electric or other wires upon, over or under any street
shall, within 15 days thereafter, furnish an accurate list of the location
of the poles, the number of crossarms thereto affixed and the number of
wires thereto attached, the location of subways and manholes and any other
information in relation to the method of their operation, together with the
location where service is rendered, viz., telegraphic, telephonic or electric
lighting (specifying whether are or incandescent), or for electrical power.
§ 120-8. Information required on poles.
All poles carrying wires shall have affixed a stencil with the name of the
person owning or using the same.
§ 120-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 120-9
1:208
§ 120-9. Attachments to trees.
No wire or wires or other electrical fixtures shall be attached to any trees
upon or along any street, avenue or highway without a permit from the
owner of the trees and the Commissioner of Public Works. Where wires
are strung through trees where they are liable to come in contact with
such trees, they shall be doubly insulated and otherwise protected in an
approved manner.
§ 120-10. High-tension wires.
All high-tension wires shall be placed and maintained at least 16 inches
in the clear from any and all telephone, telegraph or other wires of lower
tension.
Chapter 122
ENERGY
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10
1:209

ARTICLE I
Sustainable Energy Loan Program
[Adopted 12-10-2014, approved 12-29-2014]
§ 122-1. Legislative findings, intent and purpose, authority; title.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority, as defined by Subdivision 2 of § 1851 of the Public Authorities
Law, or its successor.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit Corporation
Law, authorized hereby on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon to implement
the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program by providing funds to qualified
property owners (as defined in this chapter) and providing for repayment of
such funds from monies collected by the City of Mount Vernon Tax Collector
as a charge to be levied on the real property and collected in the same
manner and same form as the City of Mount Vernon taxes.
ENERGY AUDIT — A formal evaluation or assessment of the energy
consumption of a permanent building or structural improvement to real
property, conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified
by a certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of
identifying appropriate energy efficiency improvements that could be made
to the property.
It is the policy of both the City of Mount Vernon and the State of New
York to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy goals, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of global climate change,
and advance a clean energy economy. The City of Mount Vernon finds
that it can fulfill this policy by providing property assessed clean energy
financing to property owners for the installation of renewable energy
systems and energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a
program that will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (EIC), a
local development corporation, acting on behalf of the City of Mount
Vernon, to make funds available to qualified property owners that
will be repaid by such property owners through charges on the real
properties benefited by such funds, thereby fulfilling the purposes of
this chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose.
A.
The City of Mount Vernon is authorized to implement this Energize
NY Benefit Financing Program pursuant to Article 5-L of the New York
General Municipal Law.
B.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program Law of the City of Mount Vernon."
C.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:211
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT — Any renovation or retrofitting
of a building to reduce energy consumption, such as window and door
replacement, lighting, caulking, weatherstripping, air sealing, insulation,
and heating and cooling system upgrades, and similar improvements,
determined to be cost-effective pursuant to criteria established by the
Authority, not including lighting measures or household appliances that are
not permanently fixed to real property.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — An owner of residential or commercial
real property located within the boundaries of the City of Mount Vernon
that is determined to be eligible to participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program under the procedures for eligibility set forth under this
chapter.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy generating system for the
generation of electric or thermal energy, to be used primarily at such
property, by means of solar thermal, solar photovoltaic, wind, geothermal,
anaerobic digester gas-to-electricity systems, fuel cell technologies, or
other renewable energy technology approved by the Authority not including
the combustion or pyrolysis of solid waste.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM FEASIBILITY STUDY — A written study,
conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified by a
certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of determining
the feasibility of installing a renewable energy system.
§ 122-3. Establishment of Energize NY Benefit Financing Program.
§ 122-4. Procedures for eligibility.
An Energize NY Benefit Financing Program is hereby established by the
City of Mount Vernon, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf, may provide
funds to qualified property owners in accordance with the procedures
set forth under this chapter, to finance the acquisition, construction
and installation of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements and the verification of the installation of such systems
and improvements.
A.
The funds provided shall not exceed the lesser of 10% of the appraised
value of the real property where the renewable energy systems and/
or energy efficiency improvements will be located, or the actual cost
of installing the renewable energy systems and/or energy efficiency
improvements, including the costs of necessary equipment, materials,
and labor and the cost of verification of such systems and
improvements.
B.
Any property owner in the City of Mount Vernon may submit an
application to EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and
made available to property owners on the website of EIC and at the City
of Mount Vernon offices.
A.
§ 122-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 122-4
1:212
§ 122-5. Application criteria.
§ 122-6. Opt-in, energize finance agreement.
Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC acting on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon, which shall make a
positive or negative determination on such application based upon the
criteria for making a financing enumerated in Subsection A of § 122-5
of this chapter. EIC may also request further information from the
property owner where necessary to aid in its determination.
B.
If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC acting
on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon, the property owner shall be
deemed a qualified property owner and shall be eligible to participate
in the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program in accordance with the
procedure set forth under § 122-6 of this chapter; provided that in
no case shall a property owner that has received funds from another
municipal corporation for the acquisition, construction and installation
of energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable energy systems be
deemed a qualified property owner.
C.
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the City
of Mount Vernon, shall make a positive or negative determination on
such application based upon the following criteria for the making of a
financing:
The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable
energy systems are determined to be cost effective by the
Authority;
(1)
The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable
energy systems will generate an estimated annual cost savings
greater than the annual charge payments;
(2)
(3) Sufficient funds are available to provide to the property owner;
The property owner is current in payments on any existing
mortgage;
(4)
The property owner is current in payments on any existing real
property taxes and has been current on real property taxes for the
previous three years; and
(5)
Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the City of Mount Vernon, or EIC acting on its behalf, may
set from time to time.
(6)
A.
A qualified property owner may participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program through the execution of an energize finance
agreement made by and between the qualified property owner and EIC,
acting on the behalf of the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-6
1:213
§ 122-7. Energy audit, renewable energy system feasibility study.
§ 122-8. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The energize finance agreement between the qualified property owner and
EIC, acting on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon, shall set forth the terms
and conditions of repayment in accordance with the following:
Upon execution of the energize finance agreement, the qualified
property owner shall be eligible to receive funds from EIC acting on
behalf of the City of Mount Vernon, for the acquisition, construction,
and installation of qualifying renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency improvements; provided the requirements of § 122-7 of this
chapter have been met.
B.
The energize finance agreement shall include the terms and conditions
of repayment set forth under § 122-8 of this chapter.
C.
No funds shall be made available for energy efficiency improvements
unless determined to be appropriate through an energy audit as defined
in § 122-2.
A.
No funds shall be made available for a renewable energy system unless
determined to be feasible through a renewable energy system
feasibility study as defined in § 122-2.
B.
The cost of such energy audit and/or renewable energy system
feasibility study shall be borne solely by the property owner but may be
included in the financed amount if the work is approved.
C.
The principal amount of the funds paid to the qualified property owner
hereunder, together with the interest thereon, shall be paid by the
property owner as a charge on their City of Mount Vernon tax bill and
shall be levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner
as City of Mount Vernon property taxes, provided that such charge
shall be separately listed on the tax bill. The City of Mount Vernon,
shall make payment to EIC or its designee in the amount of all such
separately listed charges within 30 days of the City of Mount Vernon
tax due date.
A.
The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
energize finance agreement is executed by the property owner and EIC,
provided that in no case shall the term exceed the weighted average of
the useful life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC
acting on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
The rate of interest for the charge shall be fixed by EIC acting on behalf
of the City of Mount Vernon at the time the energize finance agreement
is executed by the property owner and EIC.
C.
The charge shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by
the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program and shall run with the land.
D.
§ 122-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 122-8
1:214
§ 122-9. Verification and report.
A transferee of title to the benefited real property shall be required to
pay any future installments, including interest thereon.
EIC shall be responsible for verifying and reporting to the City of
Mount Vernon on the installation and performance of renewable energy
systems and energy efficiency improvements financed by such program.
A.
The City of Mount Vernon shall verify and report on the installation
and performance of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements financed by the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program
in such form and manner as the Authority may establish.
B.
§ 122-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-9
1:215
Chapter 126
FEES AND DEPOSITS
§ 122-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 122-9
1:216
ARTICLE I
Department of Public Safety Documents
[Adopted 11-13-1957, approved 11-15-1957]
§ 126-1. Accident records; photographs; police reports.
§ 126-2. Good conduct certificates.
§ 126-2.1. Escort service. [Added 4-23-1980, approved 4-24-1980]
Escort service by a member of the Police Department to or from a banking
institution shall be paid for at the rate of $20 for the first 30 minutes or any
portion thereof, plus $2.50 for any five-minute period over and above the
first half hour. Established temples and churches are exempt from paying
an escort service fee.
The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to
charge a fee of $5 per page for the issuance of a copy of an accident
report. The Department of Public Safety is further authorized to charge
a fee of $10 for the first copy of a photograph and $5 for each additional
copy of a photograph taken by the Department of Public Safety in
connection with any accident involving personal injury or property
damage. For the issuance of a copy of a detective's report, U.F. and
investigation reports, $5 per page shall be charged. [Amended
11-13-1968, approved 11-14-1968; 4-23-1980, approved
4-24-1980]
A.
Requests for copies of such reports shall be in writing and executed
before a notary public or Commissioner of Deeds on a form prescribed
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
B.
Copies of accident reports shall only be issued to persons involved
in an accident or, in case of death or in case the person is a minor
or an incompetent, the executor (or administrator), the guardian or
the committee, or any person authorized on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety by a person involved in the accident.
C.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause to be kept accurate
records of the written requests and the fees paid for copies of said
reports and/or photographs and shall collect the fee at or before the
issuance of the copy of said reports and/or photographs.
D.
The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to
charge a fee of $10 for the issuance of a certificate of good conduct
in triplicate. The fee is to be collected at the time the certificate is
issued. [Amended 11-13-1968, approved 11-14-1968; 4-23-1980,
approved 4-24-1980; 4-24-1991, approved 4-25-1991]
A.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause to be kept accurate
records of the issuance of said certificates and the fees collected.
B.
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-2.2
1:217
§ 126-2.2. Taking of fingerprints other than in answer for
commission of crime. [Added 4-23-1980, approved 4-24-1980]
§ 126-3. Transmission of fees to Comptroller.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall, at least once each month, prepare
and transmit to the Comptroller a certified report listing the source,
purpose and the amount of the fee, along with the fees collected, pursuant
to this article.
A fee of $20 shall be paid for the taking of fingerprints pertaining to
certificates, applications and other documents not related to processing
of accused held to answer for the commission of a crime. [Amended
4-24-1991, approved 4-25-1991]
A.
The fee for fingerprinting and processing pistol permit applications
shall be $35.
B.
§ 126-2.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 126-3
1:218
ARTICLE II
Deposits for Removing Plans
[Adopted 6-26-1963, approved 6-27-1963]
§ 126-4. Amount of deposit. [Amended 9-26-2012, approved
9-27-2012]
Any person or corporation taking out plans and specifications prepared by
any department of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, for the awarding
of or entering into a contract for the performance of public work shall
guarantee the safe return thereof by making a deposit of $100.
§ 126-5. Refund of deposit. [Amended 12-26-1985, approved
12-27-1985; 9-26-2012, approved 9-27-2012]
§ 126-6. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 83, adopted on March 26, 1952, and Ordinance No. 57,
adopted on May 22, 1963, are hereby rescinded.
§ 126-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon its approval by the Board of Estimate and
Contract.
If a proposal duly submitted by any person or corporation making a
deposit required by § 126-4 hereof is accompanied by a deposit of cash,
certified check or bid bond in accordance with the requirements of § 74
of the City Charter, and such person or corporation returns said plans
and specifications in good condition within 30 days following the award
of the contract covered by such plans and specifications or the rejection
of the proposal of such person or corporation, the full amount of such
deposit for one copy of the plans and specifications less the actual cost
of reproduction of the plans and specifications shall be returned to such
person or corporation.
A.
Full reimbursement in the amount of the amount of the deposit required
by § 126-4 hereof less the actual cost of reproduction of the plans and
specifications shall be made for the return of all other copies of the
plans and specifications in good condition within 30 days following the
award of the contract or rejection of bids covered by such plans and
specifications. [Added 12-26-1985, approved 12-27-1985]
B.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:219

ARTICLE III
Marriage Certificates
[Adopted 7-25-1962, approved 7-26-1962; amended in its entirety
12-2-1968, approved 12-3-1968]
§ 126-8. Amount of fee. [Amended 8-12-1981, approved 8-13-1981;
12-26-1991, approved 12-27-1991; 3-9-1994, approved 3-10-1994]
In addition to the fee for the issuance of a marriage license as provided
by § 15 of the Domestic Relations Law of the State of New York, pursuant
to § 14-a of the Domestic Relations Law, as last amended by Chapter 413
of the Laws of 1991, the City Clerk shall be entitled to and shall receive a
fee of $10 for the issuing of a certificate of marriage registration; and for a
certificate of marriage for any marriage heretofore indexed and recorded in
the office of the City Clerk, said Clerk shall be entitled to and receive a fee
of $10.
§ 126-9. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on December 2, 1968.
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-9
1:221

ARTICLE IV
Codes and Maps
[Adopted 9-10-1980, approved 9-11-1980]
§ 126-10. City codes. [Amended 6-10-1992, approved 6-11-1992;
9-13-1994, approved 9-14-1994; 3-8-2000, approved 3-9-2000]
The City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby authorized and
directed to charge the following fees for the codes of the City of Mount
Vernon:
§ 126-11. City maps. [Amended 9-22-1982, approved 9-23-1982]
The City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby authorized and
directed to establish the fees to be charged for copies of the Election Map,
Street Map or Zoning Map of the City of Mount Vernon, subject to the
approval of the City Council.
A. One copy of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon: $325.
B. One copy of the Charter of the City of Mount Vernon: $25.
C. One copy of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Mount Vernon: $25.
D. One copy of the Zoning Code of the City of Mount Vernon: $50.
Fees for amendments and supplements to the codes shall be in
accordance with the rate schedules available in the office of the City
Clerk.
E.
§ 126-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-11
1:223

ARTICLE V
Weights and Measures Inspection Fees
[Adopted 4-13-1994, approved 4-14-1994]
§ 126-12. Inspection fees for weighing and measuring devices.
The Bureau of Weights and Measures is hereby authorized and directed
to charge the following fees for the inspection of weighing and measuring
devices:
§ 126-13. Fees imposed annually.
Fees shall be charged once annually, unless a device is ordered to be
repaired and must be retested. An additional fee shall be charged for that
retest.
§ 126-14. Payment of fees.
Fees must be paid by the user within 30 days.
§ 126-15. Reports of the Director of weights and measures.
The Director of Weights and Measures shall:
§ 126-16. Report of the comptroller.
Pursuant to rules promulgated by the Commissioner of Agriculture and
Markets, the Comptroller shall submit, on a prescribed form, not later
than February of each year, an annual report of the fees collected the
For each scale (33 pounds' maximum capacity) up to and including five
scales per establishment: $20.
A.
For each scale (33 pounds' maximum capacity) over five scales per
establishment: $10.
B.
C. Scale (661 pounds' maximum capacity): $40.
D. Linear measure (up to 39 inches): $4.
E. Fabric measuring device (measuregraph): $20.
F. Liquid measure (five gallons or less): $8.
G. Timing device: $4.
Prepare and submit to the Comptroller, at least once a month, a
certified report listing the source, purpose and amount of the fees
imposed pursuant to this article for that month.
A.
Prepare and submit, not later than February 1 of each year, a verified
annual report of work completed in the preceding year to the
Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets.
B.
§ 126-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-16
1:225
preceding year pursuant to this article to the Commissioner of Agriculture
and Markets.
§ 126-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 126-16
1:226
Chapter 128
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Recreation — See Charter, Art.
VIII-A.
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
Art. IX.
Department of Public Safety — See Charter,
Art. X.
§ 128-1. Permit required; application.
§ 128-2. Insurance requirements. [Amended 9-13-2000, approved
9-14-2000]
Every application for a filming permit shall include proof of a public liability
insurance policy, to be approved by the Corporation Counsel, covering the
City of Mount Vernon as an additional insured, in the amount of $1,000,000
single limit, for the duration of the filming. The applicant shall also agree to
assume all liability for and will indemnify and hold the City of Mount Vernon
harmless of and free from any and all damages that occur to persons or
property by reason of said filming.
§ 128-3. Approval; closing of streets.
No person, persons, organization, corporation or group of any kind
shall film a commercial, movie, documentary, television program or any
other presentation upon the streets, sidewalks or any other property
within the limits of the City of Mount Vernon without first obtaining a
permit for such activity. [Amended 9-14-2016, approved 9-16-2016]
A.
Any person, persons, organization, corporation or group desiring a
permit for the aforesaid purpose shall make an application therefor on
a form to be obtained from the office of the City Clerk. Said application
shall contain the name and address of the applicant; the name and
address of the organization, group or corporation, if applicable; the
proposed location of the filming; and the date(s) and time the permit is
intended to cover.
B.
The application fee shall be $750. However, this fee will be waived for
applicants filming on City property who are required to pay the daily
permit fee. [Added 9-14-2016, approved 9-16-2016]
C.
Event application for a filming permit must be approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee, as the Department
of Public Safety shall be responsible for any street closing and/or
temporary traffic regulations necessary during filming. Approval of
said Commissioner shall be conditioned upon the applicant's agreeing
A.
§ 126-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-3
1:227
§ 128-4. Filming on public property not under supervision of
Commissioner of Recreation; fees. [Amended 9-13-2000, approved
9-14-2000]
to provide, at his or her own expense, any security officers the
Commissioner or his designee deems necessary for the protection of the
citizens or for the direction of traffic during said filming.
No public street shall be closed as a public thoroughfare under the
authority of this chapter for more than three hours on any given day.
B.
If said filming is to be done on any public street or sidewalk or on any
other public property not under the supervision of the Commissioner of
Recreation, the following requirements shall also be met:
Said application shall be approved by the Commissioner of Public
Works.
(1)
Said application shall be accompanied by an administrative fee
of $2,000 per day for filming in the following zoned districts; CB
Commercial Business District, DB Downtown Business District, NB
Neighborhood Business District, and OF Office Business District;
$1,500 per day for all other zoning districts; and after the 7th day,
fee shall be $1,000 per day. For the purpose of determining the
applicable administrative fee under this subsection, a day shall be
deemed to begin at 12:01 a.m. and terminate at 12:00 midnight.
For film shoots that include multiple locations, a location fee of
$1,000 shall be charged for each additional location. [Amended
11-13-2013, approved 11-14-2013; 9-14-2016, approved
9-16-2016; 7-14-2017, approved 7-14-2017]
(2)
Subject to the discretion of the City Clerk, certain City-owned
properties will require additional rental and permit fees to be
determined by the City Clerk based upon the time, usage, and
operations of such filming, within, near and about said City-owned
properties.
(3)
Additional permit fees for public properties must be paid pursuant
to Chapter 170 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
(4)
A.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall be responsible for supervision
of the area during the duration of the filming. Prior to the issuance of
a permit herein, the applicant shall be required to make a deposit by
cash, certified check or money order with the City Clerk in an amount
to be determined by the Commissioner of Public Works. Said deposit
shall be utilized by the City to reimburse the City for the costs it incurs
in the cleaning and sanitation at and about the location of such filming.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall certify to the City Clerk the
total amount of the costs incurred by the City in the cleaning and
sanitation at and about the location of such filming, which costs shall
be deducted from such deposit and paid to the City. In the event such
B.
§ 128-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 128-4
1:228
§ 128-5. Filming on public property under supervision of
Commissioner of Recreation; fees. [Amended 9-13-2000, approved
9-14-2000]
costs exceed said deposit, the applicant shall pay the difference to the
City Clerk upon demand. In the event the deposit exceeds such costs,
the City Clerk shall return the difference, without interest thereon, to
the applicant. In the event the City incurs no costs for the cleaning and
sanitation at and about the location of such filming, then in that event,
the applicant's deposit, without interest thereon, shall be returned to
the applicant by the City Clerk. The Commissioner of Public Works,
in his sole discretion, shall determine the necessity and costs for said
cleaning and sanitation services at and about the location of such
filming.
If said filming is to be done on any public property under the
supervision of the Commissioner of Recreation, the following
requirements shall also be met:
Said application shall be approved by the Commissioner of
Recreation, after consultation and coordination with the City Clerk,
who has lead responsibility in processing and administering all
film permit requests on behalf of the City. [Amended 5-14-2014,
approved 5-15-2014]
(1)
Said application shall be accompanied by an administrative fee of:
One thousand five hundred dollars per day for any one day,
or a portion thereof, of filming and $1,500 per day for each
additional day or any portion thereof. For purposes of this
section, "day" shall be defined as any period of time on any
given date occurring between 12:01 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
[Amended 5-14-2014, approved 5-15-2014]
(a)
Additional permit fees for public properties must be paid
pursuant to Chapter 170 of the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon.
(b)
If City-operated lighting is required, the applicant must pay
an additional fee as determined by the Commissioner of
Recreation based upon the time, usage and operation of such
City-operated lighting.
(c)
(2)
If an applicant desires to extend the permit beyond the date(s)
set out in the original application, he or she may do so by paying
the additional administrative fee as calculated in Subsection A(2)
above, provided that such request for the extension is made within
14 days of the last date set out in the permit or the last extension
granted thereto, and further provided that the insurance policy, as
required by § 128-2, is extended to cover the period of extension.
(3)
A.
§ 128-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-5
1:229
§ 128-6. Payment of fees. [Amended 9-13-2000, approved
9-14-2000]
Any administration fee collected under this chapter shall be paid either in
cash, money order or certified check made payable to the City of Mount
Vernon.
§ 128-7. Issuance of permit; availability of copies.
§ 128-8. Cancellation or modification of permit. [Amended
9-13-2000, approved 9-14-2000; 7-14-2017, approved 7-14-2017]
Should the applicant choose to cancel or modify any provision of his or her
permit prior to use, notice of such intent must be given to the City Clerk
by 9:30 a.m. two business days prior to the first day named on said permit;
the City Clerk shall immediately notify all affected departments. Should this
date fall on a holiday or a weekend, notice shall be given to the City Clerk
by 9:30 a.m. of the next business day.
§ 128-9. Waiver of provisions.
The Commissioner of Recreation shall be responsible for supervision of
the area for the duration of the filming.
B.
Upon completion of the application procedure by the applicant, said
application shall be countersigned by the Mayor and the City Clerk, and
a permit shall issue.
A.
Said filming permit shall issue from and be signed by the City Clerk and
shall set forth the name of the filmer and the location, date and time for
such filming.
B.
A copy of said permit shall be forwarded to the Fire Commissioner by
the City Clerk.
C.
A copy of said permit shall be available for inspection by the
Commissioner of Public Safety, Commissioner of Public Works or
Commissioner of Recreation, or their designees, at the site of the
filming and throughout the duration of said filming.
D.
Failure to so notify the City Clerk with regard to a cancellation will
result in the forfeiture of $250 of the administrative fee. Full refund
shall be made to the applicant if proper notice is received.
A.
Failure to notify the City Clerk with regard to a modification will result
in the imposition of an additional administrative fee of $250. No charge
shall be made to modify said permit as to time or place of filming if
proper notice is received.
B.
The provisions of this chapter pertaining to insurance and payment of
fees shall not apply to any department of the City of Mount Vernon, to
any group sponsored by the Board of Education of the Mount Vernon
A.
§ 128-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 128-9
1:230
§ 128-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-13-2000, approved
9-14-2000]
Any person, persons, organization, corporation or group not complying with
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000 per day or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 131
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boilers and other equipment — See Ch. 98.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
Hydrants — See Ch. 153.
Liquefied petroleum gases — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
School District or to any concern filming by reason of a duly executed
contract between itself and the City of Mount Vernon or any department
thereof.
Application for waiver of these provisions may be made to the City
Council, prior to filming, by any nonprofit organization desiring to
obtain a permit under these provisions.
B.
§ 128-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-10
1:231

ARTICLE I
Bureau of Fire Prevention
§ 131-1. Creation.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City is hereby
established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire
Commissioner, who shall be the head of said Bureau. The Chief of the Fire
Department and all other members thereof who may be assigned to duty in
said Bureau shall be officers thereof empowered to enforce this article.
§ 131-2. Fire Inspectors. [Amended 6-10-1981, approved 6-11-1981]
§ 131-3. Duties of officers. [Amended 12-9-1987, approved
12-10-1987]
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the
Commissioner, shall designate such officers on duty and members of the
Fire Department as he deems necessary to perform as Fire Inspectors.
Fire Inspectors shall hold this office at the pleasure of the Chief of the
Fire Department.
A.
The Chief of the Fire Department, with like approval, may also
designate such number of Assistant Fire Inspectors from the uniformed
force as shall from time to time be deemed necessary.
B.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances of the state, county and City covering
the following:
(1) Prevention of fires.
(2) Storage and use of explosives and flammables.
The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
(3)
(4) The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
The means and adequacy of exits in case of fire from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls,
theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of
persons work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose.
(5)
(6) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
A.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
administer and issue all permits and licenses required by this chapter.
Wherever the words "Commissioner of Bureau of Fire Prevention"
appear in this chapter regarding such licenses or permits, it shall
mean the Fire Commissioner or his designees in the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(1)
B.
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-3
1:233
§ 131-4. Legislative recommendations.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to investigate
and to recommend to the Fire Commissioner such additional ordinances
or amendments to existing ordinances as he may deem necessary for
safeguarding life and property against fires.
§ 131-5. Instructions and forms.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall prepare instructions for the Fire
Inspector and his Assistants and forms for their use in the reports required
by the General Ordinances.36
§ 131-6. Investigation of fires.
§ 131-7. Records; disposition of funds received.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall keep an accurate record of all its
receipts and turn over to the Comptroller of the City on the last day of
every month such sum or sums as may have been received by it during such
When more than one permit is required to be issued for the same
facility or premises pursuant to this chapter, a single consolidated
permit may be issued listing all materials or operations covered.
Revocation of a portion or portions of such consolidated permit
shall not invalidate the remainder of such consolidated permit.
(2)
The Bureau of Fire Prevention, through its officers, shall investigate
the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the City
in which persons have been injured or in which property has been
destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine if the
fire is the result of either carelessness or design. Such investigation
shall be begun immediately upon the discovery of such a fire by the
Assistant in whose district the fire occurs, and if it appears to the officer
making such investigation that such fire is of suspicious origin, the
Chief of the Fire Department shall be immediately notified of the fact.
He shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify
the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation
of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the
collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
A.
Every fire shall be reported in writing to the Bureau of Fire Prevention
within two days after the occurrence of the same, by the officer in
whose jurisdiction such fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such
form as shall be prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department and
shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and
circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage caused thereby
and the insurance data relating to such property, and such other
information as may be required.
B.
36.Editor's Note: See §§ 131-6B and 131-14.
§ 131-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-7
1:234
month, taking therefor the receipt of said Comptroller, which receipt shall
become a part of the records of the Bureau.
§ 131-8. Inspections. [Amended 6-14-1961, approved 6-15-1961;
6-24-1964, approved 6-25-1964; 6-10-1981, approved 6-11-1981;
2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to cause the
Inspectors to inspect as often as feasible all structures and the contents
thereof containing hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or
installation of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and
flammable materials; all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler
systems; and such other structures and places as may be necessary for
the enforcement of the laws and ordinances relating to fire prevention
and the safeguarding of life and property against fires.
A.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or
cause to be inspected by the officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or
by such uniformed officers or members of the Fire Department as may
be assigned to such duty by the Chief, as often as feasible, all buildings,
premises and public thoroughfares, for the purpose of ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any conditions likely to cause fire or any
violations of the provisions of any ordinances of the City affecting the
fire hazard.
B.
Vacation of premises.
Whenever an inspection of a building or occupancy reveals
dangerous fire-breeding occupancy conditions or inadequate or
illegal means of egress or other multiple fire or life hazards which
have been determined by the Fire Chief as creating an imminent
danger, then said building or occupancy, upon order of the Fire
Commissioner, shall be vacated by the owners and/or occupants
thereof. Such order may apply to an entire building or to one or
more occupants therein.
(1)
The above-mentioned premises shall be maintained vacated until
such time as there has been substantial correction of the
hazardous, dangerous conditions to the satisfaction of the Fire
Chief.
(2)
Vacate orders shall be served in the manner prescribed herein,
except that an appearance ticket may be served immediately where
there is a failure to comply with such vacate order. Where a vacate
order is directed to an occupant or to the owner of such premises
who is not an occupant thereof but is a resident of the City of
Mount Vernon, service thereof may be made either by delivering to
and leaving personally with such occupant or owner and, if either
is a corporation, by delivering to and leaving personally with an
officer thereof upon whom a summons issued out of the Supreme
Court in an action against the corporation might be served a copy
(3)
C.
§ 131-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-8
1:235
of such order, or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any
person of suitable age and discretion in charge of the premises, or,
in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of
said premises, and, in either case, where the order is directed to
the occupant, by depositing another copy thereof in a post office or
post office box, properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper addressed
to such occupant at the premises affected thereby, and, in either
case, where the order is directed to a resident owner who is not
an occupant, by depositing another copy thereof in a post office or
post office box, properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper addressed
to such owner at such owner's last known address; and where such
order is directed to a nonresident owner, service thereof may be
made by leaving a copy thereof with a person of suitable age and
discretion who is in charge of the premises, or, in case no such
person in charge of such premises is found upon the premises,
by affixing a copy of such order in a conspicuous place upon the
front door of the structure affected thereby, and, in either case, by
depositing another copy thereof in a post office or post office box,
properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper addressed to such owner
at such owner's last known address.
Where one or more occupancies in addition to the owner of the
building are involved in the evacuation, each such occupancy, as
well as the building owner, shall receive a vacate order.
(4)
In the event that the occupants fail or refuse to vacate the premises
within the stipulated time after receipt of the vacate order, a
summons shall be served upon the responsible person for violation
of this section.
(5)
A limited number of employees may be permitted to enter the
structure to maintain sufficient heat in the building and for clearing
the Fire Department violations.
(6)
Warning signs shall, upon the issuance of all vacate orders, be
securely attached to the entrance of each building or occupancy.
(7)
All agencies concerned shall be notified, including the Departments
of Buildings, Health, Social Services and Police, and necessary
cooperation requested from such agencies.
(8)
Owners of buildings or occupancies vacated shall be instructed
to notify the Fire Chief, in writing, when conditions have been
corrected, requesting an inspection for the purpose of reoccupying
the building or occupancy. The Fire Prevention Bureau, upon
receipt of such notification, shall make a reinspection of the
building or occupancy and authorize the reoccupancy or reject the
appeal.
(9)
All fire stairway doors shall be maintained in a freely operating, selfclosing
condition at all times. Signs conforming to the following
D.
§ 131-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-8
1:236
§ 131-9. Enforcement. [Amended 5-13-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981,
approved 5-27-1981; 12-22-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1983, approved
1-10-1983]
specifications shall be mounted on all such doors at least five feet
above the sill. They shall be of eighteen-gauge metal, measuring no less
than three inches in height and five inches in length. The signs shall
have a red background, four mounting holes, with readily legible sized
white lettering in baked enamel finish, containing the following legend
and with the words FIRE, STAIRWAY and CLOSED thereon in capital
letters:
FIRE STAIRWAY
This door must be kept CLOSED at all
times for your protection.
By Order of the Fire
Department
The following fees shall apply to the inspection of:
(1) Sprinkler system test, NYSFC 904.5.1: $100.
(2) Standpipe system inspection, NYSFC 905: $100.
(3) Certificate of occupancy inspection: $30.
E.
All officers and firefighters of the Mount Vernon Fire Department are
authorized to issue appearance tickets returnable in the City Court
of Mount Vernon whenever any officer or firefighter shall find in any
building or upon any premises or other place combustible or explosive
matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary
accumulations of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable
materials likely to cause fire and which are so situated as to endanger
property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows likely to interfere with the operation
of the Fire Department or with the egress of occupants in case of fire,
or shall find accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning
systems or grease in kitchen exhaust ducts, or any building or other
structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or
other exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire
extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition,
or from any other cause, creates a fire hazard.
A.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
aforesaid officers and firefighters are hereby authorized to issue
appearance tickets returnable in the City Court of Mount Vernon for the
prosecution of: [Amended 9-8-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993, approved
9-23-1993]
(1) All violations of this chapter.
All violations of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
(2)
B.
§ 131-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-9
1:237
§ 131-10. Right of entry.
The Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Inspector or any of his Assistants
or any member of the Department assigned by the Chief, may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any building and upon all premises within their
jurisdiction for the purpose of examination.
§ 131-11. Interference with inspections.
Any person interfering with or preventing any inspection as authorized by
this article shall be guilty of a violation thereof.
§ 131-12. Assistance from Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel, upon request of any officer of the Bureau, shall
assist in the investigation of any fire which in the opinion of such officer is
of suspicious origin.
§ 131-13. School drills.
Violations of Section 596 of Title 6 of the Official Compilation of
Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York.
(3)
Violations of Sections 612, 613 and 614 of Title 6 of the Official
Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New
York.
(4)
Violations of Title 2, Article 8, of the New York State Multiple
Residence Law.
(5)
(6) Violations of § 204 of the New York State Labor Law.
An appearance ticket shall be served personally. In the event that the
defendant is a corporation, the officer or firefighter shall serve the
appearance ticket upon the corporation by delivery thereof to an officer,
director, managing or general agent, or cashier or assistant cashier of
such corporation or to any other agent of such corporation authorized
by appointment or by law to receive service of process.
C.
The following fees are imposed for: [Added 2-27-2008, approved
2-28-2008]
(1) Letters of compliance for violation release: $10.
(2) Copies of violation reports: $2.
D.
Penalty for violations. A first offense for violating this chapter may
result in a warning. The second offense will result in the basic charge
being tripled. A third offense will result in the license being suspended
for six months and a fee of $500 being imposed. [Added 2-27-2008,
approved 2-28-2008]
E.
§ 131-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-13
1:238
§ 131-14. Record of fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep in the office of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same,
including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused
thereby and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in
what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by
the Inspectors under the provisions of this article. All such records shall be
public.
§ 131-15. Annual reports.
An annual report of the operation of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
be made by the Chief of the Fire Department on or before the 10th day of
January and transmitted by him to the Fire Commissioner.
§ 131-16. Application for appeal; fee. [Amended 6-10-1992,
approved 6-11-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to require
teachers of public, private and parochial schools and educational
institutions to have one fire drill each month during the school year and
to keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours.
A.
Whenever a fire alarm is sounded during the hours when such public,
private and parochial schools and educational institutions are occupied,
a fire drill, including complete evacuation of the building, shall be
carried out immediately. After the building has been evacuated and the
causes of the alarm determined and it has further been determined
that no danger exists, the fire drill may be concluded, but in no event
shall any fire drill be interrupted before the complete evacuation of the
said schools or educational institutions has been accomplished. [Added
2-25-1959, approved 2-26-1959]
B.
Any person aggrieved by any order made pursuant to this chapter shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from the decision of
the Fire Inspector within 30 days of the date of the notice of violation.
An application for appeal shall be based on the grounds that strict
compliance of the more stringent local standard would:
(1) Cause undue economic hardship or burden.
Cause restriction from the achievement of a valid state or federal
policy.
(2)
(3) Create a physical or legal impossibility.
(4) Cause an impediment to the intended objective of the regulation.
Be unnecessary, in light of variable alternatives which meet the
intended objective of the more stringent local ordinance.
(5)
A.
§ 131-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-16
1:239
§ 131-16.1. Board of Appeals. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
§ 131-16.2. Qualifications of Board members. [Added 6-10-1992,
approved 6-11-1992]
No elected official shall be a member of the Board of Appeals. Whenever
feasible, the Board should consist of at least five members with separate
experience or expertise, with no more than two being from the same
profession, such as:
§ 131-16.3. Alternative Board members. [Added 6-10-1992,
approved 6-11-1992]
The Mayor shall appoint two alternative members who shall be designated
by the Board Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternative members, when feasible, shall
possess one of the qualifications required for Board membership and shall
be appointed and serve for five-year terms or until a successor has been
appointed.
§ 131-16.4. Disqualification of Board members. [Added 6-10-1992,
approved 6-11-1992]
A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any
professional, personal or financial interest.
A fee of $100 shall be paid to the Board of Appeals when the application
for appeal is filed.
B.
A Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Mount Vernon and shall consist of five members serving initial terms
as follows: one member for a five-year term; one member for a fouryear
term; one member for a three-year term; one member for a twoyear
term; and one member for a one-year term. All successive Board
members shall be appointed and serve for five-year terms, or until a
successor has been appointed. Vacancies in such Board occurring by
the expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled by the Mayor.
A.
The Board shall select annually one of its members to serve as
Chairman and another member to serve as Secretary to the Board.
B.
A. A New York State licensed professional engineer.
B. A New York State registered architect.
C. A certified New York State fire and building code enforcement official.
D. A fire service official.
E. A business person.
F. An attorney.
§ 131-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-16.5
1:240
§ 131-16.5. Compensation of Board members. [Added 6-10-1992,
approved 6-11-1992]
Board of Appeals members shall serve without compensation.
§ 131-16.6. Notice of hearing. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
The Board of Appeals shall meet, upon written notice from the Chairman,
within 30 days after the filing of an appeal by the appellant.
§ 131-16.7. Open hearings. [Added 6-10-1992, approved 6-11-1992]
All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the Fire Inspector and any person
whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
§ 131-16.8. Hearing procedure. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
The Board of Appeals shall adopt procedures in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order, under which hearings shall be conducted and said
procedure shall be made available to the public.
§ 131-16.9. Adjournment of hearing. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
When five Board members are not present to hear an appeal, either the
appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request
and receive an adjournment of the hearing. A new hearing shall be held
within five business days.
§ 131-16.10. Decision of Board. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
§ 131-16.11. Review of Board decision. [Added 6-10-1992, approved
6-11-1992]
Any aggrieved party shall have the right to institute an appeal in an
appropriate proceeding in the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by
The Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the decision of the Fire
Inspector by a concurring vote of at least three members. The decision
of the Fire Inspector will be automatically affirmed if there is no
modification or reversal of the Fire Inspector's decision within 30 days
after the Board hearing.
A.
The decision of the Board shall be by resolution. Certified copies of the
decision shall be furnished to the appellant and the Fire Inspector and
filed with the Fire Commissioner.
B.
§ 131-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-16.11
1:241
law following the filing of the decision of the Board of Appeals with the Fire
Commissioner.
§ 131-17. Fees for copies of records. [Added 6-24-1964, approved
6-25-1964]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention is hereby directed and authorized to
charge a fee of $3 a page for the first five pages, and for each additional
page thereafter a fee of $0.50, for the issuance of any copy of a public
record of the Fire Department. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved
2-27-1969; 3-26-1969, approved 3-27-1969]
A.
The Fire Commissioner shall cause accurate records to be kept of the
fees paid for copies of such reports, shall collect the fee prior to the
issuance of such copies and shall account to the Comptroller for such
receipts as hereinbefore provided in § 131-7 of this article.
B.
§ 131-16.11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-17
1:242
ARTICLE II
Emergency Access Areas
§ 131-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY ACCESS AREA — Any area in which, in the judgment of either
the Commissioner of Public Safety or the Fire Commissioner, parking should
be prohibited so that immediate access to fire hydrants and buildings shall
be unimpeded.
§ 131-19. Designation of emergency access areas.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Fire Commissioner of the City,
where, in the judgment of either, parking of vehicles in and upon driveways,
roads, alleys, lanes, terraces and sidewalks may prevent immediate and
unhampered access to fire hydrants or portions of buildings, may designate
such areas as "emergency access areas."
§ 131-20. Unattended vehicles. [Amended 11-23-1982, approved
11-24-1982]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an emergency access area
or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant except when such vehicle is attended by
a licensed operator or chauffeur who is heated in the front seat and who
can immediately move such vehicle in case of emergency, unless a different
distance is indicated by official signs, markings or parking meters.
§ 131-21. Filing of designation with City Clerk.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Fire Commissioner shall cause
to be filed with the City Clerk a statement in writing declaring the area
an emergency access area and designating with reasonable preciseness the
area to which such designation shall apply. A diagram shall be attached to
said notice showing the area to be included within the said designation and
indicating the places where signs are to be erected. The designation as an
emergency access area shall become effective 30 days after the designation
has been filed with the City Clerk in the manner hereinbefore set forth.
§ 131-22. Notice to owners of affected buildings.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Fire Commissioner, when filing
the designation with the City Clerk as hereinbefore provided, shall cause
a copy thereof to be served by either personal service or registered mail,
return receipt requested, upon the owner, managing agent, superintendent
or custodian of any building affected by the designation as an emergency
access area. An affidavit of service shall be filed with the City Clerk within
10 days after service has been effected.
§ 131-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:243
§ 131-23. Signs.
§ 131-24. Presumptive evidence of violation.
Proof of stopping, standing or parking within an emergency access area
contrary to the provisions of this article shall be deemed presumptive
evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered is the
person who so parked, stopped or left standing such vehicle contrary to said
provisions.
§ 131-25. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-10-1972, approved
5-11-1972]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with penalties as fixed by the City
Judge of the City of Mount Vernon, provided that such penalties are within
the limits established as penalties for such offense or infraction.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause to be erected signs with
appropriate legends so as to afford notice to owners and operators of
vehicles of the parking prohibition.
A.
No owner, managing agent, superintendent or custodian of such
building, buildings or premises shall, after service has been effected,
refuse access to the Commissioner of Public Safety for the purpose of
erecting the signs as hereinbefore provided and maintaining said signs
upon said premises and areas.
B.
§ 131-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-25
1:244
ARTICLE III
Precautionary Measures
§ 131-26. Damage to fire apparatus.
No person shall cut or injure in any manner any hose, fire engine or other
apparatus used for the extinguishment of fires, belonging to or used by the
Fire Department, nor drive a vehicle over such hose.
§ 131-27. through § 131-36. (Reserved)37
§ 131-37. Incinerators. [Added 2-25-1959, approved 2-26-1959]
It shall be unlawful to burn material in incinerators other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
A.
It shall be unlawful to throw carpet sweepings containing naphthalene
or camphor balls or flakes, floor scrapings, oil-soaked rags, empty
paint cans or any other flammable or highly combustible substance
into an incinerator chute or opening. There shall be continuously and
conspicuously posted on every door opening into a space in which there
is located any service opening into any incinerator and also on the wall
directly over the hopper opening the following:
THROWING CARPET SWEEPINGS CONTAINING NAPHTHALENE,
CAMPHOR BALLS AND FLAKES, FLOOR SCRAPINGS, OIL-SOAKED
RAGS, EMPTY PAINT CANS OR ANY OTHER FLAMMABLE OR
HIGHLY COMBUSTIBLE SUBSTANCE INTO THIS INCINERATOR IS
UNLAWFUL AND SUBJECTS OFFENDER TO A PENALTY.
B.
Signs at incinerator service openings.
Signs on doors leading to the service openings shall not be less
than eight inches wide and not less than three inches high and
shall have letters not less than one inch in height. Signs shall read
"incinerator."
(1)
Signs placed on the walls over the hoppers shall be not less than
10 inches wide and four inches high and shall have letters not less
than 5/16 of an inch in height and shall be lettered to comply with
Subsection B.
(2)
The lettering of the sign shall be of the bold type and shall be
properly spaced to provide good legibility, and the letters and the
background shall be of contrasting colors.
(3)
Signs on doors shall be located on the hall side and approximately
five feet above the floor.
(4)
C.
37.Editor's Note: Original §§ 131-27 through 131-35 of the 1980 Code, regarding hazardous
activities, devices and materials, as amended, were deemed to be superseded by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code pursuant to Res. No. 11, adopted
4-11-1984 and approved 4-12-1984.
§ 131-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-37
1:245
§ 131-38. Fire alarm boxes. [Added 8-24-1960, approved 8-25-1960]
§ 131-39. Elevator override key.38 [Added 6-26-1996, approved
6-26-1996]
All new elevators installed requiring compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Part 1062 7(b) [9 NYCRR
1062.7(b)], shall install the Yale No. 255 elevator key.
§ 131-40. (Reserved)
Signs shall be durable and shall be substantially secured to the
door or wall.
(5)
Lighting shall be sufficient to make the signs easily legible at all
times.
(6)
The owner or agent will be responsible for installing and
maintaining these signs.
(7)
Incinerators used for burning rubbish or other readily combustible solid
waste material shall terminate in an approved spark arrester having
openings not greater than 1/2 inch, or they are to be provided with
other suitable means for avoiding discharge of fly particles.
D.
Whenever any multiple dwelling, group of multiple dwellings, public
buildings, mercantile or institutional buildings are not within a
reasonable distance of a public fire alarm box, the Commissioner may
require the installation and maintenance of a fire alarm box or boxes
of the type and character used in the fire alarm system of the City of
Mount Vernon to be located on the premises or in the buildings on such
premises as the Chief of the Fire Department may direct.
A.
Every asylum, almshouse, hospital, nursing or convalescent home
having more than 10 inmates and every public, private and religious
school shall be equipped with a fire alarm box or boxes of the type and
character used in the fire alarm system of the City of Mount Vernon.
Such box or boxes shall be located and maintained on the premises or
in the buildings on such premises at such places as the Chief of the Fire
Department may direct.
B.
38.Editor's Note: Former §§ 131-39 through 131-40, regarding fire bombs and Molotov
cocktails and flameproofing, respectively, as amended, were deemed to be superseded by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, pursuant to Res. No. 11,
adopted 4-11-1984, approved 4-12-1984.
§ 131-37 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-40
1:246
ARTICLE IV
Hazardous Materials39
[Added 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987]
§ 131-41. Scope.
This article shall apply to all new and existing facilities where hazardous
materials are manufactured, stored, handled or used and which are not
regulated by other articles of this chapter.
§ 131-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Corrosive liquids, flammable solids,
flammable and combustible liquids, highly toxic materials, oxidizing
materials, poisonous gases, radioactive materials and other substances or
materials that have been determined to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to health, safety and property as found in the 49 CFR 100
to 199. An abstract of the definition is found in Appendix A to this article.40
§ 131-43. Application for permit.
A permit shall be required for the storage or handling of any hazardous
materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table I-1174, Part 1174 of
Chapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, Appendix B to this article.41
All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall state the
nature of the business of the applicant, the maximum quantity of each
class of hazardous materials to be stored and the location of storage
and provide such information for development of a preemergency plan
as required by the Commissioner.
A.
Before authorizing the issuance of a permit pursuant to this article,
the Commissioner is permitted to require the applicant to submit, in
writing, one or more of the following:
A report from a testing laboratory acceptable to the Commissioner
setting forth the physical and chemical properties of the hazardous
material in question, whenever such properties are not readily
available from other recognized sources.
(1)
B.
39.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Cellulose Nitrate Plastics (Pyroxylin), was deemed to be
superseded by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, pursuant
to Res. No. 11, adopted 4-11-1984, approved 4-12-1984.
40.Editor's Note: Appendix A appears at the end of this chapter.
41.Editor's Note: Appendix B appears at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-43
1:247
§ 131-44. Permit fee. [Amended 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
The Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to charge the
following fees for the issuance of permits pursuant to this article:
§ 131-45. Permit.
Evidence that the storage, handling or use of the hazardous
materials in question is in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations or generally acceptable standards.
(2)
Qualifications, experience and knowledge of the person or persons
who will supervise the operations involving hazardous material in
question.
(3)
Before authorizing the issuance of a permit pursuant to this article,
the Commissioner shall inspect the premises to ensure that hazardous
materials are being stored in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter
C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
and generally accepted standards. During such inspection, the
Commissioner may require the separation or isolation of any hazardous
material that in combination with other substances may bring about
a fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous gas. The
Commissioner may require separation from other storage, occupancies
or buildings when the quantity stored constitutes a material hazard.
Such requirements may be included in writing on the permit for the
particular premise or operation for which the permit is issued pursuant
to this article and shall constitute a condition of the permit.
C.
Interior storage. Permit fees shall be determined by the floor area,
measured in square feet, of each story of a building, as follows:
Aggregate storage of gross floor area of each story, but not more
than 999 square feet: $30 per year.
(1)
(2) One thousand square feet to 2,999 square feet: $60 per year.
(3) Three thousand square feet to 4,999 square feet: $90 per year.
(4) Five thousand square feet to 9,999 square feet: $120 per year.
A.
Exterior storage. Permit fees for storage areas located outside of a
building shall be determined by the square footage of the enclosed area
in which the hazardous materials are being stored.
B.
Upon satisfactory completion of the application procedures pursuant to
§ 131-43 and upon payment of the appropriate fee pursuant to § 131-44,
permits issued pursuant to this article shall be issued by the
Commissioner and shall specify:
(1) The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
A.
§ 131-43 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-45
1:248
§ 131-46. Revocation of permit.
§ 131-47. Renewal of permit.
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be renewed annually after a
satisfactory inspection of the premises pursuant to § 131-43C and payment
of the appropriate fee pursuant to § 131-44.
The address or location where the activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(2)
(3) The name and address of the permit holder.
(4) The permit number and date of issuance.
(5) The period for which the permit is valid.
Any storage requirements imposed by the Commissioner pursuant
to § 131-43C.
(6)
Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation,
location, ownership or use shall require a new application and permit.
B.
Permits shall be in effect for a period of one year from the date of
issuance, unless revoked pursuant to § 131-46.
C.
Permits shall be kept on property or premises covered by the permit
and shall be conspicuously posted.
D.
The Commissioner shall revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article:
When there is a violation of a condition under which the permit was
issued; or
(1)
If there was a misrepresentation or falsification of a material fact in
connection with the permit application or a condition of the permit.
(2)
A.
The Commissioner may reinstate a permit which has been revoked
pursuant to Subsection A of this section upon:
Subsequent compliance with the condition or conditions under
which the permit was issued when such compliance has been
verified by an inspection of the premises by the Commissioner; or
(1)
Satisfactory information supplied to the Commissioner regarding
the material fact or facts that were previously misrepresented or
falsified. The Commissioner may require such verification of this
new information as he deems necessary.
(2)
B.
The inspection required by this section shall be requested by the permit
holder no more than 40 days nor less than 30 days prior to the
expiration of the current permit. Following such request, the
Commissioner shall schedule the inspection no less than 10 days before
the expiration of the current permit.
A.
§ 131-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-48
1:249
§ 131-48. Placarding of premises.
Legible, clearly visible signs or placards shall be posted at all entrances to
locations where hazardous materials are stored, handled or used.
§ 131-49. Emergency notification.
Every facility where hazardous materials are stored, handled or used shall
file with the Commissioner the name and telephone number of the person
to be notified in case of a fire or other emergency. Within five days of any
change in the information required by this section, the Commissioner shall
be notified of such change.
§ 131-50. Inspections.
The Commissioner may, at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice,
enter and inspect any facility where hazardous materials are stored,
handled or used to assure compliance with this article, provided that the
Commissioner is accompanied by the owner, operator, lessee or their
designee.
§ 131-51. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 131-52. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately. The owner, lessee or operator of
a facility regulated by this article shall have 90 days from the effective date
of this article to comply with its provisions.
Placards shall conform with the Standard System for the Identification
of the Fire Hazards of Materials found in the National Fire Protection
Association 704, Standard System for the Identification of the Fire
Hazards of Materials.
A.
Placards shall be constructed of materials with the mechanical strength
of one-sixteenth-inch-gauge steel, or its equivalent, as approved by the
Commissioner.
B.
§ 131-48 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-52
1:250
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)42
42.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Hazardous Chemicals, as amended, was repealed 12-9-1987,
approved 12-10-1987.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-52
1:251

ARTICLE VI
Dry-Cleaning Plants
[Amended 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987]
§ 131-53. through § 131-54. (Reserved)
§ 131-55. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning or dry dyeing
without a permit, which shall prescribe the location and the class of system
to be used.
§ 131-56. through § 131-72. (Reserved)
§ 131-73. Permit fees. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved 2-27-1969;
6-26-1991, approved 6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
All dry-cleaning plants in Class II shall pay an annual fee of $40, and those
in Class III and Class IV an annual fee of $60. All fees shall be paid to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 131-74. through § 131-75. (Reserved)
§ 131-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-74
1:253

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)43
§ 131-76. through § 131-77. (Reserved)
43.Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Prevention of Dust Explosions, was repealed 12-9-1987,
approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-76
1:255

ARTICLE VIII
Explosives44
§ 131-78. Bond requirements. [Amended 10-28-1964, approved
10-29-1964]
All bonds required to be given under the provisions of this article shall be
approved by the Mayor and the Corporation Counsel as to the sufficiency
of the sureties, and all such bonds shall be conditioned upon and provide
for indemnifying all persons and the City against any loss, expense, cost
or damage, direct or indirect, of any kind or nature, to persons or to
property resulting from the possession, storage or use of such explosives
or the prosecution of the work involving such explosives. This liability and
responsibility on the part of the applicant shall be absolute and shall not
depend upon any question of negligence upon his part or upon the part
of his agents, servants or employees, and the neglect of anyone to direct
the applicant to take any particular precaution or to refrain from doing
any particular thing shall not excuse the applicant in the event of any such
damage.
§ 131-78.1. Insurance requirements. [Added 10-8-1980, approved
10-9-1980]
§ 131-79. Amount of bond.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, applicants for permits of the
following classes shall give bonds in the penal sums hereinafter specified,
namely:
No permit to bring explosives into the City and sell, transport and
deliver explosives for the local trade shall be issued until the applicant
therefor shall have first placed on file with the Fire Commissioner,
without cost to the City, satisfactory evidence of public liability
insurance indicating bodily injury coverage in the amounts of $500,000
for each occurrence, $1,000,000 in the aggregate, and property
damage coverage in the amount of $500,000 for each occurrence,
$1,000,000 in the aggregate; or, in the alternative, a combined single
limit of bodily injury and property damage coverage in the amounts of
$1,000,000 each occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate.
A.
Such insurance must include the City as an additional named insured
and must remain in force throughout the effective period of the permit
as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall carry an
endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will give at least
10 days' written notice to the City of Mount Vernon of any modification
or cancellation of any such insurance.
B.
44.Editor's Note: Section 322-b(1) of the General Business Law provides that the making,
keeping or transportation of explosives in violation of a City's or village's ordinances is a
misdemeanor.
§ 131-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-79
1:257
§ 131-80. Manufacture, use and sale of explosives restricted.
§ 131-81. Permit required; fee. [Amended 6-26-1991, approved
6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
No person shall transport, store, sell, deliver, use or have in his possession
any explosive without a permit, to be given by the Fire Commissioner of the
City of Mount Vernon. There shall be a fee of $100 for each blasting permit
issued by the Fire Commissioner for each job.
§ 131-82. Blaster's license; fee. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved
2-27-1969]
To bring explosives into the City and sell, transport and deliver
explosives for the local trade: $20,000.
A.
B. For each vehicle engaged in the local delivery of explosives: $20,000.
For a magazine:
(1) First Class: $50,000.
(2) Second Class: $40,000.
(3) Third Class: $30,000.
C.
D. To use explosives: $30,000.
No person shall manufacture electric fuses, safety fuses, blasting caps
or explosives in the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
A.
No person shall engage any explosives, except small arms ammunition
and construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive-driven
pins or studs, for purposes other than blasting or demolition operations.
B.
No person shall sell or give away any explosive, except small arms
ammunition and construction devices such as explosive rivets and
explosive-driven pins or studs, to any person not in possession of a
permit to either possess, transport or use explosives as required by this
article.
C.
No person shall act as a blaster until he obtains a license from the
Fire Commissioner of the City after satisfactorily passing an oral
examination as to his fitness.
A.
A fee of $200 is necessary for the original blaster's license, with a
renewal fee of $100, which is required on the first day of each year.
[Amended 10-8-1980, approved 10-9-1980; 6-26-1991, approved
6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
B.
§ 131-79 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-83
1:258
§ 131-83. Issuance of permits restricted.
Permits as required by § 131-81 of this article shall not be issued for any
building or structure that is occupied as a dwelling, school, theater or other
place of assembly, or where the building or structure is lighted by any
means other than electricity, or where any manufacturing processes are
conducted, or where smoking material is sold.
§ 131-84. Guncotton and soluble cotton.
No person shall transport, store or sell any guncotton or soluble cotton
except in watertight metal vessels containing no more than 110 pounds dry
weight and at least 20% water.
§ 131-85. Nitroglycerine.
No person shall transport, store, keep, sell, deliver, use or have in his
possession any liquid nitroglycerine; nor shall any person store, transport
or use between November 1 and March 15 any explosive which will freeze
or deteriorate at a temperature higher than 10° F., provided that permits
may be issued for the transportation and sale of nitroglycerine in the form
of tablets, pills or granules, in quantities not exceeding 10,000 pieces,
containing no more than 1/50 of a grain each. No explosives containing
nitroglycerine and not intended for use within the City shall be stored or
kept therein or landed at or upon any dock, pier or bulkhead thereof except
as prescribed by the Fire Commissioner.
§ 131-86. Transportation and delivery of explosives.
No person shall transport or deliver any explosive between sunset and
sunrise in or upon any public conveyance, nor shall any explosive be
transported through, in or upon any street except in the manner herein
provided.
§ 131-87. Supervision of persons handling explosives.
No person shall bring into the City nor transport, store, deliver or use
any explosive therein unless same shall be continually under the care and
supervision of one or more persons, each holding a certificate of fitness.
§ 131-88. Unapproved explosives.
No permit shall be issued for the bringing into the City or for the
transportation, storage, sale or use therein of any explosive which is not of
a type, kind or brand that has been approved by the Fire Commissioner.
§ 131-89. Packing of explosives.
No person shall sell or deliver for use any explosive except in original
and unbroken packages and when packed as follows:
A.
§ 131-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-89
1:259
§ 131-90. Marking of packages containing explosives.
All packages containing explosives for transportation, storage, sale or use
shall bear the name and brand of the explosive and the name of the
manufacturer and shall have plainly marked on the top and on one end or
side thereof the words HIGH EXPLOSIVES — DANGEROUS and shall also
have plainly marked on the top thereof the words THIS SIDE UP.
§ 131-91. Magazine permit; fees.
§ 131-92. Special permit.
A special permit shall be required for the storage of explosives in a
magazine of either the First or Second Class, as classified in this article, and
the Fire Commissioner may at any time require the holder of such permit
to change the location of such magazine or establish a new one in another
location.
§ 131-93. Posting of permit.
The permit issued for a magazine shall at all times be kept in the magazine
and readily accessible for inspection.
Dynamite and other blasting compounds containing a liquid which
may exude: in strong wooden cases lined with a liquidproof paper
lining sufficient to prevent the exudation of the liquid. Such cases
shall be of two sizes only, to contain 50 pounds and 25 pounds of
explosives, respectively.
(1)
Other blasting compounds (except black and smokeless powder)
which do not contain a substance subject to deleterious influences
by exposure to moisture: in strong wooden cases of two sizes only,
to contain 50 pounds and 25 pounds of explosives, respectively.
(2)
All explosives put up in the form of sticks or cartridges shall be packed
so as to lie on their sides; and when the boxes are loaded in or upon any
vehicle, they shall be so arranged that the sticks or cartridges rest on
their sides.
B.
No person shall store or keep explosives except in a magazine for which
a permit shall have been issued.
A.
No explosives are to be kept in a magazine overnight unless a person
holding a certificate of fitness as a magazine keeper or a licensed
blaster is in attendance at all times.
B.
Application for such permit is to be accompanied by an inspection fee of
$50 for each First Class magazine, $40 for each Second Class magazine
and $20 for each Third Class magazine. This permit is good only for
the location designated thereon and is not transferable. [Amended
2-26-1969, approved 2-27-1969; 10-8-1980, approved 10-9-1980]
C.
§ 131-89 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-94
1:260
§ 131-94. Classification of magazines. [Amended 7-9-1969,
approved 7-10-1969]
There shall be three classes of magazines as follows:
§ 131-95. Construction standards for magazines.
All magazines shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the New York State Labor Law relating to the storage of explosives.
§ 131-96. Danger areas.
A danger area shall be maintained around each magazine in proportion to
the quantity of explosives contained therein. The magazine keeper shall
maintain such areas clean and free from rubbish, dead grass, shrubbery and
other obstructions and prevent persons from loitering therein.
§ 131-97. Magazine keepers.
No person holding a magazine permit shall store or keep explosives therein
unless a person holding a certificate of fitness as a magazine keeper shall be
continuously in charge thereof, provided that a person holding a license as a
blaster may also act as a magazine keeper for a magazine of the Third Class,
under a special permit of the Fire Commissioner. He shall keep an accurate
daily record of all explosives received at or delivered from the magazines
under his charge, which shall show in detail how the explosives have been
used or otherwise disposed of and shall at all times be open to inspection by
any inspector or member of the Fire Department. He shall first deliver from
the magazine such explosives as have been longest therein. All magazines
shall be kept locked except when being inspected or when explosives are
being placed therein or removed therefrom, and the magazine keeper shall
at all times have the key thereof in his possession. He must care for and
protect the magazine and its contents from interference by unauthorized
persons, and he must be constantly on the lookout for signs which would
indicate leakage of nitroglycerine from explosives under his charge, and all
explosives in such condition must be the next used. A magazine keeper shall
not be required to perform any duty that will in any way interfere with his
duties as set forth in this article.
§ 131-98. Maintenance of magazines.
A magazine shall at all times be kept clean and dry and free from grit, and
before any repairs or alterations are made to any part thereof, all explosives
shall be carefully removed to a place of safety and the magazine thoroughly
washed out. In case a magazine floor becomes stained with nitroglycerine,
it shall be well scrubbed with a stiff broom, hard brush or mop, using a
A. First Class, to contain not more than 250 pounds of explosives each.
B. Second Class, to contain not more than 100 pounds of explosives each.
C. Third Class, to contain not more than 50 pounds of explosives each.
§ 131-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-98
1:261
solution of 1/2 gallon of wood alcohol and two pounds of sulfate of sodium
so as to thoroughly decompose the nitroglycerine. All tools used in making
repairs or alterations shall be of wood or of copper, brass or other soft metal
or material. In no case shall nails or screws be driven into a magazine in
making repairs or alterations, nor into any material that has once formed
a part thereof, and all wooden structural parts of a magazine, if discarded,
shall be immediately burned at a safe distance therefrom. No person shall
store, place or keep any clothing, cotton waste or other article or thing in
a magazine containing explosives, except a wooden mallet and a wooden
wedge for the purpose of opening boxes of explosives, which shall be
opened only with such implements. Magazine keepers and all other persons
handling, storing or transporting explosives are prohibited from carrying
matches or permitting matches to be brought to or near the place where
explosives are handled, stored or transported.
§ 131-99. Storage restrictions.
No person shall place, keep or store in a magazine explosives in excess of
the amount stated in the permit therefor, except by special permission of the
Fire Commissioner; or place, keep or store black powder, blasting powder
or smokeless powder in a magazine containing any other explosive or in a
magazine containing blasting caps, detonators or electric fuses; or place,
keep or store in or bring within 100 feet of a magazine of the First, Second
and Third Classes containing explosives, black powder, blasting powder or
smokeless powder, any blasting caps, capped cartridges, detonator or any
other article or thing that is likely to cause an explosion by friction, shock,
heat or otherwise; or place or store dynamite or any other high explosive
in any magazine which has previously contained black or blasting powder,
without first obtaining the express permission of the Fire Commissioner.
§ 131-100. Delivery permit; fee; expiration. [Amended 2-26-1969,
approved 2-27-1969; 10-8-1980, approved 10-9-1980; 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991]
No person shall transport any explosives within the City of Mount Vernon
without a permit. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an
inspection fee of $100 for each vehicle. Said permit shall expire on the 31st
day of December of each year.
§ 131-101. Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives.
No persons shall load or transport, or cause or permit the loading and
transportation of, explosives on any vehicle unless the following provisions
are complied with:
Such vehicle shall be in good working condition and capable of safely
carrying the load placed upon it:
A.
The body of the truck shall be completely enclosed. It shall have tight
floors and a lining of wood. Construction of the body shall be in
B.
§ 131-98 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-101
1:262
§ 131-102. Qualifications for drivers.
Vehicles containing explosives shall be driven by and be in the charge of a
competent, reliable and experienced driver who is able to read and write
the English language and, in the case of a motor vehicle, is duly licensed
to operate such vehicle, who is not addicted to the use of or under the
influence of intoxicants or narcotics and who knows and obeys the road
rules, state laws, local ordinances and all rules and regulations governing
the transportation of explosives.
§ 131-103. Conduct of persons respecting vehicles.
No person shall approach, ride upon, drive, load or unload a vehicle
carrying explosives while smoking or while under the influence of an
intoxicant or narcotic or at any time in a careless or reckless manner.
§ 131-104. Loading of vehicles.
accordance with specifications prepared by the Fire Department and on
file in the office of the Fire Commissioner.
Exposed ferrous metal on the inside of the body likely to come in
contact with packages of explosives shall be covered or protected with
wood or other nonferrous material.
C.
Each motor vehicle used for transporting explosives shall be equipped
with a minimum of two fire extinguishers, each having a rating of at
least 10 BC. Extinguishers shall be filled and ready for immediate use
and shall be examined periodically by a competent person to ensure
that they are kept and maintained in good working order. [Amended
7-9-1969, approved 7-10-1969; 11-24-1976, approved
11-24-1976]
D.
Trailers shall not be used for the transportation of explosives, nor shall
any trailer be attached to a vehicle containing explosives. This provision
shall not apply to semitrailers.
E.
The battery and wiring of a motor vehicle shall be located so that
neither will come in contact with any package of explosives.
F.
Electric wiring of a motor vehicle shall be completely insulated and
securely fastened to prevent short-circuiting.
G.
The chassis, engine, pan and bottom of body of a motor vehicle shall be
clean and free from excess oil and grease.
H.
The gasoline tank and feed line of a motor vehicle shall be free from
leaks.
I.
No person shall place or carry or cause to be placed or carried in or
upon a vehicle containing explosives any metal tool, piece of metal, fire,
A.
§ 131-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-104
1:263
§ 131-105. Marking of vehicles.
No person shall transport or cause or permit the transportation of
explosives in any vehicle unless the front, rear and both sides of such
vehicle are marked or placarded with the word EXPLOSIVES legibly printed
in red or white letters at least six inches high.
§ 131-106. Load limit.
No person shall carry or transport in or upon such a vehicle any explosives
in excess of 500 pounds.
§ 131-107. Original packages.
No person in charge of a vehicle carrying explosives shall deliver them
except in original and unbroken packages nor at any place other than a
duly authorized magazine and to the person in charge thereof, except with
respect to remaining portions of original packages when they are being
returned to or from the magazine of their origin.
firearms, loaded cartridges, match or other device for producing spark,
flame or heat.
This provision shall not apply to tools used for the operation and
repair of such vehicle when in a compartment separate from the
loading space nor to a wooden or nonferrous conveyor.
(1)
This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the transportation
of detonators in or upon the same vehicle with other explosives,
provided that such detonators are packed in the original outside
shipping containers or in packages in an outside box made of oneinch
lumber lined with suitable padding material not less than 1/2
inch thick. Such boxes other than the original shipping containers
shall be equipped with a hinged cover and fastening device and
securely closed. Detonators in quantities of 50 or less may be
transported on the same vehicle with other explosives if they are
in inside shipping containers or other equivalent container or
wrapped in cloth with a fold of cloth separating each detonator.
Detonators transported on the same vehicle with other explosives
shall be located at a place remote from such other explosives on
the vehicle and in a position from whence they may be quickly
removed.
(2)
Bale hooks or ferrous metal tools shall not be used for loading or
handling explosives.
B.
Such explosives shall be loaded and transported in the body of such
vehicle, which shall not be loaded beyond its rated capacity, and the
explosives shall be so placed thereon that packages thereof shall not
fall from such vehicle. [Amended 7-9-1969, approved 7-10-1969]
C.
§ 131-104 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-108
1:264
§ 131-108. Rules for vehicles in transit.
No person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives shall:
§ 131-109. Use of explosives near schools and within City limits.
No person shall use any explosive in the blasting of rock or other materials
within 200 feet of any schoolhouse in the City between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on any day when public school is actually in session
in such school building; nor at any time of the day within the corporate
limits of the City, except upon a written permit therefor, signed by the Fire
Commissioner, upon the giving of a good and sufficient bond, to be approved
by the Mayor and Corporation Counsel, conditioned for holding the said City
harmless from any and all damages arising or accruing by reason of said
blasting, such permit to be for such time as the said Fire Commissioner may
prescribe.
§ 131-110. Blasting regulations.
A. Allow such vehicle to remain unguarded.
B. Permit such vehicle to enter a public garage or repair shop.
Park such vehicle in any public street in close proximity to any dwelling
or building or place where persons work, congregate or assemble.
C.
Load explosives upon or unload explosives from a motor vehicle unless
the engine is stopped and the brakes are securely set.
D.
With the exception of lights necessary for the operation of the vehicle,
use any type of lighting in or about a vehicle containing explosives
except portable electric floodlights or electric lanterns so constructed
that it will not be possible to obtain a difference of potential between
any two points on the outside of the lamp casing.
E.
F. Deliver explosives to anyone except those authorized to receive same.
Fill a gasoline tank of a motor vehicle or cause or permit it to be filled
while there are explosives on the vehicle, except in case of emergency
and then only when the engine is stopped.
G.
Make any unnecessary stops. If a stop is unavoidable, the precautions
given in Subsections A and C above shall be observed, the motor shall
be stopped, the brakes set and the ignition key removed.
H.
Place any explosive immediately behind or in close proximity to the
exhaust pipe of a motor vehicle.
I.
All blasts before firing shall be covered with heavy mats woven of hemp
rope or steel wire rope or chains which are placed over the loaded holes
and are sufficiently large to cover any rock or substance to be broken.
A.
§ 131-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-110
1:265
In the blasting of larger masses of rock, it shall be within the discretion
of the Fire Commissioner to require a larger number of mats as public
safety may demand.
B.
The blaster shall give timely notice of every blast to every person in
danger thereof and shall not explode any blast until all persons have
been removed to a safe location.
C.
No blast outside of stone quarries shall be loaded more heavily than as
follows: The explosive to be used shall not exceed one pound in weight
of 40% explosive for each four feet in depth of hole, unless the hole is of
a greater depth than 10 feet below the level of the curb or crown of the
street adjoining, in which case there may be used for the depth below
the ten-foot level one pound in weight of 60% explosive for each four
feet of depth of hole.
D.
No person shall conduct blasting operations within the City between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor at any time on Sunday.
E.
No mobile radio communications unit or units shall be maintained
within 300 feet of blasting operations. Signs so notifying the public
shall be posted prior to the delivery of any explosive or their caps.
[Amended 11-24-1976, approved 11-24-1976]
F.
§ 131-110 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-110
1:266
ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)45
§ 131-111. through § 131-113. (Reserved)
45.Editor's Note: Former Article IX, Storage and Handling of Fibers, was repealed 12-9-1987,
approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-111
1:267

ARTICLE X
Application of Flammable Finishes
§ 131-114. Scope.
This article shall apply to the application of flammable or combustible paint,
varnish, lacquer, stain or other flammable or combustible liquid applied as
a spray in continuous or intermittent processes and to dip tank operations
in which articles or materials are passed through contents of tanks, vats or
containers of flammable or combustible liquids, including coating, finishing,
treating and similar processes.
§ 131-115. Applications for installation of equipment.
§ 131-116. Inspection; fee; permit. [Amended 10-9-1963, approved
10-10-1963]
No person shall install any spraying equipment except such as has been
approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention and as shall also comply with
the requirements of the Department of Labor of them State of New York,
Division of Hygiene. No spraying equipment may be used until it shall have
been inspected and approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
All applications for installation of spraying equipment, compressors, air
storage tanks and storage of flammable liquids shall be made to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention, giving the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
Location where spraying equipment or its adjuncts are to be
installed.
(2)
(3) Maximum quantity of flammable liquids to be stored.
(4) Name of spraying device, by whom manufactured and where.
(5) Name of firm making installation.
A sketch or plan showing clearly thereon the following;
Location of building or buildings where finishing shop is to be
located.
(a)
Nature of construction, dimension of buildings and purposes
for which used.
(b)
(6)
A.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention may require the foregoing information
to be furnished upon and in accordance with uniform blanks furnished
by the Bureau.
B.
Application for such inspection shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and a fee of $60 for each
inspection shall accompany the application. [Amended 2-5-1969,
A.
§ 131-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-116
1:269
§ 131-117. through § 131-122. (Reserved)46
approved 2-6-1969; 12-3-1980, approved 12-3-1980; 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
A permit issued pursuant to this article shall at all times be subject to
inspection by any officer or member of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
such permit to expire December 31 of each year.
B.
This permit shall state specifically the applicant's name, the maximum
amount of flammable liquids to be stored and the premises where it is
to be stored.
C.
A permit for the storage and use of flammable liquids may be issued by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
D.
The Fire Commissioner may at any time modify, suspend or revoke
any such permit upon certification to him by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
E.
46.Editor's Note: Former §§ 131-117 through 131-122, regarding safety measures in the area
of flammable finishes, were repealed 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-116 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-117
1:270
ARTICLE XI
Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Tanks
[Amended 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987]
§ 131-123. Scope.
This article shall apply to all new and existing facilities where flammable or
combustible liquids are stored in tanks and to the installation, relocation or
replacement of such tanks not covered elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 131-124. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS — Any liquid having a flash point at or above 100°
F. "Combustible liquids" shall be subdivided as follows:
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Any liquid having a flash point below 100° F. and
having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square inch absolute
at 100° F. shall be known as a "Class I liquid." Class I liquids shall be
subdivided as follows:
§ 131-125. Storage in tanks.
Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, the storage of flammable
and combustible liquids shall be outside buildings, in underground tanks or
aboveground tanks.
Class II liquids shall include those having flash points at or above 100°
F. and below 140° F.
A.
Class IIIA liquids shall include those having flash points at or above
140° F. and below 200° F.
B.
Class IIIB liquids shall include those having flash points at or above
200° F.
C.
Class IA shall include those having flash point below 73° F. and have a
boiling point below 100° F.
A.
Class IB shall include those having flash points below 73° F. and having
a boiling point at or above 100° F.
B.
Class IC shall include those having flash points at or above 73° F. and
below 100° F.
C.
Storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks aboveground
and outside buildings is permitted only in an industrial district as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 267, but not within 1,000
feet of any residential or business district and shall comply with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Parts 612,
613 and 614 of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the
A.
§ 131-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-125
1:271
§ 131-126. Installer's license.
Each person who wishes to perform the installation, relocation or
replacement of tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids
or their auxiliaries, piping and pumps shall secure a license from the
Commissioner in accordance with the following:
§ 131-127. Installation permit.
State of New York and the National Fire Prevention Association 30-87,
Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code.
Notwithstanding Subsection A, the storage of gasoline and diesel fuel
in aboveground tanks is prohibited except as permitted in Article XII of
this chapter.
B.
Installer's license for tanks for the storage of all Class I flammable
liquids and for all Class II combustible liquids shall secure a license in
accordance with § 131-151.
A.
Installer's license for tanks for storage of all Class III combustible
liquids shall secure a license in accordance with § 131-151 or 131-172.
B.
No installation, replacement or relocation of any tank for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids, auxiliaries thereto, piping and pumps
shall be made without securing a permit from the Commissioner.
A.
Application for an installation permit shall be made in writing on a
form furnished by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by an
application fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Fifty dollars per tank for storage of a Class I flammable liquid.
(2) Fifty dollars per tank for storage of a Class II combustible liquid.
Twenty dollars per tank for storage of a Class III combustible
liquid.
(3)
B.
Applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall provide the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location where the tank is to be installed.
The name and flash point of the flammable or combustible liquid to
be stored.
(3)
The maximum quantity of flammable or combustible liquids to be
stored.
(4)
(5) The dimension of the storage tank.
(6) The gauge of the metal in the tank.
C.
§ 131-125 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-127
1:272
§ 131-128. Installation of tanks and equipment.
§ 131-129. Inspection of installations.
No tank or equipment for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids
that has been installed, relocated or replaced may be used until it has been
inspected and approved by the Commissioner. No underground tank shall
be covered from sight until such inspection and approval occurs.
§ 131-130. Storage permit.
The name, address and phone number of the concern making
installation.
(7)
(8) The number and type of the installer's license.
A sketch of plan showing clearly thereon the following:
The location of building or buildings where flammable and
combustible liquids are located.
(a)
The nature of construction, dimension of building and purposes
for which used.
(b)
(c) The location of each tank forming part of the equipment.
(d) The size of fill and vent pipes and where they terminate.
(9)
All plans and specifications for the erection and construction of tanks
for the storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be filed with
the Department of Buildings and the Fire Commissioner and shall be
approved by both. No installation permit shall be issued without such
approvals.
D.
All installation, relocation or replacement of tanks and equipment shall
be in compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, Parts 612, 613 and 614 of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules and
Regulations of the State of New York and the National Fire Prevention
Association 30-87, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
A.
All tank installations of more than 2,000 gallons must be provided with
a constant monitoring electronic leak-detecting system that gives visual
and audible warning signals and must be of a type approved by the
Commissioner.
B.
A notification, in writing, shall be given to the Commissioner, who
shall, within 48 hours after receipt of such notification, inspect the
installation and give written approval or disapproval.
A.
Any written disapproval shall contain the reasons therefor and the
modifications or corrections that must be made to secure the approval
required by this section.
B.
§ 131-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-130
1:273
§ 131-131. Emergency notification.
Every facility that stores flammable or combustible liquids in tanks shall
file with the Commissioner the name and telephone number of the person
to be notified in case of a fire or other emergency. Within five days of any
change in the information required by this section, the Commissioner shall
be notified of such change.
§ 131-132. Repair of tanks.
Repair of tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be
performed in compliance with Parts 613 and 614 of Title 6 of the Codes,
Rules and Regulations of the State of New York and the National Fire
Prevention Association 30-87, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
§ 131-133. Notice of change of ownership or abandonment.
No person shall own, maintain, use or operate any tank for the storage
of flammable or combustible liquids except that for which a permit has
been issued by the Commissioner.
A.
All applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall make written
application to the Commissioner, setting forth:
(1) The applicant's name.
(2) The name of the business.
(3) The address where tanks are located.
(4) The number and capacity of tanks.
(5) Any revisions to original plans that have been made.
(6) The name and class of flammable and combustible liquid stored.
B.
The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of 0.4 of $0.01 per
gallon per aggregate capacity of the tank(s). The Commissioner shall
inspect such tanks annually during the month of September. [Amended
12-13-1989, approved 12-14-1989; 2-27-2008, approved
2-28-2008]
C.
No permit shall be issued unless there is compliance with § 131-125 of
this article.
D.
No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable, and
each such permit shall expire on August 31 of each year.
E.
The Commissioner shall be notified immediately upon any change of
ownership of any facility where flammable or combustible liquids are
stored in tanks or when such tank is to be abandoned.
A.
§ 131-130 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-133
1:274
§ 131-134. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 131-135. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately. The owner, lessee or operator of
a facility regulated by this article shall have 90 days from the effective date
of this article to comply with its provisions.
§ 131-136. through § 131-139. (Reserved)
The abandonment or removal of any tank for the storage of flammable
or combustible liquids shall be in compliance with Part 1164.5 of
Chapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
B.
§ 131-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-136
1:275

ARTICLE XII
Bulk Storage Plants and Terminals47
[Added 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987]
§ 131-140. Scope.
This article shall apply to all new and existing facilities where flammable or
combustible liquids are received by tank vessel, pipelines, tank car or tank
vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing
such liquids by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank or
container.
§ 131-141. Installation and construction.
The construction of a bulk storage plant or terminal or the installation of
any new tanks and equipment or the relocation or replacement of such
tanks shall comply with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and the National Fire Prevention Association 30-87,
Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code. Plans for such construction,
installation, relocation or replacement shall bear the seal of a licensed
engineer and shall be submitted to the Commissioner and the Department
of Buildings for approval prior to any construction, installation, relocation
or replacement. A copy of the plans shall remain on file with the Fire
Department.
§ 131-142. Bulk storage permit.
No person shall own, maintain, use or operate any bulk storage plant
or terminal except that for which a permit has been issued by the
Commissioner.
A.
All applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall make written
application to the Commissioner, setting forth:
(1) The applicant's name.
(2) The name of the business.
(3) Any revisions to original plans that have been made.
The number of aboveground storage tanks and the capacity of
each.
(4)
(5) The name and class of flammable or combustible liquid stored.
B.
The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $500.
[Amended 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
C.
47.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII, Garages, was deemed to be superseded by the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, pursuant to Res. No. 11, adopted
4-11-1984, approved 4-12-1984.
§ 131-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-142
1:277
§ 131-143. Emergency notification.
Every bulk storage plan or terminal shall file with the Commissioner the
name and telephone number of the person to be notified in case of a fire or
other emergency. Within five days of any change in the information required
by this section, the Commissioner shall be notified of such change.
§ 131-144. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 131-145. Effective date.
This article shall take effect May 1, 1988.
§ 131-146. through § 131-149. (Reserved)
No permit shall be issued unless the bulk storage plant or terminal
is operating in compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the National Fire Prevention
Association 30-87, Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code. The
Commissioner shall inspect such plants and terminals annually between
the months of May and September.
D.
No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable. Each
such permit shall be renewed annually and shall expire on September
30 of each year.
E.
§ 131-142 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-146
1:278
ARTICLE XIII
Automotive and Marine Service Stations48
[Added 12-9-1987, approved 12-1087]
§ 131-150. Scope.
This article shall apply to all new and existing facilities where gasoline,
diesel or other flammable or combustible liquid motor fuel tanks and pumps
are in use or are to be installed, relocated or replaced.
§ 131-151. Installer's license; Examining Board; fee.
Each person who wishes to perform the installation of gasoline, diesel
or other flammable or combustible liquid motor fuel tanks and
equipment shall secure a license from the Commissioner.
A.
All applicants for a license pursuant to this section shall make written
application to the Commissioner, setting forth:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The age of the applicant.
(3) The address of the applicant.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the employer.
The experience and qualifications of applicant and employer for the
installation of gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible
liquid motor fuel tanks and equipment.
(5)
B.
All applicants shall be required to submit to a practical examination
before an Examining Board, constituted as hereinafter provided, as to
his experience and qualifications for such trade, business, calling or
occupation. The Examining Board shall consist of the Commissioner
and two other persons to be appointed by the Mayor, one of whom
shall be an installer of gasoline tanks and equipment for not less than
five years and the other person to be connected with the gasoline
industry for not less than five years, both of whom shall serve without
compensation.
C.
There shall be a fee of $100 for each license issued by the
Commissioner, payable at the time application is filed, said license to
expire December 31 of each year. [Amended 6-26-1991, approved
6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
D.
The Commissioner will notify each applicant for a license, in writing, of
his decision of approval or disapproval. If approved, the applicant will
receive a certificate of the license, and, if disapproved, he will receive a
E.
48.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Lumberyards and Woodworking Plants, was repealed
12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-151
1:279
§ 131-152. Installation permit; fee.
clear and concise statement giving the reasons for disapproval, without
the fee being refunded.
Every licensee shall maintain in a conspicuous place, neatly framed, his
license of approval by the Commissioner.
F.
Such license shall not be transferable and may be revoked by the
Commissioner if the holder thereof shall violate any of the provisions of
these rules and regulations.
G.
No installation, replacement or relocation of tanks for the storage of
gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible liquid motor fuel or
auxiliaries thereto, piping and pumps shall be made without securing a
permit from the Commissioner.
A.
Application for an installation permit shall be made in writing on a
form furnished by the Commissioner, and a fee of $100 per tank to
be installed, relocated or replaced shall accompany each application.
The fee for installation, replacement or relocation of other equipment
shall be $100 per application. [Amended 2-27-2008, approved
2-28-2008]
B.
Applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall provide the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location where tanks are to be installed, relocated or replaced.
(3) The maximum quantity of fuel to be stored.
(4) The dimensions of the storage tanks.
(5) The gauge of metal in the tanks.
(6) The name of the firm making the installation.
The address and telephone number of the firm making the
installation.
(7)
(8) The number of the installer's license.
Information as to policies for compensation insurance and public
liability insurance and their expiration dates.
(9)
A sketch plan showing clearly thereon the following:
The location of building or buildings where the tanks are
located.
(a)
(b) The nature of the construction and the purpose for which used.
(c) The location of each tank.
(10)
C.
§ 131-151 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-152
1:280
§ 131-153. Installation of tanks and equipment.
All installations, replacements or relocations of new or substantially
modified gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible liquid motor
fuel tanks and equipment shall be in compliance with Part 614 of Title 6 of
the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York and National Fire
Protection Association 30-87, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
§ 131-154. Inspection.
§ 131-155. Storage.
§ 131-156. Storage and dispensing permit.
(d) The size of fill and vent pipes and where they terminate.
No permit shall be approved and issued unless the applicant has
complied with § 267-31 of Chapter 267 of the Code for the City of Mount
Vernon in relation to gasoline service stations.
D.
No gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible motor fuel tank
or equipment that has been installed, replaced or relocated may be
used until it has been inspected and approved by the Commissioner.
A.
During such inspection, all tanks and piping shall be tested by a
minimum air or hydrostatic pressure of 10 pounds per square inch or as
prescribed by the manufacturer. Such pressure shall be maintained for
a period of at least 30 minutes, during which time, if the test is by air
pressure, the entire exterior surface and all joints shall be coated with
a solution of soap and water or other material suitable for the purpose
which will indicate the presence of leaks. Hydrostatic pressure, if used,
shall be gauged in the top of the tank, and the tank and piping shall
be inspected for the presence of liquid to indicate leaks. Any leakage
detected by any of the methods described shall be deemed evidence
of failure to maintain the requirements of the specifications. Under no
circumstances shall bottled gases under pressure be used.
B.
Storage of gasoline, diesel and other flammable or combustible liquid
motor fuel shall be in compliance with Parts 1164 and 1171 of Chapter
C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
and with National Fire Prevention Association 30A-87, Automotive and
Marine Service Station Code.
A.
In addition, all new and existing tanks for the storage of more than
2,000 gallons of gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible
motor fuel must be equipped with a constant monitoring electronic
leak-detecting system that gives visual and audible warning signals and
must be of a type approved by the Commissioner.
B.
§ 131-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-156
1:281
§ 131-157. Self-service stations.
No person shall own, maintain, use or operate any device to dispense
gasoline, diesel or other flammable or combustible liquid motor fuel
except that for which a permit has been issued by the Commissioner.
A.
All applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall make written
application to the Commissioner, setting forth:
(1) The applicant's name.
(2) The name of the business.
(3) The address where fuel is stored and dispensed.
(4) The number and capacity of fuel storage tanks.
(5) The number of dispensing devices.
B.
The application shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of $30 for
each dispensing device. [Amended 6-26-1991, approved 6-27-1991;
2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
C.
No permit shall be issued unless there is compliance with Part 1164.3 of
Chapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code. In addition, no permit shall be issued to a self-service gas station
unless there is compliance with § 131-157 of this article.
D.
No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable, and
each such permit issued shall expire on June 30 of each year.
E.
A "self-service station" shall be defined as that premises or portion
of a premises where gasoline, gasohol or diesel motor fuel are stored
and sold and subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing
equipment as required by this section into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles or into approved containers by persons other than the service
station attendant. Self-service stations shall be permitted when
constructed, installed, maintained and operated in accordance with this
section and other applicable provisions of the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and the National Fire Protection Association 30A-87, Automotive
and Marine Service Station Code. Remote, preset dispensing devices
for gasoline, gasohol or diesel motor fuel shall be permitted at selfservice
stations when installed and operated in compliance with all
of the provisions of this section. All electrically activated equipment
and controls shall be Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved and
installed by a licensed electrician.
A.
Attendant duties, responsibilities and qualifications.
There shall be at least one qualified attendant on duty while the
station is open to the public.
(1)
B.
§ 131-156 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-157
1:282
The attendant's primary duty shall be to supervise, observe and
control the dispensing of such motor fuel.
(2)
The attendant shall be familiar with all of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
applicable provisions of this section.
(3)
The attendant shall be capable of performing the functions and
assuming the responsibilities of the Fire Prevention Code.
(4)
The attendant shall be familiar with the operations of all fireextinguishing
equipment required under the Fire Prevention Code
and shall be familiar with the emergency procedure and
instructions.
(5)
The attendant shall prevent the dispensing of such motor fuels
into portable containers not in compliance with the Fire Prevention
Code.
(6)
The attendant shall be responsible to deactivate all pumps should it
become necessary to leave the central control station unattended.
(7)
The attendant shall be responsible to handle all accidental spills
immediately on occurrence.
(8)
The attendant shall be responsible to operate the fire extinguishers
when needed.
(9)
Central control station. All controls related to the dispensing of
gasoline, gasohol or diesel motor fuel at a self-service station shall be
centralized at one central control station. The central control station
shall be so located as to permit the attendant to maintain visual contact
over the entire premises with all operations while remaining within
arms' length of all control systems. Permanent or portable obstructions
to the vision of the attendant are prohibited. No portion of the
dispensing operation shall be greater than 75 feet from the central
control station.
C.
Control systems. The central control stations shall contain all of the
systems and devices cited in this section:
Emergency controls, including the main power shutoff switch or
switches for all pumps.
(1)
A voice communication system, such as but not limited to an
intercom system, so as to allow direct voice communication at
all times between the person dispensing such motor fuel and the
attendant.
(2)
Portable fire extinguishers of a number and type approved by the
Commissioner.
(3)
D.
§ 131-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-157
1:283
The controls for a fixed extinguishing system as required in
Subsection G of this section.
(4)
A list of emergency procedures and instructions, conspicuously
posted and visible to the attendant.
(5)
All control devices numbered to identify the applicable dispenser
or dispensers.
(6)
Dispensers. All dispensers shall comply with all of the provisions of this
section.
All dispensers shall be numbered, and the numbers shall be visible
at the central control station and to the person operating the
dispenser.
(1)
All dispensers shall have a fixed extinguishing system, approved by
the Commissioner, located at or in the vicinity of the dispensing
devices. The fixed extinguishing system shall be in compliance with
the National Fire Protection Association Standard 17-85.
(2)
All dispenser islands or individual dispensers shall contain a voice
communication system for direct contact with the attendant at the
central control station.
(3)
All dispenser islands or individual dispensers for self-service shall
be designated "self-serve" or "self-service" by a sign visible from
the street.
(4)
E.
General restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to the
operation of all self-service stations:
Operation of the dispensing device by other than a duly licensed
motor vehicle operator is prohibited.
(1)
Only gasoline, gasohol or diesel motor fuel shall be dispensed at a
self-service station.
(2)
No smoking is permitted in an area designated by the
Commissioner.
(3)
(4) The ignition of the vehicle being fueled must be shut off.
(5) Latch hold open devices on hose nozzle valves are prohibited.
F.
Self-service-station automatic fire-extinguishing-system requirement.
The Commissioner shall require a dry chemical fire-extinguishing
system which shall operate and perform in compliance with National
Fire Protection Association 17-85.
Plans for any proposed automatic dry chemical extinguishing
system shall be submitted to the Commissioner for review and
approval prior to installation.
(1)
G.
§ 131-157 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-157
1:284
§ 131-158. Inside installation of dispensing devices.
When an outside location is impractical, dispensing devices approved for
inside use may be installed inside garages or similar establishments storing,
parking, servicing or repairing automotive equipment upon the approval
of the location and safeguards and issuance of permit therefor by the
Commissioner. Such installation shall be in compliance with Chapter 5 of
the National Fire Prevention Association, 30A-87, Automotive and Marine
Service Station Code.
§ 131-159. First aid appliances.
In gasoline stations, first aid fire appliances shall be provided in such
quantities and of such type as shall be directed by the Commissioner.
§ 131-160. Cleaning materials.
Cleaning with gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids shall not
be permitted in or around the station.
Retrofitted systems. If an existing system is to be expanded or
additional coverage to other islands provided, the existing system shall
be modified and interfaced with any new components so that the
requirements of this article shall be complied with. Plans shall be
submitted for approval by the Commissioner prior to such expansion or
additional coverage and shall conform to manufacturer's specifications.
H.
Testing and inspections.
All systems, including all subsystems, shall be tested in all
operating modes prior to use and witnessed by the Commissioner.
At least one phase of the test on each system shall employ the
use of a cylinder of compressed nitrogen gas, or manufacturer's
approved equal, to ascertain that all piping and nozzles are free of
obstructions.
(1)
All systems (cylinders, release mechanisms, detectors, etc.) shall
be inspected and tagged with the name of the individual conducting
the inspection and the date of the inspection. All inspections and
testing shall be conducted by the system manufacturer's
authorized representative. The inspections shall be conducted
every six months.
(2)
I.
Manufacturer's requirements. No part of the aforementioned methods
of operation of installation are meant to alter the manufacturer's
requirements. If there is a conflict between the requirements of this
regulation and the manufacturer's requirements, each situation shall be
considered on an individual basis.
J.
§ 131-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-161
1:285
§ 131-161. Electrical standards.
All wiring and electrical equipment shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code or as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 131-162. Repair of tanks.
Repair of tanks for the storage of gasoline, diesel or other flammable or
combustible motor fuels shall be made only when the tank is empty, isolated
and gas-free and shall be done in compliance with Parts 613 and 614 of
Title 6 of the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York and the
National Fire Prevention Association 30-87, Flammable and Combustible
Liquids Code.
§ 131-163. Notice of change in ownership or abandonment.
§ 131-164. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 131-165. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately. All permits and licenses presently
in effect shall remain so until the expiration date appearing thereon.
§ 131-166. through § 131-169. (Reserved)
The Commissioner shall be notified immediately upon any change of
ownership of any facility where gasoline, diesel or other flammable and
combustible motor fuel tanks and pumps are in use or when any such
tank is to be abandoned.
A.
The abandonment or removal of any tank for the storage of gasoline,
diesel or other flammable and combustible motor fuel shall be in
compliance with Part 1164.5 of Chapter C of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
B.
§ 131-161 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-166
1:286
ARTICLE XIV
Oil-Burning Equipment; Storage and Use of Fuel Oil
[Added 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-8749]
§ 131-170. Scope.
This article shall apply to the installation and use of oil-burning equipment
for domestic and commercial purposes and to the storage of fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.
§ 131-171. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
FUEL OIL — Any liquid used as fuel having a flash point of not less than
100° F. as specified by the American Society for Testing Materials or other
standard recognized by the State of New York.
OIL BURNERS — Any device designed and arranged for the purpose of
burning or preparing to burn fuel oil as a part of a fixed heating system as
specified in the definition of "fuel oil" and having a tank or container for
storage of fuel oil connected therewith. No such tank or container shall be
of less than 275 gallons' capacity.
OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — An oil burner of any type, together with
any equipment connected thereto, including piping, wiring, control, related
devices and tank for storage of fuel oil, whether located within or outside
the building, and provisions for filling and venting same.
§ 131-172. Installers' licenses; Examining Board; fee.
No person unless duly licensed by the Commissioner, as hereinafter
provided, may install oil-burning equipment. Every mechanic employed
under the supervision of the licensee must be experienced and qualified
in the particular branch of work he is to perform.
A.
Each installer of oil-burning equipment shall have at least one member
of its organization licensed and registered by the City for the
supervision of the installation of oil burners, as hereinafter provided.
B.
Each person applying for a license pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall file with the Commissioner a statement containing his
name, address, age, experience and qualifications. The applicant shall
be required to submit to a practical examination before an Examining
Board, constituted as hereinafter provided, as to his experience and
qualifications for such trade, business, calling or occupation. The
Examining Board shall consist of the Chief the Fire Department and
one other person to be appointed by the Commissioner of the Fire
C.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. XIV, Motor Fuel Storage Tanks and
Pumps, as amended.
§ 131-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-172
1:287
§ 131-173. Installation permit; fee.
Department who shall be a duly licensed installer of oil-burning
equipment with not less than five years' active experience and who
shall serve without compensation. [Amended 12-13-1989, approved
12-14-1989]
The Commissioner shall cause the separation of licenses into two
categories, Class A and Class B. Class A licenses shall be required
for the installation of equipment with a rated capacity of over
1,000,000 Btu's. Class B licenses shall be required for the
installation of equipment up to and including units with a rated
capacity of 1,000,000 Btu's.
(1)
Holders of present licenses shall be deemed to be holders of Class
A licenses.
(2)
Each person shall maintain in a conspicuous place, neatly framed, his
license of approval by the Commissioner.
D.
Each manufacturer, firm, corporation or agent wishing to secure a
license for the installation of all oil-burning equipment shall make such
application in writing to the Commissioner, stating:
The name, address and telephone number of the firm, corporation
or agent.
(1)
(2) The name of individual to whom license is to be issued.
An affidavit showing the experience of the applicant in the
installation of oil-burning equipment. If the applicant is a
corporation, then the experience of one of its officers shall be
stated.
(3)
E.
There shall be a fee of $100 for each Class A license issued by the
Commissioner and a fee of $70 for each Class B license issued by the
Commissioner, payable at the time application is filed, said license to
expire on December 31 of each year. [Amended 6-26-1991, approved
6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
F.
The Commissioner shall notify each applicant for a license, in writing,
of its decision of approval or disapproval. If approved, the applicant
shall receive a certificate of the license; if disapproved, he shall receive
a statement giving the reasons for disapproval.
G.
The license shall not be transferable and may be revoked by the
Commissioner if the holder thereof shall violate any of the provisions of
this article.
H.
No installation, replacement or relocation of any oil-burning equipment
shall be made without securing a permit from the Commissioner.
A.
§ 131-172 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-173
1:288
§ 131-174. Installation requirements.
Any installation, replacement or relocation and use of oil-burning
equipment shall be in compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Application for an installation permit shall be made in writing on a
form furnished by the Commissioner, and a fee of $60 per oil burner
and oil-burning equipment accessory thereto shall accompany each
application. [Amended 6-26-1991, approved 6-27-1991;
2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
B.
Applicants for a permit pursuant to this section shall provide the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The type of oil-burning equipment is to be installed.
(3) The location where oil-burning equipment is to be installed.
Where an oil burner is to be installed:
(a) The name, model and type of oil burner.
(b) The name and address of the manufacturer.
(c) The kind of fuel recommended.
(d) Btu rating.
A list of nationally recognized inspection board or laboratories
approving the same.
(e)
(4)
Where a fuel storage tank is to be installed:
(a) The maximum quantity of fuel to be stored.
(b) The dimensions of storage tank.
(c) The gauge of metal in tank.
(5)
The name, address and telephone number of concern making
installation.
(6)
(7) The number of the installer's license.
A sketch of plans showing clearly thereon the following:
The location of the building or buildings where oil-burning
equipment is to be installed and the location of any existing oilburning
equipment.
(a)
The nature of construction, dimensions of buildings and
purposes for which used.
(b)
(c) The size of fill and vent and fill pipes.
(8)
C.
§ 131-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-174
1:289
Prevention and Building Code and the National Fire Prevention Association
Standard for the Installation of Oil Burning Equipment, 31-87. In addition,
the following shall be required:
§ 131-175. Inspection of installation.
No oil-burning equipment that has been installed, replaced or relocated
may be used until it has been inspected and approved by the Commissioner.
Each oil burner installation using a No. 3 or lighter oil shall be equipped
with a fusible valve, to be installed in the suction line of the burner and
not more than six inches above the level of the floor. A second gatevalve
type is to be installed in the oil suction line between the fusible
valve and the strainer for use when servicing the burner.
A.
Except where National Fire Prevention Association 31-87 is more
restrictive, the ceiling over the boiler and flue shall be fire-retardant,
with materials having a fire resistance of one hour's duration and
extending two feet in each direction over the boiler and flue. Fiveeighths-
inch "Fire Code" or equal will be accepted.
B.
Only oil burners that have been tested and approved by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., or other nationally recognition inspection board or
laboratory may be installed.
C.
Tanks shall not be located over any sewer, soil or drain lines, and, if
vaulted, vaults shall not enclose any house service lines. Tanks shall not
be located under stairs or gas meters.
D.
Application for an inspection shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Commissioner, and a fee of $60 per oil burner and
oil-burning equipment accessory thereto shall accompany each
application. [Added 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
E.
A notification, in writing, shall be given to the Commissioner, who
shall, within 48 hours after receipt of such notification, inspect the
installation and give written approval or disapproval.
A.
Inspection shall include testing of all safety controls, remote control
switches, service switches and any other specialties necessary for the
safe operation of the burner.
B.
Any written disapproval shall contain the reasons therefor and the
modifications or corrections that must be made to secure the approval
required by this section.
C.
If any installation of oil burner, tank piping or controls is found to
be defective, the Fire Department shall be required to shut down the
burner until all repairs are made and the burner is inspected and
approved by the Fire Department.
D.
Application for an inspection shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Commissioner, and a fee of $60 per oil burner and
E.
§ 131-174 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-175
1:290
§ 131-176. Use of nonautomatic burners.
Oil burners which are not equipment with automatic means for preventing
abnormal discharge of oil at the burner shall not be installed or operated in
any location unless a competent attendant will be constantly on duty in the
room where the burner is located while the burner is in operation.
§ 131-177. Fuel oil storage and use.
§ 131-178. Abandoned tanks.
Tanks abandoned by replacement or otherwise shall be disposed of as
follows:
oil-burning equipment accessory thereto shall accompany each
application. [Added 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
A permit issued pursuant to this section shall at all times be subject to
inspection by the Commissioner.
A.
The permit shall state the applicant's name, the quantity of fuel oil to
be stored and the premises where it is to be stored.
B.
No person shall store or use fuel oil for oil-heating equipment unless a
permit has first been obtained for the storage and use of fuel oil from
the Commissioner. This permit is to be exhibited on the premises in the
vicinity of the oil burner, at all times.
C.
The permit for the storage and use of fuel oil shall be issued by the
Commissioner who may at any time modify, suspend or revoke any such
permit upon any violation of this article.
D.
No fuel oil may be discharged into any fuel oil tank or container other
than the grade recommended and specified by the manufacturer for
the use in the specific burner installed. Under no circumstances shall
refuse oil or oil commonly known as "crankcase oil" be used in a burner
used for domestic heating or commercial purposes.
E.
The manufacturer or dealer of the burner shall furnish and install,
properly secured to the underside of the cover of the filling box, a brass
tag having stamped thereon the grade of oil to be used with burner
installed. The stamping of the tag shall be: "This burner for Grade No.
_____" A similar tag shall be placed on the heating equipment.
F.
Upon completion of the installation of the fuel oil tank and after it has
been inspected and approved by the Commissioner, permission must be
obtained from the Commissioner by the person making the installation
for fuel oil to be delivered to the fuel oil tank.
G.
A. If an inside tank, the tank shall be removed from the building.
§ 131-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-178
1:291
§ 131-179. Fire extinguishers.
§ 131-180. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 131-181. through § 131-197. (Reserved)
If a buried tank, disposal shall be in compliance with Part 1164.5 of
Chapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
B.
No oil-burning installation will be approved until an approved fire
extinguisher has been installed on the premises, to be placed as
directed by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A.
Premises in which oil-burning equipment has been installed prior to the
adoption of this article must nevertheless install a fire extinguisher of
approved make.
B.
§ 131-178 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-181
1:292
ARTICLE XV
(Reserved)50
§ 131-198. through § 131-226. (Reserved)
50.Editor's Note: Former Art. XV, Oil-Heating Equipment; Storage and Use of Fuel Oil, was
repealed 12-9-1987, approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-198
1:293

ARTICLE XVI
Industrial Baking and Drying Ovens
§ 131-227. Scope.
This article shall apply to the location, design, construction and operation of
industrial baking and drying ovens which are heated with oil or gas fuel or
which during operation contain flammable vapors from the products being
baked or dried. It is the intent of this article to provide requirements for the
operation of these ovens within certain limitations of control depending on
oven design, paint formulation and ventilation requirements, the disregard
of which may cause them to function in an unsafe manner, thereby
becoming liable to destruction by fire or explosion.
§ 131-228. Location and construction.
§ 131-229. Ventilation.
Ovens, oven heaters and related equipment shall be located with due
regard to the possibility of fire resulting from overheating or from the
escape of fuel gas or fuel oil and the possibility of damage to the
building and injury to persons resulting from explosion.
A.
Ovens shall be located at or above grade, or if in basements, at least
50% of the wall area of the room in which the oven is located shall be
above grade.
B.
Ovens shall be so located as to be readily accessible for inspection
and maintenance and with adequate clearances to permit the proper
functioning of explosion vents. Roofs and floors of ovens shall be
sufficiently insulated and ventilated to keep temperatures at
combustible ceilings and floors below 160° F.
C.
Ovens shall be constructed of noncombustible materials throughout
except where the maximum oven operating temperature is not over
160° F. The amount of insulation used in oven panel construction shall
be enough to prevent the outside surface temperature from exceeding
160° F. or adequate guards shall be provided to protect personnel.
D.
Ovens which may contain flammable air-gas mixtures shall be equipped
with relief vents for freely relieving internal explosion pressures.
E.
All ductwork shall be constructed of noncombustible material. Ducts
shall be made tight throughout and shall have no openings other than
those required for the proper operation and maintenance of the system.
Ducts passing through combustible walls, floors or roofs shall have
adequate insulation and clearances to prevent surface temperatures
from exceeding 160° F. Exhaust ducts shall not discharge near doors,
windows or other air intakes in a manner that will permit reentry of
vapors into the building.
F.
§ 131-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-229
1:295
§ 131-230. Safety controls.
§ 131-231. Approval required.
Before any installation is made, plans are to be submitted to the Bureau of
Fire Prevention for approval.
Ovens in which flammable or toxic vapors are liberated or through
which products of combustion are circulated shall be ventilated by the
introduction of a supply of fresh air and proper exhaust to outdoors.
Such oven ventilation shall be arranged to provide vigorous and well
distributed air circulation within the oven and to ensure that the
flammable vapor concentration will be safely below the lower explosive
limit at all times. Unless the oven is operated in accordance with
specific approval specifying particular solvents and rate of ventilation,
the rate of ventilation shall not be less than 10,000 cubic feet of fresh
air per gallon of solvent evaporated in continuous-process ovens, and
not less than 380 cubic feet per minute per gallon of flammable solvent
evaporated in batch-process ovens.
A.
Exhaust duct openings shall be located in the area of greatest
concentration of vapors.
B.
C. All exhaust shall be by mechanical means using power-driven fans.
Safety controls shall be sufficient in number and substantially
constructed and arranged to maintain the required conditions of safety
and prevent the development of fire and explosion hazards.
A.
Ventilation controls, suitably interlocked, shall be provided which will
ensure required ventilation of the system.
B.
Fuel safety controls, suitably interlocked and arranged to minimize the
possibility of dangerous accumulations of explosive air-fuel mixtures in
the heating system, shall be provided.
C.
Excess temperature controls shall be provided to maintain a safe
operating temperature within the oven.
D.
Conveyor interlocks shall be provided in conveyor ovens having a
flammable vapor hazard so that the conveyor cannot move unless
ventilating fans are operating and discharging the required amount of
air.
E.
§ 131-229 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-231
1:296
ARTICLE XVII
Portable Oil and Kerosene Heaters
§ 131-232. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OIL-HEATING STOVE OR APPLIANCE — An oil-heating stove or appliance
or kerosene stove or other stove or appliance not constituting a portable
oil heater as defined in this section which uses a liquid or any mixture,
substance or compound which will emit a flammable vapor at a temperature
below 125° F. when tested in a Tagliabue cup tester.
PORTABLE OIL HEATER OR KEROSENE STOVE — Any stove or appliance
which uses kerosene or fuel oil or any combustible mixture or flammable
mixture and is designed for the heating of space in buildings or structures
and does not require a connection to a flue, including oil stoves and oil
heaters equipped with a woven wick, but excluding portable apparatus not
designed to heat spaces in buildings or structures, such as blowtorches or
soldering pots.
§ 131-233. Use of portable oil heaters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 131-234. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the use or maintenance for
cooking purposes of any oil-heating stove or appliance which is designed
for cooking purposes only, or the keeping or storing of any oil-heating stove
or appliance or portable oil heater in any premises lawfully used in the
business of manufacturing, selling, processing, handling, storing, repairing
or transporting such stoves, appliances or heaters in any case where such
stove, appliance or heater is so kept or stored in the conduct of such
Use or permit the use of a portable oil heater in any building or
structure or portion thereof.
A.
Maintain a portable oil heater in any building or structure or portion
thereof in such manner as to be arranged, designed or intended for use.
B.
Keep or store a portable oil heater in any space used, arranged,
designed or intended for living or sleeping purposes in any building or
structure.
C.
Being an owner or agent of any building or structure, or otherwise
having charge of or control over any space therein, whether or not such
space is used, arranged, designed or intended for living or sleeping
purposes, provide or place or cause to be provided or placed in such
space a portable oil heater for use by the occupant of such space.
D.
§ 131-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-234
1:297
business and is not used in such premises or maintained for the purposes of
use therein.
§ 131-235. Oil-heating stoves or appliances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use an oil-heating stove or appliance
in any building or structure or any portion thereof for the heating of space
or to maintain any such stove or appliance in any such building or structure
or portion thereof in such manner as to be arranged, designed or intended
for the heating of space unless such stove or appliance:
Is of a type approved as to design and construction by the National
Board of Fire Underwriters.
A.
Has been installed and is maintained in conformity with the
specification of the National Board of Fire Underwriters in relation
to the installation, maintenance, use and operation of oil-burning
equipment as recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association.
B.
§ 131-234 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-235
1:298
ARTICLE XVIII
Refrigerating Systems
§ 131-236. Compliance required.
No person shall install, maintain, repair, operate or use any refrigerating
system in the City except in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 131-237. Approval and inspection required; inspection application
and fee. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved 2-27-1969]
§ 131-238. Application for installation.
§ 131-239. Installer's license; Examining Board; license fee.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall approve only those refrigerating
systems or their adjuncts which bear the seal of approval of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters Laboratory or any other nationally
recognized laboratory.
A.
No refrigerating equipment except those approved shall be installed
and no refrigerating apparatus shall be used until inspected and
approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Replacements shall be
deemed as new installations.
B.
Applications for such inspection shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. A fee of $50 shall
accompany the application. Such fee shall cover inspection of five
units or any portion thereof contained in single premises. Inspections
shall not be required of self-contained unit installations of Class D
systems. [Amended 11-26-1980, approved 11-28-1980; 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991]
C.
All applications for the installation of any refrigerator system shall
be made to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, giving the following
information:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location where refrigerating system is to be installed.
(3) Name of refrigerating system, by whom manufactured and where.
(4) Name of concern making installation.
(5) Number of installer's license.
The application shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to a scale of
1/4 inch to the foot, showing clearly thereon all details of location
and installation.
(6)
A.
Plans are not required for Class D installations where such installations
are complete self-contained units.
B.
§ 131-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-239
1:299
No person not duly licensed by the Bureau of Fire Prevention may
install any refrigerating system.
A.
Each manufacturer or his duly authorized representative shall have at
least one person in his organization duly licensed and registered for the
supervision of installations of refrigerating systems.
B.
Each person applying for a license pursuant to provisions of this article
shall file with the Bureau of Fire Prevention a statement containing his
name, address, age, experience and qualifications. The applicant shall
be given a practical examination by an Examining Board consisting
of the Chief of the Fire Department and two other members to be
appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a member of the Board
of Examining Engineers and the other shall be a duly licensed installer
who has had five years' or more experience. The term of office of said
members, other than the Chief of the Fire Department, shall begin
upon the first day of October, except those first appointed hereunder;
they shall severally hold their office one year and until their successors
are appointed and shall have qualified. They shall serve without
compensation.
C.
Each manufacturer, firm, corporation or agent wishing to secure a
license for the installation of refrigerating systems shall apply in
writing to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, stating:
(1) Name and address of firm, corporation or agent.
(2) Name of individual to whom license is to be issued.
Name of refrigerating system.
This is to be accompanied by an affidavit showing the experience
and qualifications of the person applying for the license.
(3)
D.
There shall be an annual fee of $100 for each installer's license issued
by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, payable at the time application is
filed. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved 2-27-1969; 11-26-1980,
approved 11-28-1980; 6-26-1991, approved 6-27-1991;
2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
E.
F. The installer's license shall expire on March 31 of each year.
Such license shall not be transferable and may be revoked by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention if the holder thereof shall violate any of the
provisions of this article with respect thereto.
G.
The Fire Commissioner may at any time modify, suspend or revoke any
such approval or license upon certification to him by the Chief of the
Fire Department of any violation or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this article.
H.
§ 131-239 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-240
1:300
§ 131-240. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRINE — Any liquid which, having been cooled by the refrigerating system,
is used for the absorption of heat.
CONTAINER — A cylinder for the transportation of refrigerant, constructed
to conform to the regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
DIRECT REFRIGERATION — A system in which the refrigerant is circulated
to the substance or space refrigerated.
FLAMMABLE REFRIGERANT — One which will burn or explode when
mixed with certain proportions of air, such as methyl chloride, ethyl
chloride, isobutane, propane and ethane.
FUSIBLE PLUG — A device having a member fusible at a predetermined
temperature, for the relief of pressure.
HERMETICALLY SEALED UNIT SYSTEM — One in which all joints of the
parts of the system containing the refrigerant are made by the process of
fusion.
HYDROCARBON REFRIGERANT — One showing only hydrogen and carbon
in chemical formula, such as isobutane, propane, butane and ethane.
INDIRECT REFRIGERATION SYSTEM — One in which a brine or liquid
cooled by the refrigerant is circulated to the substance or space
refrigerated.
IRRITANT REFRIGERANT — One which, when breathed, attacks the throat
or lungs, such as ammonia and sulfur dioxide.
LIQUID RECEIVER — A vessel permanently connected to a refrigerating
system for storage of liquid refrigerant.
MIXER — A vessel or device for mixing the refrigerant or other soluble
vapor with water.
MULTIPLE-UNIT SYSTEM — A refrigerating system in which the
refrigerant is delivered from a common source to two or more separate
refrigerators or refrigerated spaces, each containing one or more
evaporators.
PRESSURE-IMPOSING ELEMENT — That apparatus which draws the
refrigerant from the low-pressure or low-temperature side of the system
and discharges it into the high-pressure or high-temperature side of the
system.
PRESSURE-LIMITING DEVICE — A pressure- or temperature-responsive
mechanism for automatically stopping the operation of the pressureimposing
element.
PRESSURE-RELIEF DEVICE — A pressure-relief valve, a rupture member,
fusible plug or other approved device for relieving the pressure.
§ 131-240 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-240
1:301
PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE — A valve shut by a spring or other means
automatically to relieve pressure in excess of its setting.
REFRIGERANT — The chemical agent used to produce refrigeration.
REFRIGERATING MACHINERY ROOM — One in which is located any
pressure-imposing elements, condenser, receiver or shell-type apparatus,
except evaporators.
REFRIGERATING SYSTEM — A combination of apparatus in which a
refrigerant is circulated for the purpose of extracting heat, except all airconditioning
machines inserted in the walls and windows of all
buildings.[Amended 6-14-1961, approved 6-15-1961]
REMOTE SYSTEM — One which cannot be removed from its location
without disconnecting the refrigerant retention lines or parts.
RUPTURE MEMBER — A device that will automatically rupture at a
predetermined pressure.
SEALLESS UNIT — One which operates without stuffing boxes or which
does not depend on contacts between moving and stationary surfaces for
refrigerant retention.
SEAL-TYPE UNIT — One in which the operation depends on a contact
between moving and stationary surfaces for refrigerant retention.
SERVICE VALVE — A special key-operated shutoff valve installed in Class
C and D systems, used only for retention of refrigerant in component parts
during transportation, installation and repairs, during abnormal operation
or in case of emergency.
STOP VALVE — A valve in a refrigerating system for controlling the flow
of refrigerant during normal starting and stopping operation or in case of
emergency.
SUBSTITUTED HYDROCARBON REFRIGERANT — A hydrocarbon in which
one or more atoms of hydrogen are replaced by chlorine or some other
element. (Examples: methyl chloride, ethyl chloride, methylene chloride,
acetylene dichloride, ethylene trichloride.)
UNIT SYSTEM — One which can be removed either with or separately
from the space refrigerated without disconnecting any pipes or refrigerantcontaining
parts.
§ 131-241. Classification of systems.
The total amount of refrigerant contained in the system for its
satisfactory operation shall determine its class.
A Class A system is one containing 1,000 pounds or over of
refrigerant.
(1)
A Class B system is one containing from 100 pounds to 1,000
pounds of refrigerant.
(2)
A.
§ 131-240 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-241
1:302
§ 131-242. Permits and fees.
§ 131-243. Refrigerants.
A Class C system is one containing from 20 pounds to 100 pounds
of refrigerant.
(3)
A Class D system is one containing not more than 20 pounds of
refrigerant.
(4)
For all Class A, B and C systems, the seller shall either mark the
classification on the apparatus, together with the proper weight and
kind of refrigerant to be used, or furnish the data in a letter which shall
be permanently and conspicuously posted near the system.
B.
Except as hereinafter provided in these regulations, it shall be unlawful
to maintain or operate a refrigerating system without a permit from the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all permits or renewals thereof
issued pursuant to this article shall expire on March 31 of each year.
The Fire Commissioner may at any time modify, suspend or revoke
any such permit upon certification to him by the Chief of the Fire
Department of any violation or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this article.
B.
Applications must be made to the Bureau of Fire Prevention for permits
for all Class A, B, C and D systems used commercially, for which
the following fees shall be charged: [Amended 2-5-1969, approved
2-6-1969; 11-26-1980, approved 11-28-1980; 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
(1) Class A: $200, 1,101 pounds and over.
(2) Class B: $160, 101 pounds to 1,000 pounds.
(3) Class C: $120, 21 pounds to 100 pounds.
(4) Class D: $40, 20 pounds or less.
C.
Renewals annually of such permits shall be as follows: [Amended
6-26-1991, approved 6-27-1991; 2-27-2008, approved 2-28-2008]
(1) Class A: $120, 1,101 pounds and over.
(2) Class B: $90, 101 pounds to 1,000 pounds.
(3) Class C: $60, 21 pounds to 100 pounds.
(4) Class D: $20, 20 pounds or less.
D.
Any extension of or addition to any refrigerating system shall be subject
to the permit and inspection requirements of this article.
E.
§ 131-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-243
1:303
§ 131-244. Refrigerating machinery rooms.
Except with special approval of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, only
the following refrigerants can be used: methyl chloride, sulfur dioxide,
ethylene trichloride, acetylene dichloride, carbon-dioxide, ammonia,
freons and methylene chloride; provided, however, that ethane,
propane, isobutane, butane and ethyl chloride can also be used, only in
Class D systems.
A.
For the direct method of refrigeration for Class A and B systems using
a flammable or an irritant refrigerant or methylene chloride, acetylene
dichloride and ethylene trichloride, permits will be issued only if the
building is used exclusively for ice making or for refrigerating
purposes, or both, or if the refrigerant is not carried above the first floor
in a business building or combination business and residence building,
or if the entire refrigerating system is confined on any one floor in the
space occupied by a single tenant in a business section of business
building.
B.
Where wards of hospitals, cell rooms of prisons or the auditorium
portion of a building in which people may congregate for military, civic,
political, educational, religious, amusement or transportation purposes
are to be refrigerated by a flammable or irritant refrigerant or by
methylene chloride, acetylene dichloride or ethylene trichloride, the
indirect method of refrigeration only shall be permitted and then only
when the entire refrigerating system containing the refrigerant is
located in a separate machinery room having no connection with the
other parts of the building and entered and ventilated from the outside
only.
C.
No permit will be issued for an intermittent absorption type of
refrigerating system of Class A, but a permit will be issued for one in
Class B only when a heating medium of low-pressure steam is used in
its operation.
D.
E. Only the refrigerant specified in the permit shall be used in the system.
Refrigerating system permit fees shall be distinct and separate from
permit fees for building, plumbing, electrical or other work.
F.
Without approval from the Fire Commissioner, no brine shall be used in
a brine circulating system or tank that will generate flammable vapor
at a temperature below 100° F. when tested in a Tagliabue open cup
tester.
G.
Open flames and electrical equipment. In a refrigerating machinery
room for Class A or B system using a flammable refrigerant, a
hydrocarbon or a substituted hydrocarbon, no fire, flame or arc light
will be permitted and no major electrical equipment except motors and
switchboard to operate refrigerating machinery will be permitted. All
starting equipment, including switches, automatic starters and the like,
A.
§ 131-243 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-244
1:304
must be of the oil-immersed or -enclosed type. An emergency switch
controlling all the electrically operated refrigerating machinery for all
type refrigerants shall be located outside the refrigerating machinery
room where it can be readily reached and operated in case of
emergency.
Ventilation.
Each Class A, B or C refrigerating machinery room of any system
shall be independently provided with means for adequate
ventilation to the outer air. The ventilation shall consist of a window
or windows opening directly to the open air or of mechanical means
capable of exhausting the foul air from the room.
(1)
When a window or windows are used, if placed in opposite walls
so as to provide a through-air circulation to the outer air, a total
area of inlet and outlet, respectively, of not less than that specified
in column D of the table hereinafter set forth in this section shall
be provided. When a window or windows are placed in one wall, a
total area shall be provided of not less than that specified in column
E of said table.
(2)
When mechanical means are used, they shall consist of driven
exhaust fan of the enclosed, cased blower type which shall be
capable of removing from the refrigerating machinery room the
amount of air specified in column B of the table. The inlet to the fan
shall be located near the refrigerating equipment. The outlet from
the fan shall terminate not less than six feet above the sidewalk
and in no case under a stairway or fire escape. Where air ducts
are used on either the inlet or discharge side of the fan, they shall
each have an area of not less than that specified in column C. Sharp
bends in the run of the ducts shall be avoided. The control for
such mechanical means of ventilation shall be easily accessible and
located outside the refrigerating machinery room. (Door openings
leading directly to the open air shall be considered equivalent to
windows for the requirements specified in columns D and E.)
(3)
Where a nonirritant and nonflammable refrigerant is employed, the
requirements as given in column D of the table may be reduced
by 1/2. When air or water is employed as the refrigerant, no
ventilation shall be required.
(4)
In addition to mechanical means of ventilation in refrigerating
machinery room or rooms where a Class A system or Class B
system using ammonia is installed, a water deluge may be
provided, which shall consist of a sprinkler system having open
heads of not less than one-fourth-inch orifice spaced not more
than eight feet apart in any direction, and such system shall be
located above all the refrigerating apparatus and piping in the
refrigerating machinery room. Not more than one head shall be
installed on a three fourths-inch pipe, five heads on a one-inch pipe,
(5)
B.
§ 131-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-244
1:305
six heads on a one-and-one-fourth inch pipe. The deluge system
shall be permanently connected with the main house supply or
other assured source from which a constant water pressure of not
less than 20 pounds per square inch can be maintained on the inlet
side of the main control valve or valves at all times. The control
valve or valves for such water deluge system shall be manually
operated, easily accessible and shall be labeled and located outside
the refrigerating machinery room.
A B C D E
Refrigerant
in System
(pounds)
Mechanical
Discharge
(cubic feet
per
minute)
Mechanical
Duct Area
(square
feet)
Window
Area for
Each
Opposite
Side
(square
feet)
Window
Area for 1
Side Only
(square
feet)
Up to 20 150 1/4 1 6
50 250 1/3 1 1/2 12
100 400 1/2 2 16
150 550 2/3 2 1/2 19
200 680 2/3 3 25
250 800 1 3 1/2 29
300 900 1 4 32
400 1,100 1 1/4 4 1/2 38
500 1,275 1 1/4 5 42
600 1,450 1 1/2 6 45
700 1,630 1 1/2 6 1/2 48
800 1,800 2 7 51
900 1,950 2 7 1/2 55
1,000 2,050 2 8 59
1,250 2,350 2 1/4 9 68
1,500 2,800 2 1/4 11 78
1,750 3,150 3 12 1/2 87
2,000 3,500 3 1/2 14 98
2,500 4,150 4 16 113
3,000 4,500 4 1/2 18 130
4,000 6,000 6 24 167
5,000 7,500 7 1/2 30 204
6,000 9,000 9 36 241
§ 131-244 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-244
1:306
A B C D E
Refrigerant
in System
(pounds)
Mechanical
Discharge
(cubic feet
per
minute)
Mechanical
Duct Area
(square
feet)
Window
Area for
Each
Opposite
Side
(square
feet)
Window
Area for 1
Side Only
(square
feet)
7,000 10,500 10 1/2 42 278
8,000 12,000 12 48 315
9,000 13,000 13 52 342
10,000 14,000 14 56 360
12,000 17,000 17 68 425
14,000 19,000 19 75 470
16,000 22,000 22 86 540
18,000 24,000 24 92 580
20,000 26,500 26 100 630
25,000 33,000 33 121 760
30,000 39,000 39 142 870
35,000 44,000 44 155 940
40,000 51,000 51 176 1,060
45,000 56,000 56 190 1,120
Indirect method.
In Class A and B systems where the indirect method of
refrigeration is permitted, the refrigerating machinery room shall
be constructed according to the following requirements: Where an
irritant refrigerant is used, the refrigerating machinery room shall
be maintained vaportight, except that all doors opening to other
parts of the building shall be self-closing and so close fitting as to
prevent the passage of vapor and shall be kept closed at all times
except during entrance and exit. All doors shall open outward. All
other openings that may permit the passage of vapor to other parts
of the building shall be vaportight and kept closed. There shall
be no openings to elevator shafts, but openings to dumbwaiter
shafts shall be permitted, provided the openings are protected with
self-closing and close-fitting fire doors. There shall be adequate
ventilation to the outside as required under Subsection B of this
section.
(1)
In Class C systems of the remote type, the pressure-imposing
element, condenser, receiver or shell-type apparatus need not be
located in a separate machinery room but shall be located at least
(2)
C.
§ 131-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-244
1:307
§ 131-245. Piping and tubing.
10 feet from storage of combustible materials in an accessible part
of the building with adequate lighting facilities, and they shall be
protected against mechanical injury by a metal netting partition
arranged with a door and shall not be located under stairways nor
near dumbwaiter shafts not equipped with self-closing or closefitting
doors nor near elevator shafts.
All piping and tubing containing the refrigerant shall be supported by
strong and durable material in such a manner as to prevent vibration
and strains at joints and connections.
A.
Hard-drawn copper tubing will be accepted for air-conditioning systems
of Class A, B, C or D when installed with the necessary sweat fittings
and supported by strong, durable material in such a manner as to
prevent vibration and strain at joints and connections. All soldered
joints must be made with not less than 95-5 solder.
B.
Air-conditioning systems to which these provisions cannot be applied
may be maintained and operated subject to such conditions as are
deemed necessary by the Fire Commissioner.
C.
All refrigerant piping, tubing and fittings shall be of material suitable
for the refrigerant intended and shall be able to withstand the minimum
required test pressures as hereinafter provided in § 131-247.
D.
For systems of Class A, B, C or D, standard wall thickness pipe may
be used where a test pressure of less than 300 pounds is required;
and where the test pressures are in excess of 300 pounds, extra-heavy
wall thickness pipe shall be used. If flanged fittings are used for pipe
connections, they shall be of recessed gasket type.
E.
For systems of Class C or D, seamless copper or other suitable approved
metal tubing of not less than 0.034 of an inch wall thickness and not
exceeding 5/8 of an inch in diameter, and of corresponding greater wall
thickness for larger diameters, may be used, provided the joints are
sweated, brazed or flared.
F.
In Class C systems using seamless metal tubing for refrigerant lines
and supplying two or more evaporators in two or more separate
refrigeration spaces (termed "multiple systems"), the refrigerant lines
if they extend between floors shall be enclosed in iron pipe or tubing
or other metal sleeve enclosure. The enclosures may be of flexible
metal at bends or terminals if not exceeding six feet in length and
if rigidly fastened to connecting enclosure pipe. Enclosures shall be
rigidly secured to the walls or other supports.
G.
Each vertical run of metal enclosure shall be sealed or plugged at its
upper end with a material not affected by moisture or the temperature
of the refrigerant lines. All refrigerant line joints shall be accessible.
H.
§ 131-244 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-245
1:308
§ 131-246. Safety devices.
Service shutoff valves for the suction and liquid refrigerant lines shall
be arranged with a handwheel or other means of ready operation and
shall be located at the lower end of each riser.
I.
The use of a central refrigerating system using the direct method of
refrigeration to individual refrigerators throughout a multiple dwelling
is hereby prohibited.
J.
All drain, wastewater supply and illuminating gas connections shall be
made to comply with all City ordinances and regulations.
K.
No water drain from any compressor, absorber or condenser shall be
connected directly with any sewer, soil, waste or other plumbing pipe
but must discharge over the surface of an open area, over a trapped,
vented and water-supplied plumbing fixture or otherwise as directed by
the appropriate City authority.
L.
Elevator, dumbwaiter or other shafts containing moving objects shall
not be used for refrigerant lines.
M.
Pressure-relief valves, pressure-limiting devices and rupture members
shall be made of suitable materials for the refrigerant employed and
shall be constructed and set to prevent the pressure exceeding the test
pressures.
A.
No stop valve shall be located between a pressure-relief device or
pressure-limiting device and the part of the system protected thereby
unless two pressure-relief devices of required size are used and so
arranged that only one pressure-relief device can be cut off for repair
purposes at any one time.
B.
Class B systems in which no stop valves are used and in which the
pressure will equalize throughout the system when the pressure
imposing element is not in operation may be protected by only one
pressure-relief device located on the high-pressure side.
C.
The low pressure side of a Class A ammonia system shall be provided
with a hand operated valve for discharging the ammonia into water
through a mixer to the sewer in case of emergency.
D.
The ammonia mixer shall be constructed of steel and shall be capable
of withstanding a pressure of at least 50 pounds per square inch.
E.
No valve shall be located in the ammonia emergency discharge line
except the manually operated valve discharging into the water and
ammonia mixer, but there may be one stop valve located inside the
building for repair purposes only. This valve shall be sealed open and
labeled "keep open."
F.
The manually operated pressure-relief valve shall be located in a locked
box which can be opened by members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
G.
§ 131-245 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-246
1:309
by means of a Fire Bureau key. The door of the box shall be on the
public thoroughfare side of the building, in an easily accessible location
and not less than 18 inches nor more than five feet above the sidewalk
level. The box shall be permanently labeled, having letters of not less
than one inch reading FOR FIRE BUREAU USE ONLY. The relief valve
shall be labeled "ammonia." A sign shall be posted within the box
reading DO NOT OPEN VALVE UNTIL WATER IS FLOWING.
A single standard two-and-one-half-inch Fire Department connection
shall be provided through which the necessary water may be supplied
to the mixer. The Fire Department connection shall be located near the
box and not less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches above the
sidewalk level and shall be permanently labeled, having letters not less
than one-inch high reading TO AMMONIA MIXER. A check valve so set
as to prevent gases from reaching the Fire Department connection shall
be installed in the water line between the Fire Department connection
and water and ammonia mixer.
H.
The Fire Department shall have sole use of the mixer and supply the
necessary water.
I.
In systems using over 27,000 pounds of ammonia, there shall be
provided one additional water and ammonia mixer for each 27,000
pounds of ammonia or fraction thereof so used in excess.
J.
The ammonia mixer and its connection for a Class A system shall
conform to the diagram.
K.
The size of pressure-relief valves shall be as follows:
Carbon Dioxide and
Ethane Refrigerants Other Refrigerants
Capacity of
System
(pounds)
Number
Required
Size
(inches)
Number
Required
Size
(inches)
Up to 1,000 1 1/2 1 1/2
1,001 to 1,800 1 1/2 1 3/4
1,801 to 3,000 1 1/2 1 1
3,001 to 5,250 1 1/2 1 1 1/4
5,251 to 7,500 1 1/2 1 1 1/2
7,501 to 13,500 1 1 1 2
13,501 to
27,000
2 2
L.
Where rupture members are permitted and used, the equivalent area of
the relief valve specified must be provided.
M.
§ 131-246 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-246
1:310
Fusible plugs may be used on Class C and D systems. The free
discharge opening shall be 1/16 of an inch in diameter and shall relieve
the pressure at a temperature not exceeding 280° F.
N.
Every system using a water-cooled condenser with a pressure-imposing
element which is capable of producing a pressure in excess of the test
pressure shall be protected by a pressure-limiting device.
O.
Each compressor or generator of a Class A or B system shall be
protected by a pressure-relief valve connected into the high-pressure
side between the main top valve and the compressor or generator to
relieve excessive pressure into the low-pressure side of the system but
must at all times be relieved to atmosphere.
P.
A rupture member may be substituted for the relief valve in carbon
dioxide systems or systems operating below atmospheric pressure.
Q.
Shell-type apparatus, such as liquid receivers, condensers, evaporators,
liquid separators and absorbers of Class A and B systems, which can be
shut off by stop valves, shall be equipped with a pressure-relief valve
discharging as hereinafter provided.
R.
Class C and D systems so constructed that, when subjected to an
abnormal outside temperature such as that generated in a fire, their
walls may burst due to the expansion of the refrigerant, shall be
protected by a pressure relief device.
S.
Where more than 50 pounds of ammonia is used in a Class A or B
system, the discharge from relief valves shall be piped to the outside
atmosphere as specified for Class A systems or to the low-pressure side
as shown in diagrams or into a tank of water which shall be used for no
purpose except ammonia discharges. At least one gallon of fresh water
shall be provided for every pound of ammonia contained in the system.
The water used shall be prevented from freezing without the use of salt
or chemicals. The tank shall be substantially constructed of not less
than 1/8 of an inch or No. 11 U.S. gauge iron. No horizontal dimensions
of the tank shall be greater than 1/2 the height. The tank shall have a
hinged cover, or if of the enclosed type, shall have a vent hole at the top.
All pipe connections shall be through the top of tank only. The discharge
pipe from the pressure valve shall discharge the ammonia in the center
of the tank near the bottom. The tank shall be as securely supported
as any other part of the system. There shall be no opening in the tank
below the water level.
T.
In Class A and B systems using any refrigerant other than ammonia, the
discharge from relief valves shall be to the atmosphere as specified for
Class A ammonia systems. Carbon dioxide may be discharged into the
room if same contains at least 10 cubic feet of capacity per pound of
refrigerant used.
U.
Arrangements of pressure relief devices for Class A and B systems shall
conform to the diagrams.
V.
§ 131-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-246
1:311
§ 131-247. Tests.
Liquid level gauge glasses, except those of the bull's eye type, shall
have automatic closing shutoff, and such glasses shall be adequately
protected against injury by slotted metal casing.
W.
All refrigerating cabinets that are supplied by the remote system of
refrigeration must be securely fastened to the floor or wall.
X.
No refrigerating system shall be placed in operation until the complete
installation has been tested by the installer in the presence of the Chief
of the Fire Department or one of his deputies. Approval in writing,
issued by the Fire Commissioner, shall be posted on the premises where
the system is installed. Tests shall include a vacuum and a pressure
test of the complete piping system, preferably with the evaporators
installed, but valves thereon may be closed to prevent withdrawal of the
refrigerant. Under the vacuum test a vacuum of 20 inches of mercury
shall be placed upon the system and shall be held for a period of not
less than 20 minutes, with no detectable drop, after the pump has been
stopped. Under the pressure test every part of the refrigerating system
except pressure gauges and control mechanism shall withstand safely
and without injury the following required minimum test pressures:
Refrigerant To Be
Used in System
Chemical
Symbol
High-
Pressure Side
of System
(pounds per
square inch)
Low-Pressure
Side of
System
(pounds per
square inch)
Dichlorodifluoromethane
CCL2F2 250 150
Carbon dioxide CO2 1,500 750
Thane C2H6 1,100 550
Ammonia NH3 300 150
Propane 63H8 250 125
Methyl chloride CH3CL 150 80
Sulfur dioxide SO2 135 50
Isobutane (CH3)2CH-CH3 100 50
Butane 64H10 75 35
Ethyl chloride C2H5CI 50 25
Methylene chloride CH2CI2 15 15
Acetylene dichloride C2H2CI2 15 15
Ethylene trichloride CHCL:C CI2 15 15
A.
§ 131-246 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-247
1:312
§ 131-248. Operating precautions and license.
The apparatus, except pressure gauges and control mechanism, shall
be so designed as to withstand 3 1/3 times the above test pressure,
which product would constitute the probable rupture pressures.
B.
Two helmets or masks shall be provided with a Class A system and one
with a Class B system in which irritant refrigerant is used.
A.
Only helmets or masks that have been approved by the United States
Bureau of Mines as suitable for the refrigerant employed shall be used,
and they shall be kept in operative condition in an easily accessible case
or cabinet located immediately outside the refrigerating machinery
room.
B.
No Class A or B system shall be maintained, repaired or operated in any
building except under the personal supervision, direction or control of
a duly licensed person who has obtained a certificate of qualification to
operate, maintain or repair such a system in the City from the Bureau of
Fire Prevention upon certification as to competency by the Examining
Board. However, a Class B system containing under 200 pounds of
refrigerant need not comply with the above. Every Class C system not
automatic shall be in charge of a person holding a licensed certificate.
C.
No person shall receive a license to operate, maintain or repair any
refrigerating units unless he shall be at least 21 years of age, shall
have operated a refrigerating machine under the class for which he
applies for a period of at least one year, shall be a citizen of the United
States and by examination has shown himself sufficiently proficient to
supervise, direct, manage, repair, operate and control a refrigerating
plant for which an installation permit has been duly issued by the City.
D.
The fee for a refrigeration operator's license shall be $50 annually.
Such licenses shall expire on March 31 in each year. Applicants shall
furnish two small pictures of themselves, which shall be attached to the
license and the stub of the license. [Amended 2-26-1969, approved
2-27-1969; 11-26-1980, approved 11-28-1980; 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991]
E.
In all refrigerating machinery rooms of Class A, B and C systems,
there shall be permanently and conspicuously posted the following
information:
(1) The names and addresses of the licensed operators in charge.
(2) The location of the nearest fire alarm box.
The name, address and telephone number of a physician to be
called in case of emergency.
(3)
(4) Instructions for shutting down the plant in case of emergency.
(5) Diagram of system.
F.
§ 131-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-248
1:313
§ 131-249. Denial or revocation of licenses.
Whenever under this article any installer's license or refrigeration
operator's license shall be required, no such license shall be issued to
any person if it appears to the Board of Examiners that such person lacks
natural capacity, mechanical skill, knowledge or experience or is unfitted by
habits of insobriety to perform his duties with safety to life and property;
(6) Class of system.
(7) Kind of refrigerant in system.
The name, address and day and night telephone numbers of service
repairmen.
(8)
(9) The name of the installer and date of installation.
(10)The name of the tester and the date tested.
Class A, B and C systems shall have the name of the refrigerant painted
or affixed in a permanent manner to the main parts of the piping.
G.
Refrigerant not contained in the refrigerating system shall be stored
only in containers conforming to the regulations prescribed by the
Interstate Commerce Commission for the transportation of such
refrigerant.
H.
Only two containers holding not more than a total of 300 pounds of
flammable, irritant hydrocarbon or substituted hydrocarbon refrigerant
shall be stored in the refrigerating machinery room of a Class A system.
I.
Only one container holding not more than 150 pounds of flammable,
irritant hydrocarbon or substituted hydrocarbon refrigerant shall be
stored in the refrigerating machinery room of a Class B system.
J.
In a Class C and D system, no refrigerant other than that used in the
system shall be stored in the refrigerating machinery room.
K.
If a greater amount of flammable, irritant hydrocarbon or substituted
hydrocarbon refrigerant is desired other than that permitted in a
refrigerating machinery room, it shall be stored in a fireproof building
or enclosure separated from the machinery room and a special permit
secured from the Fire Commissioner.
L.
When the refrigerant is withdrawn from a system, it shall be discharged
only in a suitable absorbent container conforming to the regulations
of the Interstate Commerce Commission for the transportation of such
refrigerant. No refrigerant shall be permitted to escape into the
refrigerating machinery room.
M.
Containers shall not be connected to the system except during periods
of charging or withdrawing the refrigerant.
N.
O. Tightening of bolts or flanged joints when under pressure is prohibited.
§ 131-248 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-249
1:314
and for like reasons a renewal of such license granted shall be refused
when the Board shall so determine, and upon satisfactory information to
said Board of Examiners of any such deficiency, the Board may revoke any
such license granted.
§ 131-250. Appeals.
Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any decision, order or ruling of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention, the Fire Commissioner or the Board of
Examiners may appeal therefrom to the Mayor by filing with the City Clerk
a notice of such appeal in writing within 30 days after the making of the
decision, order or ruling so appealed from. Such notice shall specify the
decision, order or ruling appealed from and the reason why the same is
claimed to be erroneous. The City Clerk shall forthwith notify the Mayor
of such appeal, and he shall notify the appellant and the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, the Fire Commissioner or said Board of Examiners to attend
the Mayor's hearing, depending upon from whose decision, order or ruling
appeal is taken. The Mayor shall fix the hearing date, hear the appellant
and the Bureau of Fire Prevention, the Fire Commissioner or said Board
of Examiners, as the case may be, and shall obtain such other advice as
to the matter as he may deem proper. He may affirm, reverse or modify
the decision, order or ruling by his order in writing, to be filed as soon
as practicable with the City Clerk, and the said Bureau, Commissioner or
Board shall forthwith proceed to carry out and enforce such order of the
Mayor.
§ 131-249 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-250
1:315

ARTICLE XIX
Tanks and Pumps Under Streets and Sidewalks
§ 131-251. Licenses and consents. [Amended 2-11-1959, approved
2-13-1959]
No person shall hereafter place or maintain in, upon or under any street,
sidewalk, roadway or public place in the City of Mount Vernon any tank,
pump or apparatus for the storage, sale or distribution of petroleum
products without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
But no such license shall be granted except upon a written application
therefor, duly sworn to under oath by the applicant or a duly authorized
officer thereof and setting forth the name, residence or business of the
applicant; also that such applicant is the sole owner of such tank, pump
or apparatus, with a complete description of the same and the exact place
where the same is to be placed; and which application shall have annexed
thereto a written agreement signed and acknowledged by said applicant
and the owner of the fee of the real estate immediately abutting on that part
of the said street, sidewalk, roadway or public place in, upon or under which
said tank, pump or apparatus is to be placed, whereby in consideration of
the issuance of said license the placing of said tank, pump or apparatus
at the place described in said application is consented to and wherein it
shall also be agreed that the owner of said fee of said real estate shall
remove or cause to be removed said tank, pump or other apparatus within
10 days after a written notice so to do, signed by the Fire Commissioner,
is deposited in the United States mail addressed to the said owner at the
address set forth in said agreement, and in default of such removal the
Fire Commissioner shall therein be authorized and empowered to cause
said tank, pump or other apparatus to be removed without further notice
or demand and to collect the cost and expense of such removal from said
owner of said real estate by action or otherwise, and that said owner shall
be liable for any and all damages sustained by any person and arising out of
the placing or operation of said tank, pump or other apparatus.
§ 131-252. Issuance and expiration of licenses. [Amended
2-11-1959, approved 2-13-1959]
The Mayor is hereby authorized to grant licenses under his hand, to be
sealed with the corporate seal and countersigned by the City Clerk, to
such persons as he shall deem proper, to install and maintain tanks for the
storage, sale or distribution of petroleum products under the sidewalks in
this City and for the placing of pumps in connection therewith, provided
that application is made and consents granted as provided in § 131-254 of
this article. All such licenses shall expire on the first day of June next after
their issue.
§ 131-253. Public liability insurance. [Added 2-11-1959, approved
2-13-1959]
§ 131-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-253
1:317
§ 131-254. License application.
Any person desiring to secure a license for the installation of any tank or
pump under the provisions of this article shall make written application to
the City Council, stating the size, location and use to which such tank is
to be put, and if said application is approved by City Council, it shall be
No license shall be granted under this article unless the applicant
shall have filed with the City Clerk satisfactory evidence of public
liability insurance in the amounts hereinafter set forth, together with
satisfactory evidence that said insurance policy has been approved as to
form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation Counsel, to insure
the City against loss, injury or damages arising out of the granting
of the license or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his
agents, servants or employees in connection with the installation or
maintenance of the tank, pump or apparatus.
Where the petroleum product is not stored for the purpose of
resale, the liability insurance shall be in the amount of not less than
$25,000 for any one person and not less than $50,000 for any one
accident and property damage insurance in the amount of not less
than $10,000 for any one accident.
(1)
Where the petroleum product is stored for the purpose of resale,
the liability insurance shall be in the amount of not less than
$100,000 for any one person and not less than $300,000 for any
one accident and property damage insurance in the amount of not
less than $25,000.
(2)
A.
Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective period of
the license as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall carry
an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will give at
least 10 days' written notice to the City of its intention to cancel such
insurance.
B.
A public-service corporation as defined in Article 1, Section 2 of the
New York State Public Service Law may, in lieu of the public liability
insurance hereinbefore specified for the installation or maintenance of
tanks or pumps, file and keep on file with the City Clerk an indemnity
agreement in the same amounts required by Subsection A(1) and (2) of
this section and approved as to form and legality by the Corporation
Counsel, to indemnify and save harmless the City from claims, suits,
actions, proceedings, losses, injuries, damages and costs of every kind
and description arising out of or resulting from any act or omission
on the part of any such public-service corporation under any license
granted to it or from any negligence or fault of such public-service
corporation, its contractors, agents, servants or employees in
connection with the installation or maintenance of tanks, pumps and
related apparatus or any work related thereto, and also to defend on
behalf of the City any actions or proceedings which may be instituted
against the City. [Added 5-27-1959, approved 5-28-1959]
C.
§ 131-253 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 131-254
1:318
thereupon referred to the Fire Commissioner, who shall make an inspection
of the place where such tank and pump are proposed to be located, and if
satisfactory to him, he shall approve said application and forward the same
to the Mayor, who may thereupon issue a license to said applicant.
§ 131-255. Rules and regulations for installation.
The Fire Commissioner is hereby empowered to make reasonable rules
and regulations for the proper installation of such tanks and pumps. All
tanks and pumps shall be located and installed under his supervision and
the supervision of the Commissioner of Public Works, and no tank shall be
covered from sight until after an inspection has been made by said Fire
Commissioner and his written approval has been given, which approval
shall be given without charge.
§ 131-256. Annual license fee. [Amended 2-11-1959, approved
2-13-1959]
The City Clerk shall collect an annual license fee of $50 for each license
issued, except where the petroleum product is stored for private
consumption only and not for the purpose of resale.
§ 131-257. Disposition of fees.
All moneys received by the City Clerk under this article shall be turned over
to the City Comptroller, who shall pay over same to the Treasurer of the
Police and Paid Firemen's Pension Fund.
§ 131-254 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-257
1:319

ARTICLE XX
(Reserved)51
§ 131-258. through § 131-270. (Reserved)
51.Editor's Note: Former Art. XX, Welding and Cutting Operations, was repealed 12-9-1987,
approved 12-10-1987.
§ 131-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-258
1:321

ARTICLE XXI
(Reserved)52
§ 131-271. through § 131-280. (Reserved)
52.Editor's Note: Former Article XXI, Reinspection of Electrical Wiring Installation, added
9-4-1963, approved 9-5-1963, as amended, was repealed 10-24-1984, approved
10-25-1984.
§ 131-271 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-271
1:323
Chapter 135
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 135-1. Sale and use prohibited; permit authority.
No person shall offer or expose for sale, possess or sell, furnish, use,
explode or cause to explode any fireworks, as defined by § 1894-a of the
Penal Law of the State of New York,53 and the permit authority relating to
public display of fireworks, as defined by said statute, is hereby designated
as the Mayor.
Chapter 139
FUEL, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gasoline sales — See Ch. 142.
53.Editor's Note: See now §§ 270.00 and 405.00 of the Penal Law.
§ 131-271 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 135-1
1:324
ARTICLE I
Sale for City Vehicles
[Adopted 5-2-1974, approved 5-3-1974]
§ 139-1. Findings.
The orderly and uninterrupted governmental operations and functions of
the City government of the City of Mount Vernon have been and are severely
hampered and restricted by the concerted and continuing refusal of retail
gasoline service station owners or operators to sell automotive fuels to
motor vehicles owned and operated by the City of Mount Vernon. Such
refusals have caused and will continue to cause the City of Mount Vernon
to limit and restrict police, sanitation and other vital services, resulting in
the total curtailment of such services and thereby seriously endangering the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 139-2. Refusal of service prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any individual, partnership,
company, association or corporation owning or operating a retail gasoline
service station, within the City of Mount Vernon, and every officer, agent,
employee or servant in responsible charge thereof to refuse to sell
automotive fuels, oil and other lubricating substances to any motor vehicle
owned by or operated on behalf of the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 139-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of an offense and shall be liable to a fine which shall not exceed $150 in
amount, or to imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-3
1:325
Chapter 139A
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 84. Bingo — See Ch. 95.
§ 139A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meaning indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes any bona fide religious or
charitable organization or bona fide education, fraternal or service
organization or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen,
which, by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution or act of the
Legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more of the
lawful purposes as defined in this article,54 provided that each shall operate
without profit to its members, and provided that each such organization
has engaged in serving one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in
this article for a period of five years immediately prior to applying for a
license under this article. No organization shall be deemed an "authorized
organization" which is formed primarily for the purpose of conducting
games of chance and which does not devote at least 75% of its activities to
other than conducting games of chance. No political party shall be deemed
an "authorized organization."
BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
CLERK — The City Clerk unless otherwise indicated.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety unless otherwise
indicated.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Includes only the games known as "merchandise
wheels" and such other specific games as may be authorized by the Board,
in which prizes are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number
or numbers, color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance,
but not including games commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" which
are controlled under Article 14-H of this chapter55 and also not including
"slot machines," "bookmaking," "policy or numbers games" and "lottery"
as defined in § 225.00 of the Penal Law. No game of chance shall involve
wagering of money by one player against another player.
LICENSE PERIOD — A period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive hours.
54.Editor's Note: "This article" refers to Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
55.Editor's Note: "Article 14-H of this chapter" refers to Article 14-H of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 139-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-1
1:326
OPERATION — The play of a single type of game of chance necessary to
determine the outcome or winners each time wagers are made.
SERIES OF PRIZES — The total amount of single prizes minus the total
amount of wagers lost during the successive operations of a single type of
game of chance, except that for merchandise wheels, "series of prizes" shall
mean the sum of the actual value of merchandise awarded as single prizes
during the successive operations of any single merchandise wheel.
SINGLE PRIZE — The sum of money or actual value of merchandise
awarded to a participant by a games of chance licensee in any one operation
of a single type of game in excess of his wager.
SINGLE TYPE OF GAME — The games of chance known as "merchandise
wheels" and each other specific game of chance authorized by the Board.
§ 139A-2. Authorization to conduct games.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor, as hereinafter provided, to conduct games of chance within the
territorial limits of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 9-A (§§ 185 through
195-n) of the General Municipal Law and the provisions of the Board.
§ 139A-3. General provisions.
Any game or games licensed hereunder shall be subject to the following
restrictions in addition to such other restrictions as may be provided herein
or contained in the rules and regulations of the Board:
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization, other than
a licensee under the provisions of Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting games of chance premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
A.
No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
B.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or
equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of
games of chance from other than a supplier licensed by the Board or
from another authorized organization.
C.
The entire net proceeds of any game of chance shall be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct
the same, and the net proceeds of any rental derived therefrom shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the authorized games of
chance lessor.
D.
§ 139A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139A-3
1:327
§ 139A-4. License application.
No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $100, except that for
merchandise wheels, no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of
$250. No single wager shall exceed $2.
E.
No authorized organization shall award a series of prizes consisting of
merchandise with an aggregate value in excess of $1,000 during the
successive operations of any one merchandise wheel.
F.
In addition to merchandise wheels, no more than five other single types
of games of chance shall be conducted during any one license period.
G.
Except for merchandise wheels, no series of prizes on any one occasion
shall aggregate more than $200 when the licensed authorized
organization conducts five single types of games of chance during any
one license period. Except for merchandise wheels, no series of prizes
on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $250 when the licensed
authorized organization conducts less than five single types of games
of chance, exclusive of merchandise wheels, during any one license
period.
H.
Except for the limitations on the sum or value for single prizes and
series of prizes, no limit shall be imposed on the sum or value of prizes
awarded to any one participant during any occasion or any license
period.
I.
No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization shall participate in the management of such games; no
person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization shall participate in
the operation of such game, as set forth in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law.
J.
No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
K.
No authorized organization shall extend credit to a person to
participate in playing a game of chance.
L.
No game of chance shall be conducted on other than the premises of an
authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor.
M.
The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
N.
Each applicant for a license shall file with the City Clerk of the City of
Mount Vernon a written application in the form prescribed in the rules
and regulations of the Board, duly executed and verified.
A.
B. Each application shall include the following:
§ 139A-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-4
1:328
The name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable such
Clerk or department, as the case may be, to determine whether or
not it is a bona fide authorized organization.
(1)
The names and addresses of its officers; the place or places where,
the date or dates and the time or times when the applicant intends
to conduct games under the license applied for.
(2)
The amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be given
directly or indirectly for each licensed period for use of the
premises of an authorized games of chance lessor.
(3)
All other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in
connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such
games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to
whom and the purposes for which they are to be paid.
(4)
The purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games are
to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission, salary,
compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for
conducting such game or games or for assisting therein except as
in this article otherwise provided; and such other information as
shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations.
(5)
The name of each single type of game of chance to be conducted
under the license applied for and the number of merchandise
wheels, if any, to be operated.
(6)
In each application, there shall be designated not less than four
bona fide members of the applicant organization under whom the
game or games of chance will be managed and to the application
shall be appended a statement executed by the members so
designated that they will be responsible for the management of
such games in accordance with the terms of the license, the rules
and regulations of the Board, this article and the applicable local
laws or ordinances.
(7)
Authorized games of chance lessor. Each applicant for a license to lease
premises to a licensed organization for the purposes of conducting
games of chance therein shall file, with the Clerk, a written application
therefor in a form to be prescribed by the Board, duly executed and
verified, which shall set forth the name and address of the applicant,
designation and address of the premises intended to be covered by the
license sought, a statement that the applicant in all respects conforms
with the specifications contained in the definition of "authorized
organization" set forth in § 139A-1 of this chapter, a statement of the
lawful purposes to which the net proceeds from any rental are to
be devoted by the applicant and such other information as shall be
prescribed by the Board.
C.
§ 139A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139A-5
1:329
§ 139A-5. Investigation of applicant; disposition of fees; issuance
and duration of license.
§ 139A-6. Denial of application; amendment to license.
The City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon shall cause to be
investigated the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each
application with due expedition after the filing of the application. The
City Clerk shall deliver to the Commissioner of Public Safety the
application, together with the supporting documents therefor and a
detailed report of the results of his investigation, including the due
qualifications of the applicant to be licensed, the relationship of the
members under whom such games are to be conducted to the applicant,
whether such persons are of good moral character or have ever been
convicted of a crime, whether the conduct of such games will comply
with all the provisions of law and rules and regulations applicable
thereto, whether a commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense of any nature will be paid to any person conducting or
assisting in conducting such games of chance, whether a prize will be
offered or given in excess of the sum or value of $250 in any single
game or an aggregate of all prizes given in a series of games on a
given occasion will exceed the sum or value of $1,000 and such other
questions or inquiries as the Commissioner of Public Safety may direct.
A.
If the Commissioner of Public Safety shall determine that the requisite
conditions have been met by the applicant, he shall so inform the
City Clerk, who shall issue a license to the applicant for the holding,
operation and conduct of the specific kinds of games of chance applied
for upon payment of a license fee or fees of $25 for each occasion upon
which any games of chance are to be conducted under such license,
which fees are to be paid to the Comptroller of the City of Mount
Vernon. Said license shall be countersigned by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
B.
On or before the 30th day of each month, the Comptroller of the City
of Mount Vernon shall transmit to the State Comptroller a sum equal to
50% of all license fees collected by the City of Mount Vernon pursuant
to this chapter during the preceding calendar month.
C.
No license for the holding, operation or conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one year.
D.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, the City
Clerk shall not issue a license to any applicant where there is found to
be a violation of any state law or City ordinance respecting premises
where it is intended that such games of chance are to be held, operated
or conducted by said applicant.
E.
No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the City
Clerk until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which
A.
§ 139A-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-6
1:330
§ 139A-7. Control and supervision.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have and exercise rigid control
and close supervision over all games of chance conducted under such
license, to the end that the same are fairly conducted in accordance with
the provisions of such license, the provisions of the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board, the provisions of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law and this chapter; and the Board shall have the power and
the authority to temporarily suspend any license issued by the Clerk or
department pending a hearing; and after notice and hearing, the Clerk,
Commissioner or Board may suspend or revoke the same and, additionally,
impose a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000 for violation of any such
provisions, and shall have the right of entry, by their respective officers and
agents, at all times into any premises where any game of chance is being
conducted or where it is intended that any such game shall be conducted
or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct
thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. An agent of the
appropriate office or department shall make an on-site inspection during
the conduct of all games of chance licensed pursuant to this article.
§ 139A-8. Days permissible for holding games.
Such games may be held on any day provided for in such license, to include
the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday,"
after 1:05 p.m. No games of chance shall be conducted on Easter Sunday,
Christmas Day and New Year's Eve.
§ 139A-9. Age restriction for participation.
No persons under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any
license issued under this chapter.
§ 139A-10. Frequency of games; alcoholic beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter more often than on 12 times in any
one calendar year or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served during the progress of the game or games. No premises
shall be used for the conduct of games of chance on more than 24 license
periods in any one year.
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard, upon the qualifications of
the applicant and the merits of the application.
Any license issued under this chapter may be amended upon
application made to the City Clerk where the subject matter of the
proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included
in the original license and upon payment of such additional license fee,
if any, as would have been payable if it had been so included.
B.
§ 139A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139A-11
1:331
§ 139A-11. Persons operating and conducting games; equipment
and expenses; compensation.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of
the authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person
shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games
of chance under such license except an active member or a member of an
organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a member
of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or
a member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the
licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association
and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided. No such
games of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as
shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation
therefor by the licensee, and no item of expense shall be incurred or paid
in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of
chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any licensee issued under
this chapter except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount
for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which
are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding,
operating or conducting thereof under any circumstances whatever. No
rental shall be paid for the use of any premises for holding, operating or
conducting any such game of chance thereon or for any other purpose in
connection with the holding, operating or conducting thereof unless the
amount of such rental is stated in a statement annexed to the application for
the license as provided in § 139A-4 of this chapter or which is in excess of
the sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement; and
no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall
be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating
or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of any
game of chance so held, operated or conducted, except that reasonable
compensation may be paid to bookkeepers or accountants for bookkeeping
or accounting services rendered according to a schedule of compensation
prescribed by the rules of the Board.
§ 139A-12. Admission charge; prizes.
Not more than $5 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any game or games of chance are to be held,
operated and conducted under any license issued under this chapter. No
prize greater in amount or value than $250 shall be offered or given in any
single game conducted under any such license, and the aggregate amount
or value of all prizes offered or given in all games played on a single
occasion shall not exceed $1,000. All winners shall be determined and all
prizes shall be awarded in any game played on any occasion within the
same calendar day as that upon which the game was played. No alcoholic
beverages shall be offered or given as a prize in any such game.
§ 139A-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-13
1:332
§ 139A-13. Advertising.
A license holder may advertise the conduct of games of chance to the
general public by means of newspaper, circular, handbill and poster and by
one sign which may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises owned or
occupied by a licensed authorized organization; and when an organization
is licensed to conduct games of chance on premises of an authorized games
of chance lessor, one additional such sign may be displayed on or adjacent
to the premises in which the games are to be conducted. All advertisements
shall be limited to the description of such event as "games of chance" or
"Las Vegas night," the name of the authorized organization conducting such
games, the license number of the authorized organization as assigned by
the Clerk and the date, location and time of the event. Any signs posted
shall fully comply with the Building Code and Zoning Ordinances of the City
of Mount Vernon, New York.56
§ 139A-14. Statement of receipt; expense; additional expenses.
§ 139A-15. Examination of books and records.
The City Clerk and the Board shall have the power to examine or cause to
be examined the books and records of any authorized organization to which
Within seven days after the conclusion of any license period, the
authorized organization which conducted the same and its members
who were in charge thereof and, when applicable, the authorized games
of chance lessor which rented its premises therefor shall each furnish to
the Clerk a statement subscribed by the member in charge and affirmed
by him as true, under the penalties of perjury, showing the amount of
the gross receipts derived therefrom and each item of expense incurred
or paid and each item of expenditure made or to be made other than
prizes, the name and address of each person to whom each such item
of expense has been paid or is to be paid, with a detailed description
of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor, the
net proceeds derived from the conduct of games of chance during such
license period and the use to which such proceeds have been or are to
be applied; and it shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and
keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the
particulars of each such statement.
A.
Upon the filing of such statement of receipts, the authorized
organization furnishing the same shall pay to the Clerk or department
as and for an additional license fee a sum based upon the reported net
proceeds, if any, for the license period covered by such statement and
determined in accordance with such schedule as shall be established
from time to time by the Board to defray the actual cost to
municipalities or counties of administering the provisions of this article,
but such additional license fee shall not exceed 5% of the net proceeds
for such license period.
B.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Building Construction, and Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 139A-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139A-15
1:333
any such license is issued so far as they may relate to any transactions
connected with the holding, operating and conducting of any game of
chance thereunder and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent,
member or employee thereof, under oath, in relation to the conduct of
any such game of chance under any such license, but any information so
received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 139A-16. Appeals.
Any applicant for or holder of any license issued or to be issued by the
City Clerk aggrieved by any action of the Clerk to which such application
has been made or by which such license has been issued may appeal to
the Board from the determination of said Clerk by filing with the Clerk a
written notice of appeal within 30 days after the determination or action
appealed from; and, upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence, if any,
taken before the Clerk and any additional evidence may be produced and
shall be considered in arriving at a determination of the matters in issue;
and the action of the Board upon said appeal shall be binding upon said
Clerk and all parties to said appeal.
§ 139A-17. Immunity from prosecution.
No person or corporation lawfully conducting or participating in the
conduct of, or possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it, any game of chance conducted or to be
conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of Article
225 of the Penal Law or any other law or ordinance to the extent that such
conduct is specifically authorized by this City Council, but this immunity
shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or
participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any license
obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application for
such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it, of any game of chance conducted under any
license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense
or statement.
§ 139A-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto, or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof unless the amount of such rental is stated in a statement
annexed to the application for the license as provided in § 139A-4 of this
chapter, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess of the
§ 139A-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-18
1:334
sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement executed
by him or on its behalf, or shall fail to keep such books and records as
shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding,
operating and conducting of games of chance under any such license or
shall falsify or make any false entry in any book or record so far as it relates
to any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of
any game of chance under any such license, or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any term of such license, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued to it under this chapter for
one year thereafter.
§ 139A-19. Amendment and repeal.
This chapter may be amended from time to time or repealed by the City
Council of the City of Mount Vernon, and such amendment or repeal, as
the case may be, made effective and operative not later than 30 days
following the date of the ordinance effecting such amendment or repeal, as
the case may be; and the approval of a majority of the electors shall not be
a condition prerequisite to the taking effect of such chapter.
§ 139A-20. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
municipality, person or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction thereunder, the remainder of this
chapter or the application thereof to such municipality, person or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby, and the City Council hereby
declares that it would have enacted this chapter without the invalid
provision or application, as the case may be, had such invalidity been
apparent.
§ 139A-21. Submission of proposition to electors.
The proposition that this chapter be adopted shall be submitted to the
electors of the City of Mount Vernon at the general election to be held on
the 8th day of November 1983. If the proposition shall be approved by a
vote of the majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, this chapter
shall be deemed adopted and shall become effective January 1, 1984, but
if the proposition shall not be approved by a vote of the majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon, no provision of this chapter shall become
effective.57
§ 139A-22. Notice.
This chapter, including the following notice, shall be published by the City
Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, in the Daily Argus, the
official newspaper of the City of Mount Vernon, twice a week in each of
57.Editor's Note: Said proposition was approved by a vote of the majority of the qualified
electors at said general election on 11-8-1983.
§ 139A-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139A-22
1:335
three calendar weeks prior to November 8, 1983, the date of such general
election.
§ 139A-23. When effective.
This chapter shall be dated June 22, 1983, and shall take effect upon its
approval by the Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
Chapter 140
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 197.
Abandoned refrigerators — Ch. 208.
§ 139A-22 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 139A-23
1:336
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Rubbish Collection
[Adopted 6-22-1960 as Ch. 49 of the General Ordinances, approved
6-23-1960]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL MEAT WASTE — Offal and all and every kind of refuse from
the trimming of meats, fish and fowl in retail markets, fish markets and
butcher shops.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works of the City of Mount
Vernon, New York.
GARBAGE — Every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter,
except commercial meat wastes, that attends the preparation, use, cooking,
dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or baked goods.
RUBBISH — Discarded combustible and noncombustible waste material
and refuse of every character accumulated within the City, except garbage,
trade waste, commercial meat wastes and offensive materials as defined in
§ 1 of Article X of the Sanitary Code of the City of Mount Vernon, New York,
and includes but is not limited to ashes or the residue from burning wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials of every description, house dirt,
trash, newspapers, papers, cartons, rags, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree
branches, yard trimmings, dry leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
bottles, glass, crockery and dust.
TRADE WASTE — Any refuse from the manufacture, processing, assembling
or repair of any kind of goods, wares or merchandise and any such
manufactured, processed, assembled or repaired goods, wares or
merchandise which has been discarded by the person, firm or corporation
manufacturing, processing, assembling or repairing same or who is
engaged in the sale of any manufactured, processed, assembled or repaired
goods, wares or merchandise, but such term does not include commercial
meat wastes, as defined herein.
§ 140-2. Receptacles.
Every owner of a building or part of a building shall provide receptacles
for garbage and for light refuse and rubbish in sufficient quantities to
accommodate such owner and the tenants occupying such building or
part of a building, except any tenant required by agreement in writing
with the owner to provide his, her or its own receptacle, in which case
such tenant shall provide the same. [Amended 2-8-1995, approved
2-9-1995]
A.
Each such receptacle shall be watertight and made of suitable metal,
equipped with adequate handles for lifting purposes and with a suitable
B.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:337
§ 140-3. Adoption of regulations governing collection.
The Commissioner is hereby authorized to adopt and issue standard rules
regulating and governing the manner in which garbage, rubbish and other
refuse and waste shall be sorted, placed and removed, including the time or
times of day when the same will be collected. Every such rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this section shall be filed with the City Clerk of the
City of Mount Vernon, New York, and shall become effective 10 days after
such filing. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to authorize the
Commissioner to reduce the number of garbage collections except during
an emergency proclaimed by the Mayor.
metal lid or cover and shall have a capacity not in excess of 20 gallons
or two bushels.
Ashes, bottles, glass, stone, bricks, plaster or other building
construction, alteration or repair nonburnable refuse, yard sweepings,
hedge cuttings, grass, leaves, earth and other nonburnable refuse shall
not be mixed with or deposited in the same receptacle with garbage and
other burnable refuse but shall be separated therefrom and placed in
separate receptacles. No receptacle shall be filled to a level higher than
four inches below the top thereof, and every such receptacle shall at
all times when containing refuse material be kept covered with a tightfitting
metal lid or cover. Every such receptacle shall at all times be kept
in a condition satisfactory to the Commissioner.
C.
Such receptacles shall be kept within the building or in the rear of the
premises connected therewith until the time for removal, when such
receptacles shall be placed on the outer edge of the sidewalk at the
curb in front of the building and there remain until the contents thereof
shall have been removed by the collector, immediately after which such
receptacles shall be returned by the owner thereof or his or its agent
or employee to the building or the rear of the premises connected
therewith.
D.
Rubbish which is of such a nature and size that it cannot be placed
in such a metal container shall be compactly bundled, covered and
securely tied in such manner as shall prevent scattering thereof by
animals, wind or weather.
E.
No such receptacle or bundle of rubbish shall be so placed as to
constitute or contribute to the creation of a nuisance.
F.
It shall be the duty of every owner or lessee of any and every building
or part thereof and of every tenant occupying housing accommodations
to place rubbish and garbage on the outer edge of the sidewalk in
front of such building only on those days assigned for rubbish removal
or pickup by the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works.
[Added 3-28-1979, approved 3-29-1979; amended 2-8-1995,
approved 2-9-1995]
G.
§ 140-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-4
1:338
§ 140-4. Additional services.
§ 140-5. Severability.
In the event that any section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this article
shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining
provisions of this article shall not be affected thereby.
§ 140-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-9-2005; approved
2-10-2005]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or rules
promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to this article shall, on
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$500.
§ 140-7. Repealer.
Owners or occupants of buildings occupied by not more than three
families and used exclusively for dwelling purposes, desiring the
additional services of removal of receptacles containing ashes, garbage
or rubbish from a location on their premises other than the outer
edge of the sidewalk in front of such building and the return to said
location of the emptied receptacles, shall make written application
therefor to the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon, stating the
number of families in such dwelling and such other information as the
Commissioner may require.
A.
Such additional service shall be rendered by the Department of Public
Works only upon payment, in advance, to the City Clerk, of a service
charge or fee of $15 per calendar month for each family residing in
such dwelling house. Such payments shall be collectible semiannually
during the months of January and July. [Amended 6-28-1978,
approved 6-29-1978; 11-12-1980, approved 11-13-1980]
B.
Upon issuance of a receipt for said service charge, the City Clerk shall
promptly transmit a duplicate thereof to the Commissioner, who shall
promptly notify his sanitation foreman as to the persons entitled to such
additional services.
C.
All fees received by the City Clerk for this service shall be transmitted
by him at least once each month to the Comptroller of the City of Mount
Vernon.
D.
A safe and convenient way of access to the receptacles shall be
provided by the owner or occupant of such dwelling house.
E.
Chapter 49 of the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon, New
York, entitled "Garbage Collection: Additional Services," adopted by the
City Council of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, on January 22,
1958, is hereby repealed.
A.
§ 140-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-7
1:339
§ 140-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed.
B.
§ 140-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-8
1:340
ARTICLE II
Licensed Collectors
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 50 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 140-9. Definitions. [Amended 6-22-1960, approved 6-23-1960]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL MEAT WASTE — Offal and all and every kind of refuse from
the trimming of meats, fish and fowl in retail markets, fish markets and
butcher shops.
GARBAGE — Every refuse accumulation, except commercial meat wastes,
of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or baked
goods.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership,
and includes the plural as well as the singular and the feminine as well as
the masculine gender.
RUBBISH — Discarded combustible and noncombustible waste material
and refuse of every character accumulated within the City, except garbage,
trade waste, commercial meat wastes and offensive materials as defined
in § 1 of Article X of the Sanitary Code of the City of Mount Vernon, New
York, and includes but is not limited to ashes or the residue from burning
wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials of every description,
house dirt, trash, newspapers, papers, cartons, rags, boxes, wood, excelsior,
wood shavings, sawdust, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, dry
leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
TRADE WASTE — Any refuse from the manufacture, processing, assembling
or repair of any kind of goods, wares or merchandise and any such
manufactured, processed, assembled or repaired goods, wares or
merchandise which has been discarded by the person, firm or corporation
manufacturing, processing, assembling or repairing same or who is
engaged in the sale of any manufactured, processed, assembled or repaired
goods, wares or merchandise, but such term does not include commercial
meat waste, as defined herein.
§ 140-10. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, removing and/or
transporting trade waste, garbage or rubbish in the City of Mount Vernon
without first obtaining from the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon a
license to carry on such business.
§ 140-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-11
1:341
§ 140-11. Hours of collection. [Amended 8-24-1977, approved
8-25-1977]
Persons licensed under the provisions of this article to collect garbage,
rubbish or trade waste in the City shall not collect such garbage, rubbish
and trade waste in the City of Mount Vernon between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m., inclusive, except in those areas of the City specifically
designated by the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 140-12. License fee. [Amended 9-27-1989, approved 9-28-1989;
3-11-1992, approved 3-12-1992; 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
The fee for a license under this article shall be $180 annually for each
vehicle engaged in the business of collecting garbage, trade waste or
rubbish. Such fee shall be payable to the City Clerk of the City of Mount
Vernon prior to the issuance of the license.
§ 140-13. License application.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant licenses, under his hand,
to be sealed with the corporate seal, to such persons approved for said
licenses.
A.
All applications for licenses shall be made by the applicant on forms
to be provided by the City Clerk. Said application shall set forth the
name, business and residence address of the applicant; the names and
residence addresses of the officers or partners if the applicant is a
corporation or partnership; a statement of the number, type and kinds
of vehicles to be used by the applicant, including their unladen weight
and capacity; the kind of service the applicant desires to perform; and
such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
B.
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with a copy of the
application, the fingerprints of both hands, and said fingerprints shall
be placed upon cards provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety
and shall be taken under his/her supervision by a senior police officer,
and at such a place as the Commissioner shall designate.
Fingerprinting shall be required of the following: individual applicants,
all members of partnerships and officers of corporations. An additional
fee as provided by the City of Mount Vernon Code § 126-2.2 shall be
charged for each set of fingerprints, payable to the City of Mount
Vernon, and such other fees as may be required by the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services. The Commissioner of Public
Safety shall promptly submit the fingerprints of the applicant, together
with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice Services
or other appropriate agency for processing and investigations. Upon
receipt of the report from the Division of Criminal Justice Services, the
Criminal Investigation Unit of the Department of Public Safety shall
review and examine the same and advise the City Clerk as to whether
or not the applicant should be issued a license, and the reasons for any
denial thereof. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has
C.
§ 140-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-13
1:342
§ 140-14. Insurance. [Amended 3-11-1992, approved 3-12-1992]
Each applicant for a license shall file with the City Clerk evidence in the
form of a certificate of insurance that a policy of liability insurance is in full
force and effect, with limits of not less than $2,000,000, combined single
limit, covering injuries to persons and damages to property, covering each
and every vehicle engaged in the collection of garbage, rubbish and trade
waste, which policy shall be endorsed to indemnify and save harmless the
City of Mount Vernon from any and all claims for personal injury or property
damage arising out of the issuance of the license to engage in said business.
Each applicant shall also file with the City Clerk evidence in the form of
a certificate of insurance that the proper workers' compensation insurance
is in force and effect covering each and every person employed by him in
the collection of such garbage, rubbish and trade waste. Said certificates of
insurance shall be approved by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 140-15. Term of license. [Amended 4-30-1970, approved 5-1-1970]
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on May 31 next following
the issuance thereof.
been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit. [Added 4-13-1989, approved 4-13-1989;
amended 3-11-1992, approved 3-12-1992; 5-27-1992, approved
5-28-199258]
After a favorable report from the Department of Public Safety, the
City Clerk shall forward the application to the Department of Public
Works for review and recommendation. [Added 3-11-1992, approved
3-12-1992]
D.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Clerk shall have the authority
to issue a temporary permit to an applicant pending approval or
disapproval of the license application. Such permit may be issued for
a period of up to 60 days and may be renewed for additional periods
not to exceed 30 days. Such temporary permit shall be invalid upon
the approval or disapproval of the application by the City Clerk. The
issuance of the temporary permit is in no way to be construed as
approval of the application. Said permit shall neither be transferred
nor assigned by the applicant. Collection of garbage, trade waste and
rubbish after the expiration date stated on the temporary permit or
after notice of the denial of the license application shall be in violation
of § 140-10 of this chapter. [Added 3-11-1992, approved 3-12-1992]
E.
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, amended 4-30-1970, approved 5-1-1970, which
required certain endorsements on the application, together with fingerprints for certain
applicants, was repealed 3-11-1992, approved 3-12-1992. Said ordinance also
redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection C.
§ 140-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-16
1:343
§ 140-16. License renewal. [Amended 4-30-1970, approved
5-1-1970]
Except as herein otherwise provided, any person having been duly licensed
in any previous year may obtain a renewal of the same for the succeeding
year upon the payment of a renewal fee in the same amount as required
for the original issue and filing the liability insurance required herein and
upon a sworn statement to the City Clerk that there have been no material
changes in the original application and upon the written endorsement on
the renewal application form of the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Works and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Applications for renewal of
licenses shall be made not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of
the term of any original license or renewal thereof. Whenever there is a
material change in the form of the application for license herein, renewals
shall be applied for and issued under the same terms and conditions as in
the case of original applications.
§ 140-17. License suspension and revocation.
§ 140-18. Obligations of licensees.
Every person holding a license issued under this article shall exhibit the
same upon demand and shall report to the City Clerk any change of
residence or place of business within five days of such change. A licensee
shall, during reasonable hours of the business day, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, be required to furnish the service for which he is
licensed to the public. Unreasonable refusal to render such service shall be
grounds for revocation of the license.
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized and
empowered to hear and determine complaints against licensees and to
suspend or revoke any license issued by the City Clerk for violations
of the provisions of this article. No license shall be revoked, however,
until after a hearing upon notice to the licensee, at which hearing the
licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Works, when investigating any matters
pertaining to the granting, issuing, transferring, renewing, revoking,
suspending or canceling of any license, is hereby authorized in his
discretion to take such testimony as may be necessary on which to base
official action, which testimony shall be reduced to writing.
B.
The Commissioner of Public Works may delegate the power to take
such testimony to the Corporation Counsel, who is authorized and
empowered to take such testimony.
C.
The Commissioner of Public Works and the Corporation Counsel are
hereby authorized and empowered to subpoena witnesses and books
and papers material to the investigation, with the same force and effect
as if subpoenaed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
D.
§ 140-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-19
1:344
§ 140-19. Licenses nonassignable.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of a license granted under this
article who permits it to be used by any other person and any person who
uses a license granted to any other person shall be each guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 140-20. Vehicle specifications.
The vehicles to be used by collectors of garbage, trade waste and rubbish
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Health Commissioner
and Commissioner of Public Works and shall be so constructed as to make
impossible the spilling or leakage of garbage, rubbish and trade waste,
and in transporting such materials through City streets the vehicle shall
be covered in such manner that none of the contents can spill on the City
streets. During the process of loading, vehicles may be uncovered, but any
garbage, rubbish or trade waste falling to the streets must be immediately
cleaned up. Commencing with the first day of July 1960, all vehicles used
by collectors of garbage, rubbish and trade waste shall be of the closedbody
type, and during the period commencing with the effective date of this
article and the first day of July 1960, all replacements of vehicles used for
the purposes set forth in this article shall be with closed-body-type vehicles
only.
§ 140-21. Coloring and identification of vehicles.
All vehicles used by collectors of garbage, rubbish and trade waste shall be
of a standard color and shall carry such identification or lettering as deemed
necessary by the Commissioner of Public Works, who is hereby authorized
and empowered to issue and publish written regulations covering such
coloring, identification and/or lettering, which shall take effect 30 days after
filing with the City Clerk.
§ 140-22. Maintenance of vehicles.
The licensee must keep all vehicles clean, sanitary and neatly painted and
shall wash, steam-clean and disinfect such vehicles at least once a week.
§ 140-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-1990, approved
2-15-1990; 2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $2,500 or by confinement in the county penitentiary
for not more than 100 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In
addition to the fine or imprisonment, or both, authorized by this article, any
licensee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his license upon
conviction for any violation of this article.
§ 140-24. Unauthorized dumping; fines. [Added 9-9-1981, approved
9-10-198159; amended 2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
§ 140-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-24
1:345
§ 140-25. Rewards. [Added 2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any person, his or her agent, employee or any
person under his or her control to suffer or permit any dirt, sand,
gravel, clay, loam, stone, rocks, rubble, building rubbish, sawdust,
shavings or trade or household waste, refuse, ashes, manure, garbage,
rubbish or debris of any sort or any other organic or inorganic material
or thing or other offensive matter being transported in a dump truck
or any other vehicle to be dumped, deposited or otherwise disposed
of in or upon any street, lot, park, public place or other area whether
publicly or privately owned.
A.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be liable for
a fine of not less than $5,000 nor more than $20,000. In addition, every
owner of a dump truck or other vehicle shall be liable for a fine of not
less than $1,500 nor more than $10,000 for each offense of unlawful
dumping described in § 140-24 by any person using or operating the
same in the business of such owner or otherwise, with the permission,
express or implied of such owner.
B.
As used in this section, the term "owner" shall have the meaning set
forth in Subdivision 1 of § 1220-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
C.
Where a notice of violation, appearance ticket or summons is issued
for a violation of § 140-24 based upon a sworn statement by one or
more individuals and where the Commissioner of the Department of
Public Works determines, in the exercise of his discretion, that such
sworn statement, either alone or in conjunction with testimony at a
civil proceeding results in the conviction of or the imposition of a civil
penalty upon any persons for a violation of § 140-24, the Commissioner
of Public Works shall offer as a reward to such individual or individuals
an amount that in the aggregate is equal to 50% of any fine collected.
A.
Where a notice of violation, appearance ticket or summons is issued
for a violation of this section based upon information furnished by one
or more individuals and where the Commissioner of the Department of
Public Works determines, in the exercise of his discretion, that such
information, in conjunction with enforcement activity conducted by the
Department of Public Works or another governmental entity, results in
the conviction of or the imposition of a civil penalty upon any persons
for a violation of § 140-24, the Commissioner of Public Works shall offer
as a reward to such individual or individuals an amount up to 50% of
any fine collected.
B.
In determining the amount of the reward, the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Safety shall consider factors that include, but are
not limited to:
C.
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former §§ 140-23 through
140-33, inclusive. In addition, former § 140-34, Penalties for offenses, was renumbered as
§ 140-23.
§ 140-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-25
1:346
§ 140-26. Clearing and cleaning of area; posting of signs. [Added
2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
§ 140-27. Impoundment and forfeiture.
The quantity and type of the material dumped, deposited or
otherwise disposed of;
(1)
The specificity of the information provided, including, but not
limited to, the license plate number, make or model or other
description of the dump truck or other vehicle alleged to have been
used and the location, date or time of the alleged violation;
(2)
Whether the information provided by the individual or individuals
identified one or more violations of § 140-24; and
(3)
Where the Department of Public Works has knowledge that
violations of § 140-24 have previously occurred at that location.
(4)
No employee of the Department of Public Safety, employee of the
Department of Public Works or employee of any governmental entity
that, in conjunction with the Department of Public Safety and/or the
Department of Public Works, conducts enforcement activity, shall be
entitled to obtain the benefit of any such reward when acting in the
discharge of his or her official duty.
D.
In addition to the foregoing penalties, the offender shall be required to
clear and clean the area upon which the offender dumped unlawfully
within 10 days after conviction thereof. In the event the offender fails
to clear and clean the area within such time, clearing and cleaning may
be done by the Department of Public Works or under the direction of
such Department by a private contractor, and the cost of same shall be
billed to the offender. In the event that the Department of Public Works
has cleaned or cleared the area, or has caused the area to be cleaned
or cleared by a private contractor prior to the offenders conviction,
the offender shall be responsible for the cost of such learning and or
cleaning. Payment by such offender, when required by this subsection,
shall be made within 10 days of demand by the Department of Public
Works.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall post a sign in any area where
the Commission deems appropriate because of instances of illegal
dumping. Such sign shall state the penalties for illegal dumping and the
reward provisions therein.
B.
Any equipment, vehicles or other personal property that has been used
or is being used to violate the provisions of § 140-24 may be impounded
by the Department of Public Safety pending forfeiture pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
A.
Notice of impoundment and intended forfeiture shall be served
together with the notice of the violation of law for which equipment,
B.
§ 140-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-27
1:347
vehicles or other personal property was impounded. Such notice shall
contain notice of the right to request a hearing before the Department
of Public Works with respect to whether there is reasonable cause to
believe that such equipment, vehicles or other personal property will be
subject to forfeiture; a hearing shall be provided within three business
days of such request, and a determination shall be rendered within
four business days of the conclusion of such hearing. The hearing
officer shall submit recommended findings of fact and a recommended
decision to the Commissioner of Public Works, who shall make the final
findings of fact and the final determination. If the Commissioner of
Public Works determines that there is not reasonable cause to believe
that such equipment shall be released, no charges or fees shall be
imposed as a condition of such release. If the Commissioner of Public
Works determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that such
equipment, vehicles or other personal property will be subject to
forfeiture, the equipment shall be retained pending forfeiture pursuant
to the provisions of this section. If after adjudication of the violation
of law for which such equipment, vehicles or other personal property
was impounded the court or agency of competent jurisdiction finds
the respondent not guilty of or not liable for such violation, such
equipment, vehicles or other personal property shall be released
forthwith, and no charges or fees shall be imposed as a condition of
such release. If after adjudication of such violation of law, the court
or agency of competent jurisdiction finds the respondent guilty of or
liable for such violation, then, upon demand of the respondent, the
equipment shall be released upon payment of all outstanding fines and
civil penalties, and removal charges and storage fees, or a forfeiture
proceeding shall be commenced pursuant to this section within 10 days
after such demand.
Except as hereinafter provided, the City agency having custody of
equipment, vehicles or other personal property, after judicial
determination of forfeiture, shall, no sooner than 30 days after such
determination, upon a notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited
equipment, vehicles or other personal property at public sale, provided
that no sooner than 30 days after judicial determination of forfeiture
or the date of final determination of a claim asserted pursuant to
this subdivision, whichever is later, the City may instead convert such
equipment, vehicles or other personal property to its own use. Any
person, other than an owner whose interest is forfeited pursuant to this
section, who establishes a right of ownership in equipment, vehicles or
other personal property, including a part ownership or security interest,
shall be entitled to delivery of the equipment, vehicles or other personal
property if such person:
Redeems the ownership interest which was subject to forfeiture by
payment to the City of the value thereof; and
(1)
Pays the reasonable expenses of the safekeeping of the vehicle
between the time of seizure and such redemption; and
(2)
C.
§ 140-27 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-27
1:348
§ 140-28. through § 140-34. (Reserved)
Asserts a claim within 30 days after judicial determination of
forfeiture. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions,
establishment of a claim shall not entitle such person to delivery if
the City establishes that the activity in violation of law for which
the equipment, vehicles or other property was seized was expressly
or impliedly permitted by such person.
(3)
For purposes of this section, "owner" means a person, other than
a holder of a security interest, having the property in or title to
equipment, vehicles or other personal property, including but not
limited to a person entitled to use and possession of equipment,
vehicles or other personal property subject to a security interest in
another person and also includes any lessee or bailee having exclusive
use thereof.
D.
§ 140-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-28
1:349

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Adopted 6-22-1960 as Ch. 51 of the General Ordinances, approved
6-23-1960; renumbered as Ch. 52 7-27-1960, approved 7-29-1960]
§ 140-35. Enforcement agencies.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works, together with
the Department of Public Safety, to enforce the ordinances contained in
Articles I and II of Chapter 140 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
The Department of Public Works shall have the power, through
authorized employees designated by the Mayor, to issue summonses
and file informations concerning any violation of any such ordinances.
B.
§ 140-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-35
1:351
Chapter 142
GASOLINE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131. Sale of fuel — See Ch. 139.
§ 140-35 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 140-35
1:352
ARTICLE I
Sign Requirements
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 34 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957; amended in its entirety 8-28-1974, approved
8-28-1974]
§ 142-1. Posting of signs required; content and size of signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for
sale at retail for use in internal-combustion engines in motor vehicles or
motorboats any gasoline or diesel motor fuel unless such seller shall post
and keep continuously posted on the individual pump or other dispensing
device from which such gasoline or diesel motor fuel is sold or offered for
sale a sign or placard 12 inches in height and 12 inches in width stating
clearly and legibly the selling price per gallon of such gasoline, the federal
and state taxes, the local sales tax and the total selling price per gallon of
such gasoline or diesel motor fuel so sold or offered for sale from such pump
or other dispensing device. The name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol
and grade or quality classifications, if any, of such gasoline or diesel motor
fuel shall be permanently imprinted on said gasoline or diesel motor fuel
dispensing unit.
§ 142-2. Additional specifications for pump signs.
Each pump which dispenses gasoline or diesel motor fuel for sale
at retail shall display a sign in compliance with the requirements of
§ 142-1 of this article (hereinafter referred to as the "sign"). The sign
shall be composed of two units, one shall contain the total selling price
and the other shall contain the price breakdown box.
A.
The unit of the sign setting forth the total selling price shall display
the selling price per gallon, including all applicable taxes, and shall be
accompanied by the statement "includes all taxes." All numbers used to
display the total selling price shall be of uniform size and shall be at
least nine inches in height, at least 3 1/4 inches in width and a stroke
width of at least one inch. The statement "includes all taxes" shall be in
letters of uniform size at least 1/2 inch in height and extending at least
5 1/2 inches.
B.
The unit of the sign setting forth the price breakdown box shall be
located in the lower right-hand corner of the sign and shall be no less
than six inches in height and four inches in width. The price breakdown
box shall include the basic price per gallon, the federal and state taxes
per gallon, the City of Mount Vernon sales tax per gallon and the total
selling price per gallon. All numbers used in the price breakdown box
shall be of uniform size and shall be at least one inch in height with a
stroke width of at least 3/16 of an inch.
C.
Where a tenth-of-a-cent number is used on the sign, that number must
be at least 1/2 the size of the number to which it relates.
D.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:353
§ 142-3. Other signs prohibited. [Amended 10-26-1983, approved
10-27-1983]
No sign or placard stating the price or prices of gasoline or diesel motor
fuel at retail for use in motor vehicles or motorboats other than such signs
or placards as hereinabove provided shall be posted or maintained on the
premises on which said gasoline or diesel motor fuel is sold or offered
for sale; except that the vendor, if doing business on a one-way street,
may place one sign, two feet two feet, containing the precise information
required by §§ 142-1 and 142-2 within the vendor's premises; in the event
that the vendor is doing business on a two-way street, two such signs may
be placed within the vendor's premises.
§ 142-4. Deceptive practices prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for
sale gasoline or diesel motor fuel at retail in any manner so as to deceive
or tend to deceive the purchaser as to the price, nature, quality or identity
thereof, or to sell or offer for sale from any pump or dispensing device any
gasoline or diesel motor fuel other than that gasoline or diesel motor fuel
manufactured or distributed by the manufacturer or distributor marketing
such gasoline or diesel motor fuel under the name, trade name, brand,
symbol or mark affixed to or contained on such pump or other dispensing
device, or to substitute, mix or adulterate gasoline or diesel motor fuel sold
or offered for sale under a name, trade name, brand, symbol or mark.
§ 142-5. Enforcement.
The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall administer and enforce this
article and shall have the authority to issue summonses for violations
thereof.
All letters used to explain the information in the price breakdown box
of the sign shall be at least 1/4 inch in height and 1/8 inch in width.
E.
The sign shall be permanently fixed to the pump so that the information
may be easily read from the dispensing side of the pump.
F.
If service of gasoline or diesel motor fuel may be made from more
than one side of a pump or dispensing device, the sign shall be so
constructed as to be visible from each side from which dispensing takes
place or a sign shall be posted on each side that dispensing takes place.
G.
§ 142-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 142-5
1:354
Chapter 144
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abatement of nuisances — See Ch. 80. Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 144-1. Intent.
The City Council of the City of the City of Mount Vernon hereby finds and
declares that graffiti creates a nuisance for our residents and merchants.
The unabated proliferation of graffiti is a physical blight upon the landscape
of the City and costs taxpayers, merchants and homeowners substantial
moneys to remove and repair. The City Council also finds that when
unchecked, graffiti presents an image of a deteriorating community that no
longer cares about itself.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
following meaning:
ABATEMENT OFFICIAL — The Commissioner of Public Works or a designee
or a duly authorized representative.
GRAFFITI — The unauthorized writing, drawing, spraying of paint or
marking of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on any fence,
wall, building, public or private, vehicles, or any other property, real or
personal, owned, operated or maintained by any public benefit corporation
the City of Mount Vernon or by any person, firm or corporation, or any
agency or instrumentality thereof.
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE — An abatement procedure which
identifies graffiti, issues notice to the landowner or person in possession or
tenant to abate the graffiti, and provides for a remedy in the absence of a
timely compliance.
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR — Any person with whom the City shall have duly
contracted to remove graffiti.
UNAUTHORIZED — Without the permission of the landowner or person in
possession or tenant in possession or control of the subject property.
§ 144-3. Graffiti prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti, as defined herein,
upon any fence, wall, building, public or private, vehicles, or any other
property, real or personal, owned, operated or maintained by any public
benefit corporation, the City of Mount Vernon or by any person, firm
A.
§ 142-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-3
1:355
§ 144-4. Abatement notice.
§ 144-5. Penalties for offenses.
or corporation, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, in the City of
Mount Vernon.
It shall also be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in
control of the subject property within the City to maintain or permit
or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain upon any fence,
wall, building, public or private, vehicles or any other property, real or
personal, when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or
private or commercial property.
B.
Whenever the abatement official determines that graffiti on any fence,
wall, building, public or private, vehicles or any other property, real
or personal, is visible from the street or other public or private or
commercial property, the abatement official may cause a prosecution
to be brought against the person actually placing the graffiti on the
building, fence, wall or other structure.
C.
The abatement official having determined the existence of graffiti on
any fence, wall, building, public or private, vehicles or any other
property, real or personal, in violation of this chapter shall cause a
written abatement notice to be served upon the landowner or person in
possession or control of the premises or tenant of the affected premises
in the following manner:
By personal service on the landowner, person in possession or
control of the premises or tenant of the subject property, in which
case the thirty-day curative period shall begin to run from the date
of said service; or
(1)
By posting the notice on the property and sending said notice by
registered or certified mail addressed to the landowner, person
in possession or control of the premises or tenant of the subject
property at the last known address of said person, in which case the
thirty-day curative period shall begin to run from the date of that
said notice is posted or said receipt is dated received or, if rejected,
the last date of attempted delivery, whichever is later.
(2)
A.
The abatement official may issue an abatement notice against the
landowner, person in possession and control or tenant of the subject
property in accordance with the graffiti abatement procedure set forth
hereinafter.
B.
Any person who violates § 144-3A of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500 for the first offense, and of not more than
$1,000 for a second or subsequent offense or shall be imprisoned for
not more than 15 days in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A.
§ 144-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 144-5
1:356
§ 144-6. Removal by City.
In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person
convicted of violating § 114-3A shall be required to completely remove
said graffiti from the subject property so as to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation.
B.
Any occupant, owner, lessee, sublessee, agent and/or landlord of any
commercial or residential property located within the City of Mount
Vernon which has been found guilty of having any form of graffiti on its
property after the thirty-day notice as designated in § 144-4A shall be
punished by a fine of $250 for each week of violation. Each week the
graffiti is permitted to remain on the premises after the curative period
designated in § 144-6A shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
and shall be punishable by separate and distinct cumulative amounts of
fines not to exceed $250 for each offense.
C.
Upon failure of the landowner or person in possession or control or
tenant of the subject property to comply with the notice of abatement
within the 30 days given for compliance, the abatement official shall
so advise the Commissioner of Public Works of said noncompliance.
The Commissioner of Public Works or designee or agents are then
authorized to issue a summons and to enter upon the subject property
and cause such graffiti to be removed by City personnel or by a private
contractor.
A.
The cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting shall be at the
cost and expense of the occupant, owner, lessee, sublessee, agent and/
or landlord of the property, reduced only by the amount recovered, if
any, by the City from the person(s) found guilty of actually causing the
graffiti to be made.
B.
The actual cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting, plus the
cost of the inspection of said property and other costs incidental to such
removal, shall thereupon become a lien upon the real property upon
which the graffiti was found to be and shall be added to and become a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied on such real property,
and the same shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
general City taxes.
C.
In all cases where the Commissioner of Public Works certifies expenses
to the City Council pursuant to the foregoing provision of this section,
he shall simultaneously transmit to the Comptroller a duplicate original
of such certification and the Comptroller shall upon receipt thereof
forthwith docket the amount of such expense in the tax rolls against the
real property affected with a notation "Assessment pending pursuant to
§ 144-6 of the City Code."
D.
§ 144-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-7
1:357
§ 144-7. Economic hardship; installment payments.
If the landowner, person in possession and control or the tenant of the
subject premises within 15 days from receipt of an abatement notice notifies
the abatement official or designee that it is unable to abate the graffiti
because of economic hardship and establishes the same to the abatement
official or designee, the City may enter into a payment installment
agreement for the cost of inscribed graffiti removal and upon receipt of 50%
of the cost thereof may remove said graffiti.
§ 144-8. Reimbursement.
The City shall follow the procedure set forth in Chapter 80 of the Code of
the City of Mount Vernon pertaining to the abatement of public nuisances in
general in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred as a result
of the removal of graffiti under this chapter.
§ 144-9. Trust fund.
The City Council hereby creates the City of Mount Vernon Anti-Graffiti Trust
Fund. Penalties assessed against violators of this chapter shall be placed in
the fund, along with any monetary donations received from persons wishing
to contribute to the fund. The Council shall direct expenditures of moneys
in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost
of graffiti removal, the payment of rewards for information leading to the
conviction of violation of the chapter, the costs of administering the chapter,
and such other public purpose as may be approved by the City Council.
§ 144-10. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any part or subsection is
determined to be invalid the remaining provisions shall remain in full force
and effect.
Chapter 145
HANDBILLS AND POSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194. Signs — See Ch. 221.
§ 145-1. License required; applicability.
No person shall post or place any advertising bills, circulars, posters, cards,
cuts, pamphlets or papers of any character or description upon any fence
or billboard or any other place on any building or street, or print or affix
any writing, stencil or other written matter upon any sidewalk, or distribute
handbills, without first having obtained a license therefor from the Mayor.
§ 144-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 145-1
1:358
This chapter, however, shall apply only to the distribution of commercial or
business advertising matter, except as hereinafter expressly provided.
§ 145-2. Fee and bond.
Every person receiving such a license shall pay therefor the sum of $100 to
the City Clerk and shall also give a bond to the City of Mount Vernon in the
penal sum of $1,000, conditioned upon due observance of all the ordinances
of the City Council that may be adopted or are now in force.
§ 145-3. Issuance of license; denial; term of license.
The Mayor, after the payment of the license fee and the filing of the bond
as hereinbefore provided, may grant such license to such person as shall
make application therefor. The Mayor may, in his discretion, refuse to issue
such license, and in that event the application shall be marked "rejected"
and said sum of $100 and the bond theretofore filed shall be returned to the
applicant. No license shall be issued for a period in excess of one year.
§ 145-4. Permission required for posting on private or City property.
§ 145-5. Destruction of material posted by City prohibited.
No person shall willfully tear down, deface or destroy any notice, handbill,
poster or ordinance posted by order of the City Council or by or under the
direction of any other City department, bureau, board or office.
§ 145-6. Littering prohibited.
No person shall deposit, throw or place any bills, circulars, posters, cards,
pamphlets, wastepaper of any character or other refuse in or upon any
street, lot or enclosure or upon the stoops or other outside portions of any
buildings or in the vestibule or any hall of any building. This section shall
also apply to noncommercial and nonbusiness advertising matter.
No person shall post any handbills, notices or advertisements of any
kind on any house, wall or fence without permission of the owner, or
upon any post, sidewalk, flagstones, curbstones, telegraph or telephone
pole, shade tree, box, hydrant or other place in any street; nor print,
stamp or otherwise mark any words, letters, figures, signs or tokens of
any sort thereon without such permission.
A.
No handbills, posters, notices or advertisements of any kind or
description other than official orders issued by the City shall be affixed
to any City property without the approval of the City Council.
B.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-6
1:359
Chapter 147
HARASSMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 147-1. Purpose; findings.
The purpose of this chapter is for the protection of sworn police officers
during the performance of their duties, and, in support of that aim, the
following legislative findings are hereby made:
§ 147-2. Determination of guilt.
A person is guilty of harassment of a police officer when, with intent to
annoy, harass or alarm said police officer, in a public place, with at least
one other person present beside the addresser and addressee police officer,
he directs obscene, abusive fighting words or he makes an obscene gesture
directed to a police officer.
§ 147-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter may be punished by a
fine of not more than $150 or to 15 days' imprisonment, or both.
This chapter is for the protection of the City's police officers pursuant to
§ 10, Subdivision 1a, of the Municipal Home Rule Law, which provides
that a municipality may adopt local laws for the protection, welfare and
safety of its officers and employees.
A.
Police officers are not second-class citizens who may be publicly vilified
and abused with impunity while the average citizen is protected from
public vilification. [Amended 5-26-1982, approved 5-27-1982]
B.
The presence of a third person will tend to deter the making of unjust
charges of harassment by police officers.
C.
The efficiency and morale of police officers is negatively affected if
public abuse and vilification of these officers is permitted.
D.
The physical safety from attack is threatened by insulting, inciting
language directed to a police officer in a public place. Such language
may encourage and incite a physical assault upon the police officer by
others present in the public place.
E.
Only those epithets and gestures which common knowledge would
classify as "fighting words" or actions should be prosecuted.
F.
G. This chapter is not inconsistent with any state law.
§ 145-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 147-3
1:360
Chapter 148
HOME IMPROVEMENT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120. Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
§ 148-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "An Ordinance to Require the Licensing of
Building Contractors Performing Work in the City of Mount Vernon."
§ 148-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Mount Vernon, in order
to protect the safety and welfare of its inhabitants and for the protection
and security of their property, that all home improvement and building
contractors performing work in the City of Mount Vernon shall hereinafter
be licensed. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and
enacted are for the above-mentioned purpose.
§ 148-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure containing no more than four residence or
dwelling units.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Buildings.
CONTRACTOR — Any person or salesman, other than a bona fide employee
of the owner, who owns, operates, maintains, conducts, controls or
transacts a home improvement business and who undertakes or offers to
undertake or agrees to perform any home improvement or solicits any
contract therefor, whether or not such person is licensed or subject to the
licensing requirements of this chapter and whether or not such person is a
prime contractor or subcontractor with respect to the owner.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — The construction, repair, replacement,
remodeling, alteration, conversion, rehabilitation, renovation,
modernization, improvement or addition to any land or building or that
portion thereof which is used or designed to be used as a residence or
dwelling place and shall include, but not be limited to, the construction,
erection, replacement or improvement of driveways, swimming pools,
terraces, patios, landscaping, fences, porches, garages, fallout shelters,
basements and other improvements to structures or upon land which is
adjacent to a dwelling house. "Home improvement" shall not include the
construction of a new home building or work done by a contractor in
compliance with a guaranty of completion of a new building project; or the
§ 147-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:361
sale of goods or materials by a seller who neither arranges to perform nor
performs directly or indirectly any work or labor in connection with the
installation of or application of the goods or materials; or residences owned
by or controlled by the state or any municipal subdivision thereof; or the
painting or decorating of a building, residence, home or apartment, when
not incidental or related to "home improvement" work as herein defined.
Without regard to the extent of affixation, "home improvement" shall also
include the installation of central-heating or air-conditioning systems,
central vacuum-cleaning systems, storm windows, awnings or fire or
burglar alarms or communication systems.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or
written or contained in one or more documents, between a contractor and
an owner, or contractor and a tenant, regardless of the number of residence
or dwelling units contained in the building in which the tenant resides,
provided that said work is to be performed in, to or upon the residence or
dwelling unit of such tenant for the performance of a home improvement
and includes all labor, services and materials to be furnished and performed
thereunder.
HOME IMPROVEMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any shop, establishment,
place or premises where the home improvement business is transacted or
carried on.
LICENSEE — A person permitted to engage in the home improvement
business under the provisions of this chapter.
OWNER — Any homeowner, cooperative or condominium unit owner, tenant
or any other person who orders contracts for or purchases the home
improvement services of a contractor or the person entitled to the
performance of the work of a contractor pursuant to a home improvement
contract.
PERSON — An individual, firm, company, salesman, partnership or
corporation, trade group or association.
SALESMAN — Any individual who negotiates or offers to negotiate a home
improvement contract with an owner or solicits or otherwise endeavors
to procure in person a home improvement contract from an owner on
behalf of a contractor, or for himself should the salesman be also the
contractor, whether or not such person is licensed or subject to the licensing
requirements of this chapter.
§ 148-4. License required.
No person shall solicit, canvass, sell, perform or obtain a home
improvement contract as a contractor or salesman from an owner
without a license therefor.
A.
A license issued pursuant to this chapter may not be construed to
authorize the licensee to perform any particular type of work or engage
in any kind of business which is reserved to qualified licensees under
separate provisions of state or local law; nor shall any license or
B.
§ 148-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 148-4
1:362
§ 148-5. Conditions for issuance of license; bond; insurance.
§ 148-6. License fees; term.
authority, other than as is issued or permitted pursuant to this chapter,
authorize engaging in the home improvement business; neither shall
the license be used as a representation as to the quality of the work
performed by the contractor.
The maintenance of a bona fide establishment at a definite location
within the state shall be a prerequisite for the issuance of a home
improvement business license.
A.
An applicant for a home improvement contractor's license must
establish that he is the real owner and possesses title to or is entitled to
the possession of the establishment and will conduct, operate, engage
in and transact a home improvement business. He must furnish
satisfactory evidence of a good moral character, financial responsibility
and a minimum of two years' experience in the building, home repair or
other related industry.
B.
Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a bond,
approved as to form by the Corporation Counsel and executed by a
bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the State of
New York, in the amount of $10,000, conditioned upon the assurance
that during the term of such license the licensee will continue to comply
with the provisions of this chapter to assure that, upon default in the
performance of any contract, the advance payments made thereon,
less reasonable value of services actually rendered to the date of such
default or the reasonable costs of completion of the contract in the
event of noncompletion thereof, will be refunded to the purchaser,
owner or lessee with whom such contract was made. Such bond shall
run to the City of Mount Vernon for the use and benefit of any person or
persons intended to be protected thereby. Any claims under such bond
shall be made to the Office of Consumer Protection. The filing of the
required bond in the office of the City Clerk, after approval as to form
by the Corporation Counsel, shall be deemed sufficient compliance with
this subsection.
C.
The applicant shall submit satisfactory evidence of workers'
compensation insurance and general liability insurance in an amount
not less than $500,000 listing the City of Mount Vernon as an additional
insured.
D.
Fees.
The fee for a license to conduct a home improvement business shall
be $100, and for each renewal thereof the fee shall be $100.
(1)
A.
§ 148-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:363
§ 148-7. License not transferable; posting; notice of changes;
powers and duties of Commissioner.
§ 148-8. Application for license; qualifications of applicants.
The fee for a saleman's license employed by a home improvement
contractor shall be $50, and for each renewal thereof the fee shall
be $50.
(2)
The fee for issuing a duplicate license or for one lost, destroyed or
mutilated shall be $20.
(3)
Licenses shall be valid for one year from the issuance thereof unless
suspended or revoked by the Commissioner.
B.
A. No license shall be assignable or transferable.
A license issued hereunder shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous
place in the place of business of the licensee.
B.
Every licensee shall, within 10 days after a change of control in
ownership or of management or of change of address or trade name,
notify the Commissioner of each change.
C.
A duplicate license may be issued for one lost or mutilated and shall
bear the word "duplicate" stamped across its face.
D.
Commissioner. In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere
prescribed in this chapter, the Commissioner shall have power:
To appoint an adequate number of assistants, inspectors and other
employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter and to prescribe their duties.
(1)
To examine the qualifications and fitness of applicants for licenses
under this chapter.
(2)
(3) To keep record of all licenses issued, suspended or revoked.
At any time to require reasonable information of an applicant or
licensee and may require the production of books of accounts,
financial statements, contracts or other records which relate to the
home improvement activity, qualification or compliance with this
chapter by the licensee; provided, however, that said information
and production of records is required of him pursuant to its regular
business and functions under this chapter.
(4)
E.
Applications.
An application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made to the
Commissioner on a form prescribed by him.
(1)
(2) A separate license shall be required for each place of business.
A.
§ 148-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 148-8
1:364
§ 148-9. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Commissioner may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary with respect to
the form and content of applications for licenses, the reception thereof,
the investigation and examination of applicants and their qualifications
and the other matters incidental or appropriate to his powers and duties,
as prescribed by this chapter, and for the proper administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to amend or repeal any
such rules and obligations.
§ 148-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Commissioner shall have the power to suspend or revoke a license or
deny an application for the renewal of a license for any one or more of the
following causes:
The application shall be filed only by the actual owner of a business
and shall be in writing, signed and under oath, and it shall contain
the office address of the business, the name and residence address
of the owner or partner and, if a corporation, trade group or
association, the names and resident address of the directors and
principal officers.
(3)
The Commissioner may require the names and residence addresses
of any employees of an applicant, in addition to any other
information which he may deem advisable.
(4)
Qualifications of applicants.
(1) Each applicant shall be over 18 years of age and of good character.
The Commissioner shall investigate each applicant as to good
character before a license is issued.
(2)
B.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation, bribery in securing a license.
The making of any false statement as to a material matter in any
application for a license.
B.
The person or the management personnel of the contractor are
untrustworthy and not of good character.
C.
The business transactions of the contractor have been or are marked
by a practice of failure to timely perform or complete its contracts or
by the manipulation of assets or accounts or by fraud or bad faith or
are marked by an unwholesome method of practice of solicitation of
business from owners.
D.
E. Failure to display the license as provided in this chapter.
Failure to comply with any demand or requirement lawfully made by
the Commissioner.
F.
§ 148-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-10
1:365
§ 148-11. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
§ 148-12. Exceptions to provisions.
No contractor's license shall be required in the following instances:
When an agent or employee of a licensee has been guilty of an act or
omission, fraud, misrepresentation and the licensee has approved or
had knowledge thereof.
G.
Violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation
adopted hereunder or for performing or attempting to perform any act
prohibited by this chapter.
H.
Abandonment or willful failure to perform, without justification, any
home improvement contract or project engaged in or undertaken by
a contractor; or willful deviation from or disregard of plans or
specifications in any material respect without the consent of the owner.
A.
Making any substantial misrepresentation in the solicitation or
procurement of a home improvement contract or making any false
promise of character likely to influence, persuade or induce.
B.
Any fraud in the execution of or in the material alteration of any
contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document incident to a
home improvement transaction.
C.
Willful failure to comply with any order, demand, rule, regulation or
requirement made by the Commissioner pursuant to provisions of this
chapter.
D.
An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary.
A.
A plumber, electrician, architect, professional engineer or any other
such person who is required by state or City law to attain standards of
competency or experience as a prerequisite to engaging in such craft
or profession and who is acting exclusively within the scope of the craft
or profession for which he is currently licensed pursuant to such other
law.
B.
Any retail Clerk, clerical, administrative or other employee of a licensed
contractor, as to a transaction on the premises of the contractor.
C.
This chapter shall not apply to or affect the validity of a home
improvement contract, otherwise within the purview of this chapter,
which is made prior to the effective date of the respective provisions of
this chapter governing such contracts.
D.
Any home improvement where the aggregate contract price for all
labor materials and other items is less than $200. This exemption does
E.
§ 148-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 148-12
1:366
§ 148-13. Investigations.
The Commissioner, if, upon reasonable cause, he should believe that any
licensee or any other person has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other law relating to home improvement business, shall have
the power to make such investigation as he shall deem necessary, and to
the extent necessary for this purpose, he may examine such licensee or
any other persons and shall have the power to compel the production of all
relevant books, records, accounts, documents or other records.
§ 148-14. Issuance of appearance tickets.60
The officers and inspectors of the Mount Vernon Building Department and
the Office of Consumer Protection are authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets for any violation of this chapter.
§ 148-15. Hearing on suspension or revocation of license; notice.
No license shall be suspended or revoked nor fine imposed until after a
hearing had before an officer or employee of the department designated
for such purpose by the Commissioner upon notice to the licensee of at
least 10 days. The notice shall be served either personally or by registered
mail and shall state the date and place of hearing and set forth the ground
or grounds constituting the charges against the licensee. The licensee or
registrant shall be heard in his defense, either in person or by counsel, and
may produce witnesses and testify in his behalf. A record of the hearing
shall be taken and preserved. The hearing may be adjourned from time
to time. The person conducting the hearing shall make a written report
of his findings and a recommendation to the Commissioner for decision.
The Commissioner shall review such findings and the recommendation
and, after due deliberation, shall issue an order accepting, modifying or
rejecting such recommendation and dismissing the charges or suspending
or revoking the license. For the purpose of this chapter, the Commissioner
or his designee may administer oaths, take testimony, subpoena witnesses
and compel the production of books, papers, records and documents
deemed pertinent to the subject of investigation.
§ 148-16. Judicial review.
The action of the Commissioner in suspending, revoking or refusing to issue
or renew a license may be reviewed by a proceeding brought under and
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
not apply where the work is only part of a larger or major operation,
whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor, or in which a
division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than $200
for the purpose of evasion of this provision or otherwise.
60.Editor's Note: For other officials authorized to issuance appearance tickets, see Ch. 7,
Appearance Tickets.
§ 148-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-17
1:367
§ 148-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 148-18. Official acts as evidence.
The official acts of the Commissioner and the department shall be prima
facie evidence of the facts therein and shall be entitled to be received in
evidence in all actions at law and other legal proceedings in any court or
before any agency, board, body or officer.
§ 148-19. Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter for the application thereof to any
person or circumstances be ajudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part,
provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the
validity of the remainder of this chapter or the application thereof to other
persons or circumstances, and the Council hereby declares that it would
have enacted this chapter or the remainder thereof had the invalidity of
such provision or application thereof been apparent.
§ 148-20. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on August 15, 1984.
Chapter 149
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boilers and other equipment — See Ch. 98.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 106.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 140.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 197.
Rooming houses — See Ch. 211.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
Any person who shall own, conduct or operate a home improvement
business without a license therefor or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or, having had his license suspended or
revoked, shall continue to engage in such business shall be guilty of
a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both
such fine and imprisonment, and each such violation shall be deemed a
separate offense.
A.
The Corporation Counsel may bring an action in the name of the City to
restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter or any continuance of
any such violation.
B.
§ 148-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 148-20
1:368
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 149-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Housing Code
Applicable to Residential Premises."
§ 149-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential
premises and establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and
welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 149-3. Scope.
§ 149-4. Conflict with other regulations.
Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply
or sewage disposal law, code or ordinance,61 or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or
requirement which is the more restrictive or which establishes the higher
standard shall prevail.
§ 149-5. Compliance with other standards.
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises, and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York. Conformity of such work, materials,
This chapter shall apply to residential premises as follows:
Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings,
buildings of mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
(1)
Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings.
(2)
(3) Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
(4) Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
A.
This chapter shall not apply to transient-type occupancies and uses,
including but not limited to nursing and convalescent homes, hotels,
motels and other forms of temporary housing.
B.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Boilers and Other Equipment; Ch. 120, Electrical Standards; Ch.
131, Fire Prevention; Ch. 140, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse; Ch. 211, Rooming Houses;
Ch. 246, Trailers and Trailer Camps; Ch. 287, Zoning.
§ 149-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-5
1:369
assemblies or equipment with the applicable requirements of the Building
Code of the City of Mount Vernon, New York, shall be prima facie evidence
that the same is reasonably safe to persons and property.
§ 149-6. Severability.
If a term, part, provision, section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter
shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, such
determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms, parts,
provisions, sections, subsections or paragraphs.
§ 149-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-6
1:370
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 149-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms listed in this article
shall have the meanings herein given, except as they are defined in any
other law, ordinance or regulation which may apply in particular cases.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental
to the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory
uses may include, among others, the following: offices for the building
management; dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms;
recreation and play rooms; laundries for the use of tenants and occupants
and in connection with the management and operation of a residential
building; maintenance and work shops; storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects; rooms or space for
the incidental sale or display of merchandise to occupants and tenants, such
as newspaper, candy and cigar stands; garages within a residential building
or on the premises thereof used primarily for the storage of passenger-type
motor vehicles.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building the floor of which is not less than
two feet below grade and the ceiling of which is not less than four feet six
inches above grade.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes. See "toilet room."
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction that is safe
and stable, adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy and affording
shelter to persons, animals or property.
CELLAR — That portion of a building the ceiling of which is entirely below
grade or less than four feet six inches above grade.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building
designed for and occupied exclusively by two families.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT — The exit doorway or doorways or such doorways, together with
connecting passageways or stairways, through which persons must pass
§ 149-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-7
1:371
from a room or space to a street or to an open space which provides safe
access to a street.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal
adoption who live together in one dwelling unit and maintain a common
household.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE — When a curb level has been established, "grade" means curb
level; when a curb level has not been established or when the natural
surface is at a different level from the curb level and remains unchanged,
"grade" means, with respect to a building, the average ground elevation
adjoining the building.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room occupied by one or more persons for living,
eating or sleeping, and includes kitchens serving individual households or
apartments, but does not include bathrooms, water closets, compartments,
laundries, serving and storage pantries, corridors and cellars and similar
spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods, nor does it
include kitchens or kitchenettes of less than 70 square feet of floor area.
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 70 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used or designed as
a residence for three or more families or households living independently of
one another.
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Mount Vernon, New York.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces used for access and vertical travel between
stories. See "habitable room," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
§ 149-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-7
1:372
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
RESIDENCE — A building in which sleeping accommodations are provided.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any lodging house, rooming house, furnished
rooming house, tourist home and any other similarly occupied building,
structure or portion thereof having more than three sleeping rooms which
are directly or indirectly let, sublet, used or occupied for single-room
occupancy; also any multiple dwelling which has been converted or altered
or used for single-room occupancy.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY — An occupancy for hire by one or more
persons living independently of those occupying other rooms in any
apartment or suite or portion of a building or structure.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials forming a structure that is
safe and stable, and includes, among other things, stadiums, gospel and
circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms, staging, observation towers, radio
towers, water tanks and towers, trestles, piers, wharves, sheds, storage
bins, walls, fences and display signs. The word "structure" shall be
construed, when necessary, as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
TOILET ROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more water closets,
which may also contain one or more lavatories and other plumbing fixtures.
See "bathroom."
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without wind-driven
devices.
§ 149-8. Word usage.
The use of the present tense includes the future tense; the masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word "person"
includes a corporation and partnership as well as an individual; "writing"
includes printing and typewriting; "oath" includes affirmation; "signature"
or "subscription" includes a mark made by a person who cannot write, if his
name is written near such mark.
§ 149-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-8
1:373

ARTICLE III
Space, Occupancy, Light and Ventilation
§ 149-9. Compliance required.
§ 149-10. Classification of buildings.
Buildings, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be classified in respect to
their occupancies as follows:
§ 149-11. Maximum occupancy.
Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this chapter shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning
occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide safe and
healthful environment.
A.
The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
residential buildings.
B.
One- and two-family dwellings: buildings containing one or two
dwelling units with less than four lodgers residing with a family in
either one of such dwelling units.
A.
Multiple dwellings.
(1) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(2) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(3) Rooming houses.
Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house or for similar uses.
(4)
(5) Garden apartments.
B.
Accessory structures: garages, carports and similar types of structures
on residential premises.
C.
In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited
to the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable
rooms, other than kitchens, as follows:
One occupant per room having a floor area of at least 80 but less
than 120 square feet.
(1)
Two occupants per room having a floor area of at least 120 but less
than 180 square feet.
(2)
Three occupants per room having a floor area of 180 or more
square feet.
(3)
A.
§ 149-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-11
1:375
§ 149-12. Prohibited uses.
§ 149-13. Size of habitable spaces.
In rooming houses, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited
to the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
B.
In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined as the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
C.
The use of any kitchen, nonhabitable space or public space for sleeping
purposes is prohibited.
A.
The use of any communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet
of floor area, or any nonhabitable space or public space other than
dining space, for dining purposes in rooming houses is prohibited.
B.
The preparation or consumption of meals in rooming houses is
prohibited.
C.
D. The use of any cellar space as a habitable space is prohibited.
Every habitable room shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
clear floor area and have in any part at least eight feet in its least
horizontal dimension and shall have a clear height of not less than
eight feet, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling. [Amended
11-7-1968, approved 11-7-1968]
A.
A dwelling unit shall have at least one living room containing not less
than 150 square feet of clear floor area, and such apartment or dwelling
unit shall, in its entirety, contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 square feet additional
floor space for each additional occupant thereof, to be calculated on the
basis of total habitable room area.
B.
Kitchens shall have a minimum of 70 square feet of floor area, and other
habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of floor area
and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven feet.
C.
Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking space
or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The area of
the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and the room
shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition, measured in the
alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The depth of such alcove
shall not exceed half its width. The floor area of the alcove shall be
added to the floor area of the room in determining light and ventilation
requirements for the room. An alcove with an area of 60 square feet
D.
§ 149-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-13
1:376
§ 149-14. Basements.
Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where required windows
are located only on one wall and the depth of the basement space exceeds
four times its clear height.
§ 149-15. Light and ventilation.
Every habitable room shall have one or more windows opening directly on a
street or on a yard or court conforming to the requirements of this chapter
and shall be provided with artificial light and natural ventilation or with
mechanical ventilation in addition to natural ventilation.
or more but less than the required area of a habitable room shall be
separately lighted and ventilated as required for habitable space.
§ 149-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-15
1:377

ARTICLE IV
Structural Requirements
§ 149-16. General requirements.
§ 149-17. Exterior protection.
§ 149-18. Interior protection.
Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
A.
Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
B.
Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying, and termites and other destructive insects.
C.
Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that ground and surface water will not penetrate
into habitable spaces, basements and cellars.
D.
Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin. Such protection
shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil drains at footings,
grouting of masonry cracks, waterproofing of walls and joints and other
suitable means.
A.
Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such
maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair of walls,
copings and flashings; waterproofing of joints; waterproof coatings;
installation or repair of termite shields; poison treatment of soil; or
other suitable means.
B.
Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of
roofing, flashings, waterproof coatings or other suitable means.
C.
Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture, and the flow of
air from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so
as to prevent deterioration of structural members. Such provisions
shall consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls to provide
adequate circulation of air in the crawl space; covering the ground in
the crawl space with a moisture barrier; installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade; blocking
openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls;
A.
§ 149-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-18
1:379
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor
members above; poison treatment of soil and other suitable means.
Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate
means.
B.
Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
C.
Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and repairing loose or defective sections.
D.
Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use
and floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moisture- and waterproof qualities required for
the particular floor.
E.
§ 149-18 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-18
1:380
ARTICLE V
Firesafety Requirements
§ 149-19. Prohibited accumulations.
It is prohibited:
§ 149-20. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 149-21. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 149-22. Fireplaces.
To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in locations
approved by the Fire Department, any highly flammable or explosive
matter, such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar
materials, or any combustible refuse liable to spontaneous combustion,
such as wastepaper, boxes, rags or similar materials.
A.
To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or windows or in any other locations where in the event of fire such
materials may obstruct egress of occupants or interfere with firefighting
operations.
B.
Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
A.
In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
B.
Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated
from other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
C.
Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
A.
Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
B.
§ 149-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-22
1:381
Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
C.
§ 149-22 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-22
1:382
ARTICLE VI
Equipment
§ 149-23. General requirements.
§ 149-24. Plumbing.
Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects, a source of ignition
or a radiation hazard and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include but are not limited
to apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or in connection with such
installations.
A.
Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
B.
Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
C.
Maintenance.
Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(1)
Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
(2)
A.
Water supply.
Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system
of the building shall be connected to such approved source and
shall not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(1)
Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
(2)
Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
(3)
B.
§ 149-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-24
1:383
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
Hot-water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
(4)
Sewage drainage system.
Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system,
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(1)
Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance,
provided that said system is authorized by local ordinances or
codes.
(2)
Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into
a waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(3)
Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(4)
Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(5)
Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(6)
The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss
of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(7)
Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(8)
Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
(9)
C.
D. Storm drainage.
§ 149-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-24
1:384
Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm
drains shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow
onto sidewalks.
(1)
Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(2)
Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
(3)
Plumbing facilities.
Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and hot and cold
water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required therein.
In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at a temperature
range of 130 F° to 140 F° from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(1)
There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink;
(b) One water closet;
(c) One bathtub or shower; and
(d) One lavatory.
(2)
Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water closet and
lavatory for each five individuals and one bathtub or shower per 10
individuals.
(3)
Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water
closet and lavatory for each multiple of five persons so
accommodated and one bathtub or shower per 10 individuals.
(4)
Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
(5)
E.
Plumbing fixtures.
Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(1)
F.
§ 149-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-24
1:385
§ 149-25. Fuel gas.
Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(2)
Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
(3)
Swimming pools.
Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be
clean. Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution
from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
(1)
Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding
the swimming pool and arranged so that water from such areas will
drain without entering the pool.
(2)
Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each
period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable
fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(3)
The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
(4)
G.
Water supply tanks.
Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to
be watertight, verminproof, resistant to corrosion and capable of
withstanding the working pressures under normal operation.
(1)
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(3)
Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
(4)
Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
(5)
H.
General requirements.
Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(1)
A.
§ 149-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-25
1:386
§ 149-26. Heating.
Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
(2)
Shutoff valves.
Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means from
the street for shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be
maintained in good operating condition.
(1)
An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in
the piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliance.
(2)
B.
Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
C.
Refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
D.
High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gauge shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square
inch gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressures.
E.
Liquefied petroleum gas.
Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(1)
Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(2)
Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(3)
Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
(4)
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates
at a safe location.
(5)
Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
(6)
F.
A. General requirements.
§ 149-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-26
1:387
It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted
or undertaken or shall be bound to heat or to furnish heat for
any building or portion thereof occupied as a home or place of
residence of one or more persons or as a business establishment
where one or more persons are employed, to heat or furnish heat
for every occupied room in such building or portion thereof so that
a minimum air temperature be maintained in compliance with the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Code. This section
shall not apply to any building or portions thereof used and
occupied for trades, business or occupations where high or low
temperatures are essential and unavoidable. [Amended
3-14-1973, approved 3-15-1973; 8-8-1979, approved
8-8-1979; 6-10-2009, approved 6-11-2009]
(1)
Responsibility. [Amended 6-10-2009, approved 6-11-2009]
For the purpose of this section, wherever a building is heated
by means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under control
of the owner, superintendent, agent or lessee of such building,
such owner, superintendent, agent or lessee, in the absence
of a contract or agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed
to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself or herself to
furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The term "contract" as used in this section shall be taken to
mean and include a written or verbal contract.
(a)
It shall be the responsibility of the party defined herein to
provide heat in accordance with this section. Upon complaints
from an individual occupying a space required to be heated
in accordance with the requirements of this section, such
individual not being the responsible party to provide such heat,
the Department of Buildings shall conduct inspections of the
space(s) to determine compliance of the space(s) with this
section, or lack thereof.
(b)
A heat inspection fee shall be charged to the responsible party
for each major complaint for a given building during the same
heating season as follows:
[1] First major complaint: $200;
[2] Second major complaint: $500;
Third major complaint and any subsequent major
complaint during the same heating season: $1,000.
[3]
(c)
A complaint shall be defined as major when the air
temperature, measured as prescribed by the New York State
Uniform Code, is at least 4° F. less than required.
(d)
(2)
§ 149-26 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-26
1:388
When the provided air temperature is no more than 3° F. less
than the required temperature, the complaint shall be defined
as minor and the inspection fee shall be $90.
(e)
(f) Invalid complaints shall not be subject to an inspection fee.
The heat inspection fee shall not be deemed to replace any
legal actions, fines or imprisonment defined in this chapter and
incurred by the perpetrator of a violation of this section.
(g)
Inspection of systems; fees. [Added 5-24-1978, approved
5-25-1978]
The furnace, boiler and central heating system of every
dwelling subject to this chapter will be inspected by an agent
or designee of the Commissioner of Buildings between May
15 and September 15 of each year. The fee for such annual
inspections shall be $50 for all multiple dwellings for six
families and over, $20 for all multiple dwellings for under
six families and for all other residences. One-family homes
occupied by the owner shall be exempt from provisions of this
subsection.
(a)
In addition to testing the dependability, efficiency and
adequacy of the heating system, the central heating system,
independent or accessory equipment, flues, vents and dampers
shall be inspected for escape of carbon monoxide gas. The
findings of inspection reports shall be recorded on approved
forms stating condition of inspected equipment and a copy
thereof shall be sent to the owner. Owner shall make necessary
repairs to equipment within 10 days of receipt of inspection
report.
(b)
When owner has caused necessary repairs to be made, the
Department of Buildings shall be notified by owner for
reinspection, on forms provided therefor.
(c)
Before September 30 of the subject year, all defects found upon
inspection shall have been corrected.
(d)
(3)
Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
B.
Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
C.
Prohibited locations for equipment. Fuel-burning water heaters shall
not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet rooms.
D.
§ 149-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-26
1:389
Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
E.
Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed a safe temperature.
F.
Air supply.
Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(1)
Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
(2)
G.
Removal of products of combustion.
Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(1)
Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent.
(2)
Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
(3)
H.
Safety devices.
Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(1)
Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature
or pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to a safe rate.
(a)
When the water level in a steam boiler drops below a
predetermined level, the fuel supply shall be cut off. When
(b)
(2)
I.
§ 149-26 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-26
1:390
§ 149-27. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
§ 149-28. Incinerators.
failure or interruption of the pilot light or main burner of
liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel supply to
such pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages multiple
dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that equipment
burning gas or liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage space, shall be
permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so as not to be
exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases.
J.
General requirements.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed
and maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(1)
Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(2)
(3) Masonry chimneys shall have noncombustible foundations.
Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue
gas without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(4)
Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(5)
No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(6)
Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
(7)
A.
Firesafety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use, the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed a safe temperature.
B.
Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
C.
A. General requirements.
§ 149-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-28
1:391
§ 149-29. Electrical.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(2)
A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(3)
Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack or flue.
(4)
Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
(5)
Service openings.
Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(1)
Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
(2)
B.
General requirements.
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be
a potential source of ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard.
(1)
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(2)
Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(3)
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(4)
Electrical wiring and equipment and the electric service entrance
to each building shall be grounded or otherwise protected by
insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the danger of
high voltage from lightning or other causes.
(5)
Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs
or sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(6)
A.
§ 149-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-29
1:392
§ 149-30. Cooking and refrigeration.
Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
(7)
Artificial lighting.
Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electrical
wiring systems shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(1)
There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit, near the point of entrance to such unit.
(2)
Every habitable room, every bathroom, every kitchen and every
kitchenette having more than 70 square feet of floor area shall
be provided with not less than one outlet, of wall, ceiling or base
type, properly installed and connected to provide electric current
for artificial lighting or other purpose.
(3)
B.
Exit and directional signs.
Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(1)
Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(2)
Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters, with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated
signs the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
(3)
Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
(4)
C.
Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
A.
Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
B.
Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall be
made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
C.
§ 149-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-30
1:393
§ 149-31. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation.
D. Solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately vented.
Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
Communal kitchens shall contain at least one kitchen sink; at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners; at least one electric or gas-type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities, where provided in the kitchen area, shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(1)
Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
(2)
E.
One- and two-family dwellings.
Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
(1)
Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(2)
A.
Multiple dwellings.
Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
(1)
Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
(2)
B.
Ventilating systems.
Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be
prevented and so that under conditions of use the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(1)
Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(2)
Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(3)
Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(4)
Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(5)
C.
§ 149-30 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-31
1:394
Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(6)
Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(7)
Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building.
(8)
Air intake and exhaust openings.
Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so as
to prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter
being drawn into the system.
(1)
Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(2)
Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(3)
Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
(4)
D.
Ventilation requirements.
Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(1)
Public space shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
(2)
E.
Safety controls.
Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation
of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously
identified and in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(1)
Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
or more than one fire area or more than one story of a building
shall be provided with controls arranged so that under abnormal
rise in temperature of the air in the system the fans causing normal
circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(2)
F.
§ 149-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-31
1:395
§ 149-32. Fuel oil.
§ 149-33. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
(3)
Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed by means of fixed
liquidated equipment.
A.
Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
(2)
B.
Piping.
Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(1)
Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks,
or check valves shall be installed to prevent a return flow.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
(2)
C.
Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
A.
Sprinkler equipment.
Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to effective discharge of water.
(1)
Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(2)
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
B.
Standpipe systems.
Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(1)
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free
of deterioration.
(3)
C.
§ 149-31 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-33
1:396
§ 149-34. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
Portable extinguishers.
Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot-water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two roundbottom
pails filled with sand.
(1)
Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
(2)
D.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
A.
Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
B.
Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
C.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall
not be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
E.
No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
F.
§ 149-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-34
1:397

ARTICLE VII
Property Maintenance
§ 149-35. Compliance required.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 149-36. Open areas.
§ 149-37. Buildings and structures.
§ 149-38. Infestation and screening.
Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
A.
Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
B.
Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
C.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
E.
Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
A.
Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
B.
Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions
detrimental to safety or health.
C.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
A.
Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
B.
§ 149-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-38
1:399
§ 149-39. Garbage and refuse.
§ 149-40. Domestic animals and pets.
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and shall
not be permitted to run at large.
From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings other than
multiple dwellings shall be provided with self-closing-type devices or
screens, and windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be
appropriately screened. Screens shall not be required in rooms located
sufficiently high in the upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free
of mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects.
C.
Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
A.
In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
B.
§ 149-38 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-40
1:400
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
[Amended 12-13-1972, approved 12-15-1972; 5-23-1973, approved
5-24-1973]
§ 149-41. Enforcement by Commissioner of Buildings.
The Commissioner of Buildings, with the cooperation of the
Commissioner of Public Safety and the Fire Commissioner, shall
administer and enforce this chapter and secure compliance herewith,
and is hereby empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance.
A.
The Commissioner is hereby authorized to conduct surveys of housing
in any area of the municipality to determine the condition of premises,
extent of deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance,
unsafe and unsanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use and
other relevant factors.
B.
It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner, with the cooperation
and assistance of the Commissioner of Public Safety and the Fire
Commissioner, to:
Secure periodic inspections, to be made not less than once every
four years, of all multidwellings within the scope of applicable
housing standards.
(1)
Cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
(2)
Order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in
or on any premises in violation of provisions of this chapter or of
rules and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Buildings;
state in the violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance
therewith and, where necessary, order the vacation of the premises
found unfit for human habitation.
(3)
Request the Corporation Counsel of the municipality to take
appropriate legal action in the name of the Commissioner of
Buildings upon failure of the responsible party to comply with
such violation order within the time specified therein, to institute
appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or
remove such violation, and to take such other legal action as is
necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter. The
remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law; any
and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively,
and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election
or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others.
(4)
C.
§ 149-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-41
1:401
§ 149-42. Inspections.
Cause a search of the Building Department's records of housing
violations existing on any premises and issue a certified statement
thereof upon receipt of written request and payment of any fees
required by local law or ordinance.
(5)
(6) Study housing conditions in the City.
Cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private
agencies engaged in the study and improvement of housing
conditions.
(7)
Publish an annual report of housing conditions in the City,
accomplishments of the Building Department and
recommendations for the future.
(8)
Where violations of this chapter exist and pose an immediate hazard
or danger to the health, safety or welfare of building occupants or of
the public, the Building Commissioner may issue an order citing the
violation and directing such action by such Building Commissioner as is
necessary to remove or abate the immediate hazard or danger.
D.
Whenever the Building Commissioner determines that there has been
a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, he shall give notice
of such violation to the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be in writing
and shall specify the alleged violation and shall provide at least 48
hours for compliance, except as provided in § 149-46 of this article,
and shall be served upon the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner, agent, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for such violation if a copy thereof is served upon
him personally, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the building affected by the notice and a copy is mailed
on the same day it is posted to the last known address of the owner,
agent, operator or occupant, or by such other method authorized by
the laws of the State of New York. [Amended 2-23-1977, approved
2-24-1977; 10-25-1978, approved 10-26-1978]
E.
Building Department inspectors are hereby authorized and have the
right in the performance of their duties, to enter any premises during
normal business hours and in emergencies whenever necessary to
protect the public interest.
A.
Owners, agents, operators, executive officers of corporate owners,
occupants, contractors, lessees or tenants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized Building Department personnel acting in the performance of
their duty.
B.
§ 149-41 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-42
1:402
§ 149-43. Notice of violation; issuance of summons or appearance
ticket.
For the purpose of facilitating the inspection of vacant residential rental
units, it shall be the duty of every owner, sublessor, agent, manager or
operator of a vacant dwelling unit offered for rerental to file a written
request for vacancy inspection of the unit by the Building Department
prior to its rental. [Added 11-13-1974, approved 11-15-1974;
amended 8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979; 8-27-1980; approved
8-28-1980]
C.
Tenant occupancy without vacancy inspection. [Added 8-8-1979,
approved 8-8-1979; repealed 8-27-1980, approved 8-28-1980]
D.
Person providing rent for dwelling without vacancy inspection. [Added
8-8-1979; approved 8-8-1979; repealed 8-27-1980, approved
8-28-1980]
E.
The Building Department shall, within three days of the receipt of
the request for inspection, make such an inspection and shall, within
two days of said inspection, notify, in writing, the landlord or owner
requesting the inspection, of any violations discovered by the
inspection or that no violations were discovered. [Added 8-8-1979,
approved 8-8-1979]
F.
The request for inspection shall be made within two days after the
dwelling unit offered for rental becomes vacant. [Added 8-8-1979,
approved 8-8-1979]
G.
The request for inspection must be accompanied by a fee of $10 payable
to the Building Department. [Added 8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979]
H.
No dwelling unit shall be rented or reoccupied by any owner, sublessor,
agent, manager or operator until such inspection is completed and
the dwelling unit is certified by the Department of Buildings to be
free of any violations of this chapter, the Building Code or any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto. [Added 8-8-1979, approved
8-8-1979; amended 8-27-1980, approved 8-28-1980]
I.
Failure to comply with the mandates of this section shall result, upon
conviction, in a mandatory fine of $100 or imprisonment for 15 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. [Added 8-8-1979, approved
8-8-1979]
J.
Should any portion of Subsections C through J be declared illegal
or ultra vires, the remaining portions nevertheless shall survive and
remain in operation. [Added 8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979]
K.
Whenever the Building Commissioner determines that there has been
a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there
has been a violation, of any provision of this chapter, except as provided
in § 149-46 of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
A.
§ 149-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-43
1:403
§ 149-44. Final order.
Any notice of violation provided for in § 149-43A shall automatically become
a final order if written request for a hearing is not filed in the office of
thereto, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to
the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other person responsible for
such violation. Such notice shall be in writing, shall specify the alleged
violation, shall provide a reasonable time for compliance and shall
be served upon the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other person
responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner, agent, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for such violation if a copy is served upon him
personally, or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the building affected by the notice and if a copy is mailed on the same
day it is posted to the owner, agent, operator, occupant or other person
responsible for such violation, or by such other method authorized
by the laws of the State of New York. Such notice shall inform the
person to whom it is directed of his right to apply for a hearing before
the Commissioner as provided in § 149-55 of this article. Such notice
may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. [Amended 10-25-1978,
approved 10-26-1978]
Whenever the Commissioner of Buildings or an inspector of the
Building Department determines that a heat violation pursuant to
Article VI, § 149-26A(1), of this chapter follows a prior notice of heating
violation attributable to the same premises by no more than 120 days,
the Commissioner or his inspector is authorized to issue, without
further notice to the person responsible for such violation, a summons
or appearance ticket returnable in the City Court for the prosecution of
said violation. [Added 8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979]
B.
Whenever the Commissioner or an inspector of the Building
Department determines that a heat violation pursuant to Article VI,
§ 149-26A(1), exists at premises which had not been the subject of a
notice of violation for inadequate heat during the preceding 120 days,
the person responsible for heating the premises shall be served with
a notice of violation and an order pursuant to § 149-46 of this article
to abate the hazard of inadequate heat within eight hours. [Added
8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979]
C.
In accordance with § 149-50 of this article, if the Commissioner of
Buildings has provided in a written notice to the person responsible
for heating the premises that the heating violation be cleared within a
certain number of days of such notice, then, in that event, no summons
or appearance ticket shall be issued for the violation until the expiration
of the time allowed by the Commissioner of Buildings. [Added
8-8-1979, approved 8-8-1979]
D.
§ 149-43 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-44
1:404
the Commissioner within five days after receipt of the notice. A copy of the
order shall be served as provided in § 149-3A of this chapter.
§ 149-45. Referral of violations.
Whenever it is determined that the condition of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit or premises is in violation of any applicable
code which is not provided for by this chapter or which is provided for
by a higher standard of such other law, code, ordinance or regulation, as
provided in Article I, § 149-4, such condition or violation shall be referred to
the appropriate authority.
§ 149-46. Power to act in emergencies. [Amended 2-9-1977,
approved 2-10-1977; 10-25-1978, approved 10-26-1978]
Whenever the Commissioner finds that a violation of this chapter exists
which, in his opinion, requires immediate action to abate a direct hazard
or immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of
a building or of the public, he may, without prior notice of hearing, issue
an order citing the violation and directing that such action be taken as is
necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. The order citing the
violation shall also specify the time within which the said hazard or danger
must be abated. Said time period shall not be less than eight hours and the
said order shall also state that in the event the said hazard or danger is not
abated within the time period specified in the order, the Commissioner of
Buildings will take the steps necessary to abate the danger or hazard and
the expenses of such abatement will be charged to the owner as provided in
§ 149-58 of this article.
§ 149-47. Abatement by City; recovery of costs. [Amended 2-9-1977,
approved 2-10-1977; 2-25-1981, approved 2-26-1981]
Whenever any violation of this chapter, in the opinion of the Commissioner
with the concurrence of the Corporation Counsel, causes a direct hazard
or immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of
a building or the public, the Commissioner shall notify the owner of the
property or his agent of said hazard by either personal service of the notice
required in § 149-46 hereof or by posting said notice conspicuously upon
the property in question and by telephone communication with said owner
or his agent, and as to the aforesaid telephonic communication, at the
telephone number designated by the owner for that purpose, at least three
attempts to contact said owner or his agent shall be made, by mailing said
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to said owner or agent at
its last known address. Thereafter, the Commissioner may take such direct
action as is necessary to abate the hazard or danger; provided, however,
that expenditures in excess of $5,000 shall require prior approval of the
City Council. Expenses incurred in the execution of such orders shall be
recovered as provided in § 149-58 of this article.
§ 149-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-48
1:405
§ 149-48. Demolition.
Any owner of a building receiving a notice of violation stating that such
building does not comply with the provisions of this chapter may demolish
such building, and such action shall be deemed compliance.
§ 149-49. Reinspection.
At the end of the period specified in the notice of violation or any extension
thereof, it shall be the duty of the Commissioner to make or cause to
be made a reinspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit or premises, and if compliance has not been established,
appropriate legal action shall be instituted as specified in § 149-41C(4) of
this article. Additional notices of violation may be issued as a result of such
reinspection.
§ 149-50. Extension of time for compliance.
The Commissioner may extend the compliance time specified in any notice
or order issued under the provisions of this chapter where there is evidence
of intent to comply within the period specified, provided that reasonable
conditions exist which prevent immediate compliance.
§ 149-51. Recording of notices.
Whenever a notice or order has been issued for any infraction of this
chapter, the Commissioner shall keep on file a copy of such notice or
order in his office. Such recording shall constitute appropriate notice of
such violation, infraction or order to any subsequent purchaser, transferee,
grantee, mortgagee or lessee of the property affected thereby.
§ 149-52. Transfer of ownership.
No owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or
premises upon whom any notice or order pursuant to this chapter has
been served shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose
of such property to another until compliance with the provisions of such
notice or order has been secured, or until such owner shall furnish to
the purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee prior to such sale,
transfer, grant, mortgage or lease a true copy of such notice or order and,
at the same time, give adequate notification to the Commissioner of his
intent to sell, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease and supply the name and
address of such person, persons or firm to whom the sale, transfer, grant,
mortgage or lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee
or lessee shall be bound by any notice or order issued and filed pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 149-53. Requests for searches of records.
Upon request, the Department of Buildings shall be required to make
a search and issue a certificate of any of its public records, including
§ 149-48 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-53
1:406
violations, and shall have the power to charge and collect reasonable fees
for such searches or certificates.
§ 149-54. Requests for hearing. [Amended 10-25-1978, approved
10-26-1978]
Any person affected by any notice of violation issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, except as provided for
in § 149-46 of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing before the
Commissioner, provided that such person shall file in the office of the
Commissioner a written request for such hearing, setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor, designating the person and his address
upon whom orders may be served and setting forth the reasons why such
notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. If this request is filed
within five days after the service of notice of violation, compliance with such
notice of violation shall not be required while the hearing is pending.
§ 149-55. Hearing.
Upon receipt of a request for a hearing as provided in § 149-54, the
Commissioner shall set a time and a place for such hearing and shall give
the applicant at least 10 days' written notice thereof. Such hearing shall
commence not later than 30 days after the date on which the request
was filed; however, hearings may be postponed beyond such thirty-day
period for good and sufficient reason. At such hearing, the applicant or his
representative shall be given an opportunity to show cause why such notice
of violation should be modified or withdrawn.
§ 149-56. Decision upon hearing. [Amended 10-25-1978, approved
10-26-1978]
After a hearing held in accordance with §§ 149-54 and 149-55 of this article
and on consideration of the evidence presented, the Commissioner shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice. If the notice of violation is sustained
or modified, such decision shall be deemed a final order and shall be served
as provided in § 149-43A of this article on the person or persons whom the
Commissioner shall find to be responsible for the violation. Where there are
practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships in the literal enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter, the Commissioner shall have the power to
authorize a variance from the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
intent of the chapter shall be observed with respect to the safeguarding of
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
§ 149-57. Record of hearing.
The Commissioner shall keep a summary of testimony and a copy of every
relevant notice or order, the request for a hearing, entries of appearance,
findings of fact, if any, and the final determination, and such record shall be
maintained as a public record.
§ 149-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-58
1:407
§ 149-58. Recovery of expenses; costs as lien. [Amended 2-9-1977,
approved 2-10-1977; 10-25-1978, approved 10-26-1978; 11-10-2004,
approved 11-12-2004]
The Commissioner of Buildings, with the assistance of the Corporation
Counsel, shall cause the expenses incurred pursuant to §§ 149-46 and
149-47 of this article plus a service charge of 25% to be charged against the
land on which the building or structure existed, as a municipal lien, or cause
such costs to be added to the tax roll as an assessment or to be levied as a
special tax against the land upon which the building or structure stands or
did stand, or such costs may be recovered by the City of Mount Vernon in a
civil action.
§ 149-58 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-58
1:408
ARTICLE IX
Compliance
§ 149-59. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 149-60. Responsibilities of rooming house operators.
Rooming house operators, in addition to their other responsibilities, shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter in regard to the following:
§ 149-61. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in this chapter in regard to the following:
Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact
that this chapter may also place certain responsibilities on operators
and occupants and regardless of any agreements between owners and
operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility.
A.
Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities and for furnishing adequate
heat and hot-water supply in multiple dwellings.
B.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the standards herein.
Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of rooming
house premises.
B.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within the operator's control, as well as other building
equipment and facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
D.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which the occupant
occupies or controls to the maximum permitted by this chapter.
A.
Maintenance of that part of the premises which the occupant occupies
or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
B.
§ 149-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-61
1:409
Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities
in that part of the premises which the occupant occupies or controls,
in a clean and sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the
operation and use thereof.
C.
Keeping exits from the occupant's dwelling unit clear and
unencumbered.
D.
Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
E.
Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within the occupant's
dwelling unit if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
F.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
H.
§ 149-61 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-61
1:410
ARTICLE X
Penalties
[Amended 11-24-1976, approved 11-24-1976; 2-9-1977, approved
2-10-1977; 2-23-1977, approved 2-24-1977; 10-25-1978, approved
10-26-1978]
§ 149-62. Penalties for offenses.
For any and every violation of this chapter, and upon failure to comply
with written notice thereof or order to remove such violation within
the applicable period of time prescribed in Article VIII, § 149-41E or
149-46, and specified in such notice or order, or any extended date of
compliance granted in accordance with the provisions of this section,
the owner, agent or contractor of any structure or of any land where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the agent, builder,
contractor, occupant or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in such violation or who maintains any building or premises in
which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of an offense and shall
be liable to a fine which shall not exceed $500 or to imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, for each and
every day or part thereof during which such violation continues after
the expiration of time given for compliance as prescribed in Article VIII,
§ 149-41E or 149-46, and specified in such notice or order, or, if an
extension of time be given by the Commissioner, for each and every day
after the extended date.
A.
In addition to such prosecution for an offense aforesaid, each such
violator shall be liable for any expense to which the City may be put
in eliminating such violation in addition to a penalty of $500 to be
recovered by the City of Mount Vernon in a civil action. In cases where
the violator has failed to comply with the aforesaid notice, he shall be
subject to penalties set forth in Subsection A of this section for each
and every day or part thereof that such violation continues after the
expiration of time given for compliance as prescribed in Article VIII,
§ 149-41E or 149-46, and specified in such notice or order, or after the
expiration of the extended date of compliance.
B.
§ 149-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-62
1:411

ARTICLE XI
Window Guards
[Added 11-12-1992, approved 11-13-1992]
§ 149-63. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words or terms shall have the
following meaning:
CHILD or CHILDREN — Any person 10 years of age or younger.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Mount Vernon Department of Buildings.
INSTALLATION OF WINDOW GUARDS — Proper installation and
maintenance of window guards in a manner approved by the Department.
LANDLORD — Any owner, agent or other person who manages or controls
a multiple dwelling.
TENANT — Any lessee or other occupant regularly residing within a
dwelling unit, regardless of whether said occupant is a part to a lease
agreement.
§ 149-64. When installation required; obstruction or removal
unlawful.
§ 149-65. Notice to tenants.
The landlord shall provide, install and maintain a window guard of a
type deemed acceptable by the Department, installation to be made
pursuant to specifications provided by the Department, on the windows
of each dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling in which a child or children
reside and on the windows, if any, in the public halls of a multiple
dwelling in which such child or children reside, except that this section
shall not apply to windows giving access to fire escapes or a window on
the first floor that is a required means of egress from the dwelling unit.
It shall be the duty of said landlord to ascertain whether such a child or
children resides therein.
A.
No tenant or occupant of a multiple dwelling, or other person, shall
obstruct or interfere with the installation of window guards required by
Subsection A nor shall any person remove such window guards.
B.
No landlord shall refuse a written request of a tenant or occupant of a
multiple dwelling to install window guards, regardless of whether such
installation is required by Subsection A, except that this subsection
shall not apply to windows giving access to fire escapes or to a window
on the first floor that is a required means of egress from the dwelling
unit.
C.
All leases offered to a tenant in a multiple dwelling must contain a
notice, conspicuously set forth therein, which advises the tenant of
the obligation of the landlord to install window guards and where
A.
§ 149-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-65
1:413
§ 149-66. Effective dates.
This article shall take effect pursuant to the following schedule:
further information regarding the procurement of such window guards
is available.
The landlord must cause to be delivered to each dwelling unit of a
multiple dwelling a notice advising occupants of the obligation of such
landlord to install window guards and where further information
regarding the procurement of such window guards is available. Such
notice must be provided on an annual basis in a form and manner
approved by the Department.
B.
The landlord must cause to be delivered to each dwelling unit of a
multiple dwelling, within 30 days of a change of occupancy not
involving a written lease, a notice advising the occupants of the
obligation of such landlord to install window guards and where further
information regarding the procurement of such window guards is
available.
C.
Multiple dwellings with 60 or more dwelling units: effective January 1,
1993.
A.
Multiple dwellings with 30 through 59 dwelling units: effective March
1, 1993.
B.
Multiple dwellings with 16 through 29 dwelling units: effective June 1,
1993.
C.
Multiple dwellings with three through 15 dwelling units: effective
January 1, 1994.
D.
§ 149-65 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-66
1:414
ARTICLE XII
Entrances and Intercoms
[Added 10-12-1994, approved 10-13-1994]
§ 149-67. Requirements for certain apartment buildings.
Every entrance from the street, roof, passageway, court, yard, cellar or
other entrance to a multiple dwelling containing six or more apartments
or dwelling units erected or converted after November 1, 1994, shall be
equipped with automatic self-closing and self-locking doors. Such doors
shall be locked at all times, except when an attendant shall actually be
on duty. Every such multiple dwelling shall also be equipped with bells
or buzzers located at the door giving access to the main entrance hall or
lobby of said multiple dwelling for the purpose of alerting the occupants
of each apartment or dwelling unit to the presence of a person seeking
entry. Every such multiple dwelling containing six or more apartments
or dwelling units shall also be equipped with an automatic release
mechanism to permit an apartment or dwelling unit occupant to release
the locking mechanism of the door giving access to the main entrance
hall or lobby of said multiple dwelling from his apartment or dwelling
unit.
A.
Every such dwelling erected or converted after November 1, 1994,
containing six or more apartments or dwelling units shall also be
equipped with an intercommunication system. Such
intercommunication system shall be located at the door giving access
to the main entrance hall or lobby of said multiple dwelling and shall
consist of a device or devices for voice communication between the
occupant of each apartment or dwelling unit and a person outside said
door to the main entrance hall or lobby and to permit such apartment
or dwelling unit occupant to release the locking mechanism of said door
from the apartment or dwelling unit.
B.
On or after May 1, 1995, every multiple dwelling containing six or more
apartments or dwelling units erected or converted prior to November
1, 1994, shall be equipped with:
Automatic self-closing and self-locking doors, which doors shall be
kept locked, except when an attendant shall actually be on duty.
(1)
Bells or buzzers, located at the door giving access to the main
entrance hall or lobby of said multiple dwelling, for the purpose of
alerting the occupants of each apartment or dwelling unit to the
presence of a person seeking entry.
(2)
An automatic release mechanism to permit an apartment or
dwelling unit occupant to release the locking mechanism of the
door giving access to the main entrance hall or lobby of said
multiple dwelling from his apartment or dwelling unit.
(3)
C.
§ 149-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-67
1:415
Provided that the tenants occupying a majority of all the
apartments or dwelling units within the structure comprising the
multiple dwelling affected shall request or consent in writing
thereto, the installation of an intercommunication system
described in Subsection B of this section, such installation to be
started within 90 days and completed within six months after the
owner's receipt of such request or consent.
(4)
All doors, locks, bells, buzzers, automatic release mechanisms and
intercommunication systems in existence prior to the enactment of this
article or subsequently installed shall be kept in good working order.
D.
Every owner, general agent or agent who shall fail to comply with or
who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
E.
§ 149-67 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-67
1:416
ARTICLE XIII
Chronic Violators of Housing Standards
[Added 10-26-2005, approved 10-27-2005]
§ 149-68. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Multiple Dwellings with
Chronic Violations" and added to the Housing Code Applicable to
Residential Premises.
§ 149-69. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to improve the conditions of the City's
multifamily housing stock, especially in those buildings where there has
been a history of routine and consistent neglect of an owners
responsibilities to comply with the City's housing standards.
§ 149-70. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHRONIC HISTORY OF VIOLATIONS — A multiple dwelling has a chronic
history of violations when, at the discretion of the Commissioner of
Buildings, its owner receives five or more violations from the Building
Department within a one-year period for conditions that are either unsafe,
unsanitary, deteriorated, overcrowded or the result of inadequate
maintenance of the premises which may be dangerous to the health, safety
or welfare of the inhabitants thereof.
CHRONIC OFFENDER — The owner of a multiple dwelling classified as
having a chronic history of violations.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — For purposes of this chapter, a multiple dwelling
is a dwelling which is either rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied,
or is occupied, as the residence or home of six or more families living
independently of each other.
§ 149-71. Mandatory task force inspection.
Whenever a multifamily dwelling is classified as having a chronic
history of violations, the Commissioner of Buildings shall immediately
notify the owner, in writing, of the building's classification and of the
other matters required by this article and, as soon as practicable
thereafter, shall commence a task force inspection and investigation to
determine if the premises is fit for human habitation. At the same time
that the Commissioner of Buildings notifies the owner of the building's
classification, the Commissioner, through the office of the City Clerk,
shall simultaneously notify the City Council that the building has been
so designated.
A.
§ 149-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-71
1:417
§ 149-72. Financial status of owner.
Upon classifying a multiple dwelling as having a chronic history of
violations, the Commissioner of Buildings shall request a detailed financial
status report from the City Comptroller and other departments showing
any and all amounts of taxes and other charges owed to the City of Mount
Vernon by the owner of the building.
§ 149-73. Monitoring; report required by building owner.
Within 10 days of the Commissioner of Buildings mailing the notice
described herein classifying a multiple dwelling as having a chronic history
of violations, the owner is required to provide the following information to
the Commissioner of Buildings (which period may be extended up to 30 days
by the Commissioner of Buildings in his discretion, in writing):
§ 149-74. Penalties for chronic offenders; publication of names and
addresses.
For each day that a multiple dwelling is classified as having a chronic
history of violations, the owner shall be liable for a mandatory fine of $2,000
per day in addition to the other fines and penalties under the Code of the
City of Mount Vernon. In addition, the City is hereby authorized to publish,
The task force inspection shall be conducted in cooperation with the
Commissioner of Public Safety, Fire Commissioner, and any other
federal, state, or local agency that the Commissioner of Buildings
deems appropriate under the circumstances.
B.
A printed sign shall be conspicuously placed on the building notifying
the public that the building has been classified as having "Chronic
History of Building Code Violations" showing the name, address, and
telephone number of the owner and further indicating that the owner is
being prosecuted by the City for such violations.
C.
A report listing of all tenants residing in the building, showing name,
apartment number, and telephone number (if available).
A.
A report listing all security deposits collected by the owner from each
tenant and identifying the financial institution in which the security
deposits are held.
B.
A written plan, in sufficient detail for repairs and abatement of
conditions giving rise to the violations. The plan must show the time
periods for commencement and completion of repairs and must identify
contractors engaged by the owner to perform the work described.
C.
Failure to provide any of the required reports shall result in additional
violations being issued for noncooperation with the requirements of this
section with penalties of $500 per day for each day or part thereof that
the owner fails to file the report with the Building Commissioner. This
fine shall be in addition to all other fines imposed.
D.
§ 149-71 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-74
1:418
on its website or through any other means, the names and addresses of
owners classified as chronic offenders.
§ 149-75. Power to act in emergency.
The Commissioner of Buildings shall issue an order directing the owner of a
multiple dwelling classified as having a chronic history of violations to take
necessary action to abate any hazardous or dangerous conditions within 24
hours. If the owner fails to take such action within the time period specified,
the Commissioner may proceed to take the steps necessary to abate the
danger or hazard, and the expense of such abatement plus a service charge
of 50% of the expense shall be charged to the owner and recoverable by
action of the Corporation Counsel.
§ 149-76. Premises unfit for human habitation.
§ 149-77. Amnesty period.
The owner of a multiple dwelling that presently falls within the definition
of having a chronic history of violations may file an application and a plan
with the Commissioner of Buildings to bring the building in compliance with
the City Code. The application must be filed within six months of the date of
The Commissioner of Buildings may order a building classified as
having a chronic history of violations unfit for human habitation
pursuant to this chapter and further order that the same be vacated
immediately.
A.
In such case, the Commissioner shall, pursuant to § 7-109 of the
General Obligations Law, request the commencement of a proceeding
or action by the New York State Attorney General to have a court of
competent jurisdiction direct the financial institution(s) holding tenant
security deposits of the building so classified to hold the same pending
the outcome of the City's actions against the owner for the violations
set forth herein.
B.
Tenants may bring legal action for damages against an owner classified
as a chronic violator for constructive eviction as a result of unabated
chronic violations.
C.
Tenants may bring legal action for damages and injunctive relief
against an owner classified as a chronic offender for harassment and
retaliation for tenants pursuant to relevant state statutes.
D.
The classification of a dwelling with a chronic history of violations
shall be assertable as an affirmative defense, i.e., constructive eviction,
against any action brought by the landlord for possession of the
premises for nonpayment of rent.
E.
A tenant's choosing to bring civil action under this section is in addition
to any other remedies available and shall not be construed as an
election or waiver of the tenant's right to pursue any other remedies.
F.
§ 149-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-77
1:419
enactment of this chapter and a certification from the Building Department
that repairs are completed within six months of the application (which time
period may be extended by the Commissioner of Buildings in his discretion).
All fines and penalties shall be waived if the owner timely makes application
and otherwise fulfills the requirements of this section.
§ 149-78. Reports to City Council.
The Commissioner of Buildings shall file a report with the City Council each
month. Such report shall set forth, in detail, the actions taken with respect
to each building that was classified as having a chronic history of violations
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 149-77 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 149-78
1:420
Chapter 153
HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
§ 153-1. Hydrants to be kept closed.
The Superintendent of the Board of Water Supply of the City of Mount
Vernon shall cause all water supply hydrants to be kept closed. Except in
case of fire and for purposes of extinguishing same, or when otherwise
authorized by law, it shall be unlawful to take or use the water from any
such hydrant.
§ 153-2. Permit required for use; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the Board
of Water Supply, Department of Public Works or the Fire or Police
Departments acting in an official capacity, to open, use, operate or tamper
with a fire hydrant in the City or a valve in the water supply system of the
City without a permit in writing from the Superintendent of Water. Said
Superintendent shall charge a permit fee of $30 for each month or part
thereof for which the permit has been issued, and said Superintendent shall
require the posting with him of a deposit of $100 per hydrant covered by the
permit to offset any possible damage to the hydrant. It shall also be unlawful
to use such hydrant for a longer period than shall be limited in the permit
or to use water for other purposes than shall have been authorized by such
Superintendent.
§ 153-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-18-2006, approved
7-18-2006]
Any person who shall violate or refuse or neglect to comply with any
provision of § 153-2 shall, upon conviction thereof; be punished by a fine of
not more than $300 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both;
and any such person shall also, for each offense, be subject to the payment
of a penalty in the sum of $50, to be recovered in a civil action brought in
the name of the Board of Water Supply.
Chapter 155
INSURANCE
§ 149-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:421

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance
[Adopted 11-26-1980 by L.L. No. 12-1980, approved 12-12-1980]
§ 155-1. Conditions for claiming against policy. [Amended
10-26-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983, approved 11-10-1983]
Any resolution or ordinance hereinafter adopted by the City Council
pursuant to General Municipal Law § 22 for the purpose of claiming against
fire insurance policy proceeds for liens for taxes, special ad valorem levies,
special assessments and municipal charges shall be subject to the condition
that the City shall release or return to the insured any amounts to which it
would otherwise be entitled to claim, provided that the insured agrees with
the City, in writing, to restore the affected premises to the same or improved
condition that it was in prior to the time that the City's lien against proceeds
as provided in General Municipal Law § 22 arose, subject to conditions
such resolution or ordinance shall provide to guarantee performance of
such obligation, including, but not limited to, an agreement to deposit
such proceeds in an escrow account or that the insured shall obtain a
performance bond.
§ 155-2. When effective.
This article shall take effect pursuant to § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:423
Chapter 156
ITEM PRICING
§ 156-1. Legislative findings and intent.
The City Council finds that the failure of the State Legislature to extend
the state item pricing law has left consumers without assurance that they
will be able to easily ascertain prices of basic consumer necessities such as
groceries, paper goods, detergents and health and beauty aids. Item pricing
is uniquely useful in comparison shopping within a store, in keeping track
of the total cost of items being purchased, and in discovering erroneous
charges at the cash register. The City Council finds, therefore, that the
City's Code must be amended to add a new chapter on item pricing.
§ 156-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of
this chapter:
ADVERTISED PRICE — The price of a stockkeeping unit which a retail store
has caused to be disseminated by means of promotional methods such as an
in-store sign or newspaper, circular, television or radio advertising.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED CHECKOUT SYSTEM — Any electronic device,
computer system or machine which indicates the selling price of a
stockkeeping item by interpreting its universal product code, or an in-house
product code, or by use of its price lookup function.
CONSUMER — A purchaser of consumer goods.
CONSUMER GOODS — Goods which are primarily for personal, household
or family purposes.
DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE — Any false, falsely disparaging or
misleading oral or written statement, visual description or other
representation of any kind made in connection with the sale or in
connection with the offering for sale of consumer goods which has the
capacity, tendency or effect of deceiving or misleading consumers.
"Deceptive trade practices" include, but are not limited to:
Representations that consumer goods have sponsorship, accessories,
characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits or quantities that they do
not have; the supplier has a sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation or
connection that he or she does not have; consumer goods are original
or new if they are deteriorated, altered, reconditioned, reclaimed or
secondhand; or consumer goods are of a particular standard, quality,
grade, style or model, if they are of another.
A.
The use, in any oral or written representation, of exaggeration,
innuendo or ambiguity as to a material fact or failure to state a material
fact if such use deceives or tends to deceive.
B.
§ 155-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 156-2
1:424
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Office of Consumer Protection of the City
of Mount Vernon.
INSPECTOR — The Director of the Office of Consumer Protection of the City
of Mount Vernon or his or her designee.
ITEM PRICE — The tag, stamp or mark affixed to a stockkeeping item which
sets forth, in Arabic numerals, the retail price thereof.
PRICE LOOKUP FUNCTION — The capability of any checkout system to
determine the retail price of a stockkeeping item by way of the manual entry
into the system of a code number assigned to that particular stockkeeping
unit by the retail store or by way of the checkout operator's consultation of
a file maintained at the point of sale.
RETAIL STORE — A store engaged in selling stockkeeping units at retail.
A store which is not open to the general public but is reserved for use by
its members shall come within the provisions of this definition unless the
members must pay a direct fee to the store to qualify for membership and
the store is not required to collect sales tax on transactions with members.
A "retail store" shall not include any store which:
Disparaging the consumer goods or business of another by false or
misleading representations of material facts.
C.
D. Offering consumer goods with intent not to sell them as offered.
Offering consumer goods with intent not to supply reasonable
expectable public demand, unless the offer discloses a limitation of
quantity.
E.
Making false or misleading representations of fact concerning the
reasons for, existence of or amounts of price reductions, or price in
comparison to prices of competitors or one's own price at a past or
future time.
F.
Falsely stating the reasons for offering or supplying consumer goods at
scale discount prices.
G.
Has as its only full-time employee the owner thereof or the parent,
spouse or child of the owner and, in addition thereto, not more than two
full-time employees;
A.
Had annual gross sales of stockkeeping items in the previous calendar
year of less than $1,000,000, unless the retail store is part of a network
of subsidiaries, affiliates or other member stores, under direct or
indirect common control which, as a group, had annual gross sales
of stockkeeping items in the previous calendar year of $1,000,000 or
more; or
B.
Engages primarily in the sale of food for consumption on the premises
or in a specialty trade which the Director determines, by rule, would be
inappropriate for item pricing.
C.
§ 156-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-2
1:425
SHELF PRICE — The tag or sign placed at each point of display of a
stockkeeping unit which clearly sets forth the retail price of the
stockkeeping items within that stockkeeping unit.
STOCKKEEPING ITEM — Each individual item of a stockkeeping unit
offered for sale. This shall include two or more pieces packaged for sale
together.
STOCKKEEPING UNIT (KNOWN IN THE INDUSTRY AS "SKU") — Each
group of items offered for sale of the same brand name, quantity of
contents, retail price and variety within the following categories:
§ 156-3. Item pricing required.
§ 156-4. Exemptions.
The following stockkeeping items need not be item priced as provided in
§ 156-3 of this chapter, provided that a shelf price and a price lookup
function are maintained for such stockkeeping items:
Food, including all material, solid, liquid or mixed, whether simple
or compound, used or intended for consumption by human beings or
domestic animals normally kept as household pets and all substances
or ingredients to be added thereto for any purpose.
A.
Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, paper toweling and any
disposable wrapping or container for the storage, handling, serving or
disposal of food.
B.
C. Detergents, soaps and other cleansing agents.
Nonprescription drugs, feminine hygiene products and health and
beauty aids.
D.
Except as may be otherwise prescribed by state or federal law or as
provided in § 156-4 of this chapter, every person, firm, partnership,
corporation or association which sells, offers for sale or exposes for sale
in a retail store a stockkeeping unit shall disclose to the consumer the
item price of each stockkeeping item by causing the item price to be
conspicuously, clearly and plainly marked, stamped, tagged or affixed
thereto.
A.
All stockkeeping items sold by a retail store, upon which stockkeeping
units the retail store is required to collect a sales tax from any taxing
authority, shall be clearly marked immediately after the item price
indicating the stockkeeping item as being taxable.
B.
A. Milk.
Stockkeeping items which are under three cubic inches in size and
weigh less than three ounces and are priced under $1.
B.
C. Eggs.
§ 156-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 156-4
1:426
§ 156-5. Scanner accuracy.
In a retail store with a laser scanning or other computer-assisted checkout
system, an inspector shall be permitted to compare the disclosed retail
price of any one stockkeeping item within any stockkeeping unit sold in the
retail store, whether or not exempt under § 156-4 of this chapter, not to
exceed 500 stockkeeping items at any one inspection, with the programmed
computer price. The retail store shall provide such access to the computer
as is necessary for the inspector to make the determination. The inspector
shall also make note of undercharges on the inspection report. In the event
that the programmed computer price exceeds the lowest price a retail store
is permitted to charge for a stockkeeping item under § 156-6 of this chapter,
this shall be deemed a deceptive trade practice under this chapter.
§ 156-6. Price accuracy.
No retail store shall charge a retail price for any stockkeeping item,
whether or not exempt under § 156-4 of this chapter, which exceeds the
lower of any item, shelf, sale or advertised price of such stockkeeping item.
§ 156-7. Cash register tape.
Any retail store which utilizes a computer-assisted checkout system or cash
register to compute the total sales price of stockkeeping items shall deliver
D. Fresh produce not packaged for final retail sale.
E. Products sold through a vending machine.
F. Food sold for consumption on the premises.
Snack foods such as cakes, gum, candies, chips and nuts offered for sale
in single packages and weighing five ounces or less.
G.
H. Cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and tobacco products.
I. Food offered for sale in bulk.
J. Frozen juice.
K. Ice cream.
L. Frozen foods packaged for final retail sale in plastic bags.
Stockkeeping items on sale for one week or less, where such
stockkeeping items are not otherwise item priced, are located in a
segregated display at the end of an aisle and the sale period, the name
of the product and the advertised price are clearly and conspicuously
posted on a sign at the point of display. Failure to display this
information shall be deemed a deceptive trade practice under this
chapter.
M.
N. Baby food packaged in jars.
§ 156-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-7
1:427
to the consumer a legible tape accurately displaying the item price of all
stockkeeping items sold to the consumer, any sales tax thereon and the total
sales price of said items.
§ 156-8. Enforcement; penalties.
Upon the request of an inspector, the retail store representative shall
afford the inspector access to the test mode of the checkout system in
use at that retail store or to a comparable function of such system and
to the retail price information contained in a price lookup function. No
more than one inspection shall be conducted in any twenty-four-hour
period.
A.
The Director may, upon due notice, hold hearings to determine whether
violations of the provisions of this chapter have occurred. Such notice
shall contain a concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged
violation and shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing.
Upon a finding of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
Director shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty as follows:
[Amended 3-11-2009, approved 3-12-2009]
Upon a first inspection, up to $50 for the first 20 violations and up
to $75 for the 21st and successive violations, total violations not to
exceed $4,000.
(1)
Upon a second or subsequent inspection within a two-week period,
up to $100 an item, total violations issued not to exceed $10,000.
(2)
B.
Each failure to comply with § 156-3 of this chapter with respect to any
one stockkeeping unit shall constitute a separate violation; provided,
however, that no violation shall be found where less than five
stockkeeping items of a particular stockkeeping unit lack clearly
readable item prices. Following an initial inspection, each inspection
that finds a continuing violation with respect to a particular
stockkeeping unit cited within the previous 14 days shall constitute a
separate continued violation.
C.
Upon a finding by the Director of repeated, multiple or persistent
violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule promulgated
thereunder, the City may, except as hereinafter provided, bring an
action to compel the defendant or defendants in such action to pay
in court all moneys, property or other things, or proceeds thereof,
received as a result of such violations; to direct that the amount of
money or the property or other things recovered be paid into an
account established pursuant to § 2601 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules from which shall be paid over to any and all persons who
purchased the consumer goods during the period of violation such
sum as was paid by them in a transaction involving the prohibited
acts or practices, plus any costs incurred by such claimants in making
and pursuing their complaints, provided that, if such claims exceed
the sum recovered into the account, the awards to consumers shall
D.
§ 156-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 156-8
1:428
§ 156-9. Settlements.
be prorated according to the value of each claim proved; to direct
the defendant or defendants, upon conviction, to pay to the City the
costs and disbursements of the action and pay to the City for the
use of the Director the costs of his or her investigation leading to
the judgment; or if not recovered from defendants, such costs are to
be deducted by the City from the grand recovery before distribution
to the consumers; and to direct that any money, property or other
things in the account and unclaimed by any persons with such claims
within one year from creation of the account be paid to the City, to be
used by the Director for further consumer law enforcement activities.
Consumers making claims against an account established pursuant to
this subsection shall prove their claims to the Director in a manner
and subject to procedures established by the Director for that purpose.
The procedures established in each case for proving claims shall not
be employed until approved by the court, which shall also establish by
order the minimum means by which the Director shall notify potential
claimants of the creation of the account. Restitution pursuant to a
judgment in an action under this subsection shall bar that portion of
the recovery of any damages in any other action against the same
defendant or defendants on account of the same acts or practices which
were the basis for such judgment, up to the time of the judgment,
by any person to whom such restitution is made. Restitution under
this subsection shall not apply to transactions entered into more than
five years prior to commencement of an action by the Director. Before
instituting an action under this subsection, the Director shall give
the prospective defendant written notice of the possible action and
an opportunity to demonstrate, in writing, within five days, that no
repeated, multiple or persistent violations have occurred.
Whenever any retail store has engaged in any acts or practice which
constitute violations of any provision of this chapter or of any rule
promulgated thereunder, the City may make application to the Supreme
Court for an order enjoining such acts or practices and for an order
granting a temporary or permanent injunction, restraining order or
other order enjoining such acts or practices.
E.
To establish a cause of action under this section it need not be shown
that consumers are being or were actually injured.
F.
In lieu of instituting or continuing an action pursuant to this chapter,
the Director may accept written assurance of discontinuance of any
act or practice in violation of this chapter from the retail store which
has engaged in such acts or practices. Such assurance may include
a stipulation for voluntary payment by the violator of the costs of
investigation by the Director and may also include a stipulation for the
restitution by the violator to consumers, of money, property or other
things received from them in connection with a violation of this chapter,
including money necessarily expended in the course of making and
A.
§ 156-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-9
1:429
§ 156-10. Item price waiver. [Amended 5-11-2011, approved
5-12-2011]
pursuing a complaint to the Director. All settlements shall be made
a matter of public record. If such stipulation applies to consumers
who have been affected by the violator's practices but have not yet
complained to the Director, the assurance must be approved by the
court, which shall direct the minimum means by which potential
claimants shall be notified of the stipulation. A consumer need not
accept restitution pursuant to such a stipulation; his or her acceptance
shall bar recovery of any other damages in any action by him or her
against the defendant or defendants on account of the same acts or
practices.
Violation of an assurance entered into pursuant to this section shall
be treated as a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all the
penalties provided therefor.
B.
Every retail store which uses a computer-assisted checkout system and
which would otherwise be required to price mark each item as provided
in § 156-3 above may make an application, in writing, to the Office of
Consumer Protection for a waiver of the item pricing requirement. A
separate application shall be required for each qualified retail store.
Each application shall be subject to a nonrefundable waiver fee based
upon the square footage of the retail area of each store as set according
to the following schedule:
Store's Retail Area
(square feet) Waiver Fee
Under 3,000 $750
Between 3,001 and 10,000 $1,500
Between 10,001 and 30,000 $4,000
Between 30,001 and 90,000 $7,000
Over 90,000 $17,500
A.
Upon receipt of an application and fee as provided in Subsection A
above, the Office of Consumer Protection shall cause to be conducted a
scanner count, location and accuracy inspection of the store for which
the application has been submitted. At stores with a retail area in
excess of 10,000 square feet, a minimum of 100 stockkeeping units
shall be checked at inspection. At stores with a retail area of 10,000
square feet or less, a minimum of 50 stockkeeping units shall be
checked. If the number of stockkeeping units found to be in violation
does not exceed 2% of those stockkeeping units inspected, the
Department shall grant to the applicant a one-year revocable waiver
from the item pricing requirement set forth in § 156-3 above.
B.
§ 156-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 156-10
1:430
In the event that total violations in excess of 2% are discovered in
the inspection process, the Department shall not grant a waiver to the
applicant. Such a store may, within 10 business days of being notified of
the failure, request a second inspection. If the number of stockkeeping
units found to be in violation during this second inspection does not
exceed 2% of those stockkeeping units inspected, the Department shall
grant to the applicant a one-year revocable waiver for the item pricing
requirement.
C.
Stores whose waivers are revoked pursuant to Subsection G or stores
which, upon renewal for a waiver, fail the scanner accuracy
inspection(s) twice must comply with item pricing as set forth in § 156-3
within 30 days from the final date of failure. Such a store will be
prohibited from applying for a new waiver for one year from the date of
revocation or second inspection failure.
D.
Waivers shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance,
at which time the waiver shall expire. Stores must reapply annually
for renewal. The waiver fee and inspection shall be required for each
annual renewal application as required for an original waiver
application.
E.
As a condition of the waiver from item pricing, each store must agree
to meet all of the following requirements, and no regular or temporary
waiver shall be granted to a store which has not agreed to these
requirements in writing:
In addition to scanners at the point of sale, the store shall make
available price check scanners to enable consumers to confirm the
price of stockkeeping items. These price check scanners shall be
in locations convenient to consumers with signs of sufficient sized
lettering to identify the units to the consumers. Stores will submit
their proposed sign and device locations to the Sealer for approval.
The number of conveniently located price check scanners shall also
be dependent on the store's retail area:
Store's Retail Area
(square feet) Price Check Scanner
Under 1,500 No price check scanners necessary
but only if an item will be scanned for
the price, upon the request of a
consumer
Under 3,000 1
Between 3,001 and
10,000
2
Between 10,001 and
30,000
3
(1)
F.
§ 156-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-10
1:431
§ 156-11. Promulgation of rules. [Amended 5-11-2011, approved
5-12-2011]
The Director may promulgate such rules as he or she may deem necessary
or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
§ 156-12. Severability. [Amended 5-11-2011, approved 5-12-2011]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 156-13. When effective. [Added 5-11-2011, approved 5-12-2011]
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 157
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 140.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 189.
Abandoned refrigerator — See Ch. 208.
Auto wreckers — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
Store's Retail Area
(square feet) Price Check Scanner
Over 30,001 Minimum of 3 and such additional
price check scanners as the sealer
may deem appropriate; and
Stores must also have a shelf price for each stockkeeping item
which is visible to the consumer and which is located directly under
the item on the shelf on which the item is displayed; or if the
item is not conspicuously visible to the consumer, by a sign or
list conspicuously placed near the point of procurement. Failure to
display the shelf price for a stockkeeping item shall constitute a
violation.
(2)
The Director may revoke a waiver from item pricing for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter;
(2) Deliberate overcharging of any consumer;
(3) Material misrepresentation in the application for a waiver.
G.
§ 156-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 156-13
1:432
ARTICLE I
Junkyards and Junk Shops
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 21 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 157-1. License required.
No person shall keep what are commonly called junk shops, nor collect,
buy or sell, nor be engaged in the business of collecting, buying or selling
within the City, old junk, rags, cloth, paper, paper bagging, old rope, scrap
metals, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, slush, empty bottles, old rubber
products, old cable and wire or any other article whose condition renders
it practically useless for the purpose for which it was made and commonly
intended, without first procuring from the Mayor a license therefor.
§ 157-2. License requirements. [Amended 4-13-1989, approved
4-13-1989]
The Mayor is hereby authorized to grant licenses under his/her hand,
to be sealed with the Corporate Seal and countersigned by the City
Clerk, to such persons as shall procure a recommendation in writing
from the Commissioner of Public Safety, to keep what are commonly
called "junk shops," "junkyards," "waste material handling plants" and
"scrap metal establishments" for the purchase and sale of secondhand
articles described in § 157-1 of this article and to collect such articles.
A.
All applications for licenses shall be made on forms to be provided by
the City Clerk. Said application shall set forth the name, business and
residence addresses of the applicant; the name, business and residence
addresses of the officers and partners if the applicant is a corporation
or partnership. Any changes in residence addresses must be promptly
reported to the City Clerk.
B.
Every applicant for a license should file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as
the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety
shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant,
together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice
Services or other appropriate agency for processing and investigation.
No application for a junkyard or junk dealer shall be approved nor
any license issued under the provisions of this article until after the
commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in the
Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history record information disseminated by the Division of Criminal
Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has
been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit.
C.
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-3
1:433
§ 157-3. Fees and bonds. [Amended 10-11-1989; approved
10-12-1989; 4-24-2002, approved 4-25-2002]
Every person receiving such license shall pay therefor the sum of $150
and shall also give a bond to the City in the penal sum of $5,000 and
fingerprint fees as required by the Division of Criminal Justice Services
and § 126-2.2A of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, conditioned for
the due observance of all ordinances of the City Council and regulations
applicable to the keeping of junk shops, junkyards, scrap metal dealers or
waste material handling plants at any time during the continuance of such
license. No person, partnership or corporation shall be granted a license if
such person or any partner or stockholder or corporate officer thereof shall
have been convicted of the crime of larceny or of knowingly receiving stolen
property.
§ 157-4. Approvals required.
No licenses nor renewals thereof shall be granted by the Mayor unless the
applicant produces a certificate in writing countersigned by the Building
Commissioner, Health Commissioner, Fire Commissioner and Commissioner
of Public Safety approving the application.
§ 157-5. Duration of license.
Every license to keep a junk shop, junkyard, scrap metal establishment or
waste material handling plant shall continue in force until the 30th day
of June next following the granting thereof, unless sooner revoked by the
Mayor or City Council of said City, and no longer.
§ 157-6. Location of business restricted.
Every license granted hereunder shall designate the place in which the
licensee is authorized to carry on such business, and no person shall carry
on such business at any other place than the one designated in such license.
§ 157-7. City location required; exception.
No person shall be licensed to deal in junk or to deal in the articles
described in § 157-1 of this article, or to collect the same in the City,
unless he has a place of business in the City.
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, no
license shall be required of non-City junk or scrap metal dealers,
provided that their operations in the City are confined to collecting
articles described in § 157-1 of this article only from junk shops,
junkyards, waste material handling plants or scrap metal dealers
licensed to carry on their business in the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
§ 157-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 157-8
1:434
§ 157-8. Record of purchases.
Every licensee shall maintain and keep a book in which shall be plainly and
legibly written at the time of every purchase a description of the articles
so purchased, the name and residence of the person or name and business
address of the firm from whom such purchases were made and the day
and hour of such purchase. Such book shall be at all times open to the
inspection of the Mayor, City Councilmen, Commissioner of Public Safety or
any police officer, or any person authorized by any of the aforesaid. Every
such licensee shall also, on purchasing any pig or pigs of metal, bronze or
bronze castings or parts thereof, sprues or gates or parts thereof, copper
wire or brass car journals, cause to be subscribed by the person from whom
purchased a statement as to when, where and from whom he or his principal
obtained such property, also his age, residence by city, village or town, and
the street or number thereof, if any, and otherwise such description as will
reasonably locate the same, his occupation and name of his employer and
place of employment or business, which statement the junk dealer or scrap
metal dealer shall forthwith file in the office of the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
§ 157-9. Purchases from minors prohibited.
No licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall purchase any of the
articles described in § 157-1 of this article from any minor.
§ 157-10. Hours of purchasing.
No licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall purchase any goods or
articles of the kind enumerated in § 157-1 of this article from any person or
persons between the hour of sunset and the hour of 7:00 a.m.
§ 157-11. Identification of purchases.
Every licensee shall, on purchasing any of the articles of property described
in § 157-1 of this article, place and keep each separate purchase in a
separate and distinct pile, bundle or package in the usual place of business
of such junk dealer, scrap metal dealer or waste material dealer without
altering, defacing or taking apart any such article or removing, melting,
cutting or destroying any part of such article for a period of five days
immediately succeeding such purchase.
§ 157-12. Vehicle identification.
Every licensee shall have his name, place of business and the number
corresponding with the number of his license plainly and conspicuously
painted on every vehicle used in his business, in letters and figures of not
less than two inches high.
§ 157-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-13
1:435
§ 157-13. Exhibition of articles on demand.
Every licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall, on demand by the
Mayor, City Councilmen, Commissioner of Public Safety or any police officer
or other person authorized by any of the above named to make such
demand, exhibit to the same any article or thing in his possession.
§ 157-14. Conduct of business in noisy manner.
No licensee shall break iron or other metals on Sunday or before 8:00 a.m.
or after 6:00 p.m. on other days of the week, or otherwise at any time so
conduct his business as to make unusual or improper noises tending to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
§ 157-15. Storage.
§ 157-16. Fencing requirements. [Amended 5-9-1962, approved
5-9-1962]
The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce
the provisions of the foregoing § 157-15B of this article and to regulate the
construction, material, location and height of the fence referred to in said
foregoing § 157-15B, which said fence shall be no less than seven feet in
height and may not be constructed of used or secondhand materials.
§ 157-17. Burning.
The burning of any materials or articles described in § 157-1 of this article
on premises occupied by junk dealers, scrap metal dealers or waste material
handling plants, or by their servants, agents or employees, is prohibited
unless such burning is done within an incinerator, oven or other receptacle
approved in writing as to construction, capacity, smoke and firesafety by
the Chief of the Fire Department, the Health Commissioner and the
Commissioner of Buildings. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as modifying, amending or rescinding the provisions of any City
No licensee shall store or accumulate any of the articles described in
§ 157-1 of this article except in a house, shop or shed or other building,
except that licensee may temporarily accumulate such articles in a yard
at his place of business for a period not to exceed 60 days, provided
that said accumulated articles are at all times covered by a temporary
shed or tarpaulin or otherwise.
A.
If the open yard or open space in which the articles described in
§ 157-1 of this article are accumulated is enclosed by a solid wood or
metal fence or a combination solid wood and metal fence of uniform
size, height and material which sufficiently obscures such accumulated
articles from public view, such licensee need not cover the same with a
temporary shed, tarpaulin or otherwise and there shall be no limitation
on the length of time such articles may be stored in such open yard.
B.
§ 157-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 157-17
1:436
ordinance pertaining to the burning of fires in business and industrial
districts of the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 157-18. Sanitary facilities.
All junkyards, junk shops, scrap metal establishments and waste material
handling plants shall construct and maintain on their premises adequate
sanitary facilities, including a sink with running water and a water closet
or lavatory, and shall keep the said facilities in good repair. Such premises
shall also be kept free at all times from rodents, rubbish, vermin and debris.
§ 157-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-18
1:437

ARTICLE II
Junk Dealers and Solicitors
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 27 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 157-19. License required.
No person shall go about from house to house for the purpose of purchasing
old clothes, gold, silver, jewelry or other articles of personal wear or
ornament without a license therefor granted as hereinafter provided in this
article.
§ 157-20. License requirements. [Amended 4-13-1989, approved
4-13-1989]
The Mayor is hereby authorized to grant licenses under his/her hand, to
be sealed with the Corporate Seal and countersigned by the City Clerk,
to such person or persons as he/she shall deem proper and who shall
have presented to him/her a properly authenticated recommendation
from the Commissioner of Public Safety, to go about from house to
house within the limits of the City for the purpose of purchasing old
clothes, gold, silver, jewelry and other articles of personal wear and
ornament, which licenses shall expire on the first day of June next after
their issue.
A.
All applications for licenses shall be made on forms to be provided by
the City Clerk. Said application shall set forth the name, business and
residence addresses of the applicant; the name, business and residence
addresses of the officers and partners if the applicant is a corporation
or partnership.
B.
Every applicant for a license should file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as
the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety
shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant,
together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice
Services or other appropriate agency for processing and investigation.
No application for a junk dealer or solicitor shall be approved nor
any license issued under the provisions of this article until after the
commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in the
Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history record information disseminated by the Division of Criminal
Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has
been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit.
C.
§ 157-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-21
1:439
§ 157-21. License fee; disposition of fees.
The City Clerk shall collect for each license so issued the sum of $50, and no
license shall be issued for a period less than one year. Such license shall not
be transferred to any other person. Of such sum of $50 so paid to the City
Clerk, the sum of $40 shall be paid over by the Comptroller to the Mount
Vernon Police and Paid Firemen's Pension Fund, and the sum of $10 shall
be paid into the general funds of the City.
§ 157-22. Identification badge.
At the time such license is granted, the City Clerk shall issue to the person
to whom such license is granted an appropriate badge, which shall be worn
and properly displayed by the licensee at all times when engaged in the
business authorized and permitted by such license.
§ 157-21 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 157-22
1:440
Chapter 160
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 160, Jurors' Fees, adopted 5-28-1958, approved
5-29-1958, was repealed at time of adoption of 2013 Code Revisions
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).]
Chapter 162
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
§ 162-1. Odorization required.
§ 162-2. Approval of equipment and systems.
All liquefied petroleum gases shall be effectively odorized by an
approved agent of such character as to indicate positively by distinct
odor the presence of gas down to concentration in air of not over 1/5 the
lower limit of flammability. [NOTE: The lower flammable limits of the
more commonly used liquefied petroleum gases are: propane, 2.15%;
butane, 1.55%. These figures represent volumetric percentages of gas
in gas-air mixtures.]
A.
The odorization requirement of Subsection A shall be considered to
be met by the use of 1.0 pounds of ethyl mercaptan, 1.0 pounds of
thiophane or 1.4 pounds of amyl mercaptan per 10,000 gallons of
liquefied petroleum gas. However, this listing of odorants and
quantities shall not exclude the use of other odorants that meet the
odorization requirements of Subsection A of this section.
B.
Each system utilizing Interstate Commerce Commission containers
shall have its container valves, connectors, manifold valve assemblies
and regulators (bases, hoods or cabinets), if desired, listed by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or listed by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory. [NOTE: Regulations of the United States Interstate
Commerce Commission outline specifications for transportation of
explosives and dangerous articles (Code of Federal Regulations, Title
49, Parts 171 through 190) and are available from the Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C., or from the Association of American
Railroads, Bureau of Explosives, 2 Pennsylvania Plaza, Room 2177, 7th
Avenue and West 33rd Street, New York, New York, or the American
Trucking Association, Inc., 1616 P Street, Washington, D.C. In Canada,
the regulations of the Board of Transport Commissioners for Canada
apply and are available from BTC, Union Station, Ottawa, Ontario.]
A.
§ 157-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-2
1:441
§ 162-3. Welding on containers.
§ 162-4. Marking of containers.
Each system for domestic or commercial use utilizing containers of
2,000 gallons' or less water capacity, other than those constructed in
accordance with Interstate Commerce Commission specifications, shall
consist of a container assembly and one or more regulators and may
include other parts. The system as a unit or the container assembly
as a unit and the regulator or regulators shall be individually listed by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or listed by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory. (NOTE: Where necessary to alter or to repair such
listed system in the field in order to provide for different operating
pressures, change from vapor to liquid withdrawal and the like, such
changes may be made by use of component parts which have been
individually listed by one of the above for use with liquefied petroleum
gas.)
B.
In systems utilizing containers of over 2,000 gallons' water capacity,
each regulator, container, valve, excess flow valve, gauging device and
relief valve installed on or at the container shall have its correctness
as to design, construction and performance determined by listing by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or listing by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory.
C.
Welding to the shell, head or any part of the container subject to
internal pressure shall be done in compliance with the code under
which the tank was fabricated. Other welding is permitted only on
saddle plates, lugs or brackets attached to the container by the tank
manufacturer.
A.
Where repair or modification involving welding of Interstate Commerce
Commission containers is required, the container shall be returned
to a qualified manufacturer making containers of the same type, and
the repair or modification shall be made in compliance with Interstate
Commerce Commission regulations. [NOTE: Regulations of the United
States Interstate Commerce Commission outline specifications for
transportation of explosives and dangerous articles (Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171 through 190) and are available from the
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., or from the Association
of American Railroads, Bureau of Explosives, 2 Pennsylvania Plaza,
Room 2177, 7th Avenue and West 33rd Street, New York, New York,
or the American Trucking Association, Inc., 1616 P Street, Washington,
D.C. In Canada, the regulations of the Board of Transport
Commissioners for Canada apply and are available from BTC, Union
Station, Ottawa, Ontario.]
B.
Each container shall be marked as specified in the following:
With a marking identifying compliance with and other markings
required by the rules of the code under which the container is
(1)
A.
§ 162-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 162-4
1:442
§ 162-5. Location of containers and regulating equipment.
constructed or with the stamp and other markings required by the
National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors.
With a notation as to whether the container is designed for
underground or aboveground installation, or both. If intended for
both and different style hoods are provided, the marking shall
indicate the proper hood for each type of installation.
(2)
With the name and address of the supplier of the container or with
the trade name of the container.
(3)
With the water capacity of the container in pounds or gallons,
United States standard.
(4)
With the pressure in pounds per square inch gauge for which the
container is designed.
(5)
With the rare weight in pounds or other identified unit of weight
for containers with a water capacity of 300 pounds or less.
(6)
With marking indicating the maximum level to which the container
may be filled with liquid at temperatures between 20° F. and 130°
F., except on containers provided with fixed maximum level
indicators or which are filled by weighing. Markings shall be in
increments of not more than 20° F. This marking may be located on
a liquid level gauging device.
(7)
(8) With the outside surface area in square feet.
Markings specified shall be on a metal nameplate attached to the
container and located in such a manner as to remain visible.
B.
When liquefied petroleum gas and one or more other gases are stored
or used in the same area, the containers shall be in compliance with
U.S.A. Standard Z48.1-1954, Method of Marking Portable Compressed
Gas Containers to Identify the Material Contained.
C.
Each individual container shall be located with respect to the nearest
building or group of buildings or lot line of adjoining property which
may be built upon in accordance with Table 1:
A.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-5
1:443
Table 1
Minimum Distances
Water Capacity
per Container
(gallons)
Underground
Containers
(feet)
Aboveground
Containers
(feet)
Between
Aboveground
Containers
(feet)
Less than 125 10 None None
125 to 250 10 10 None
251 to 500 10 10 3
501 to 2,000 25 25 3
2,001 to 30,000 50 50 5
30,001 to 70,000 50 75 1/4 of sum of
diameters
70,001 to 90,000 50 100 Adjacent
containers
If the aggregate water capacity of a multicontainer installation at
a consumer site is 501 gallons or greater, the minimum distance
shall comply with the appropriate portion of this table, applying the
aggregate capacity rather than the capacity per container. If more
than one installation is made, each installation shall be separated from
another installation by at least 25 feet. Do not apply the minimum
distances between aboveground containers to such installations.
[NOTE: The above distance requirements may be reduced to not less
than 10 feet for a single container of 1,200 gallons' water capacity or
less, provided that such a container is at least 25 feet from any other
liquefied petroleum gas container of more than 125 gallons' water
capacity.]
B. Containers installed for use shall not be stacked one above the other.
In cases of bulk storage in heavily populated or congested areas, the
authority having jurisdiction shall determine restrictions of individual
tank capacity, total storage and distance to line of adjoining property
which may be built upon and other reasonable protective methods.
[NOTE: Generally, aggregate storage of 2,000 gallons' water capacity
or more is considered bulk storage.]
C.
In industrial installations involving containers of 180,000 gallons'
aggregate water capacity or more, where serious mutual exposures
between the container and adjacent properties prevail, the authority
having jurisdiction may require fire walls or other means of special
protection designed and constructed in accordance with good
engineering practices.
D.
In the case of buildings devoted exclusively to gas manufacturing and
distributing operations, the above distances may be reduced, provided
E.
§ 162-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 162-5
1:444
Chapter 164
MEMORIAL DAY OBSERVANCE
§ 164-1. Restriction of activities.
The legal holiday known as "Memorial Day" being by general consent,
custom and tradition set apart for rest, repose and patriotic observances
and uses, and the observance thereof being for the solemn tribute by the
community to our honored war dead, the doing of certain acts hereinafter
specified, which are deemed serious interruptions and desecrations of this
holiday, is prohibited.
§ 164-2. Prohibited acts. [Amended 5-27-1970, approved 5-28-1970]
All labor, manufactures and trades on such holiday are prohibited between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon excepting the works of necessity
and charity, which include whatever is needful during the holiday for the
good order, health or comfort of the community and which are performed
in orderly manner so as not to interfere with the rest, repose and patriotic
observances of the community. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to prohibit public or private sports, exercises, games, recreation, concerts,
dances, shows, entertainments or performances, nor any necessary labor
involved in such activities.
§ 164-3. Sales restricted. [Amended 5-27-1970, approved
5-28-1970]
that in no case shall containers of a water capacity exceeding 500
gallons be located closer than 10 feet to such gas manufacturing and
distributing buildings.
Readily ignitable material, such as weeds and long dry grass, shall be
removed within 10 feet of any container.
F.
The minimum separation between liquefied petroleum gas containers
and flammable liquid tanks shall be 20 feet, and the minimum
separation between a container and the center line of the dike shall
be 10 feet. The foregoing provision shall not apply when liquefied
petroleum gas containers of 125 gallons' or less capacity are installed
adjacent to Class III flammable liquid tanks of 275 gallons' or less
capacity.
G.
Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of
flammable liquids under adjacent liquefied petroleum gas containers,
such as by diking, diversion curbs or grading.
H.
When dikes are used with flammable liquid tanks, no liquefied
petroleum gas containers shall be located within the diked area.
I.
§ 162-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-3
1:445
§ 164-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of the prohibition herein specified is an offense punishable by
a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $25 or by imprisonment not
exceeding five days, or by both; but for a second or other offense where the
party shall have been previously convicted, it shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $25 and not more than $50 or by imprisonment of not less
than five nor more than 20 days, or both.
Chapter 165
MINIBIKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 92. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property upon
such holidays is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon except as follows:
Meals may be sold to be eaten on the premises where sold at any
time of the day.
(1)
(2) Caterers may serve meals to their patrons at any time of the day.
Prepared tobacco, bread, milk, dairy products, eggs, ice, soda
water, ice cream, fruit, cooked and prepared foods, flowers,
confectionery, newspapers, magazines, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs,
medicine and surgical instruments may be sold and may be
delivered at any time of the day.
(3)
A.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to allow or permit
the public sale or exposing for sale or delivery of uncooked fresh foods
or meats, fresh or salt, at any hour or time of the day; nor shall the
provisions of this section be construed to prevent or prohibit the sale
of beverages not expressly prohibited by law or by rules adopted by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
B.
§ 164-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 164-4
1:446
ARTICLE I
Operation on Memorial Field Track
[Adopted 7-22-1970, approved 7-23-1970]
§ 165-1. Permitted times.
The Recreation Department is hereby authorized to permit children to
operate privately owned, gasoline-powered, minibikes, on the track area of
Memorial Field on Sundays, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon.
§ 165-2. Racing prohibited.
The foregoing permission shall not be construed to permit minibike racing
in any manner.
§ 165-3. Operation to coincide with other activity.
The aforesaid activity will be coordinated and coincide with any other use
of said Memorial Field.
§ 165-4. Supervision by Department of Recreation.
The aforesaid activity shall be under the supervision of the Department of
Recreation.
§ 165-5. Restrictions.
The foregoing permission is granted upon the following conditions:
No minibike shall be permitted to be brought on to Memorial Field
unless the operator shall be accompanied by and attended by a parent
or guardian or other responsible adult.
A.
No minibike shall be permitted to be operated on the Memorial Field
track, unless such minibike has been first inspected and approved by
the representative of the Recreation Department and the tires found to
be in good condition, the engine free of gasoline leakage and the unit
equipped with a proper muffler device.
B.
No child shall be allowed to operate any minibike unless the parent
or guardian of such child shall have executed, acknowledged and
delivered to the office of the Department of Recreation a waiver, on a
form approved by the Corporation Counsel of the City of Mount Vernon,
absolving said City of Mount Vernon and its officers, employees and
representatives from responsibility and liability in the event of accident
resulting in personal injury or property damage.
C.
The minibikes shall be restricted at all times to a reasonable speed and
their operation limited to the track area only of Memorial Field.
D.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:447
Operators of minibikes shall at all times be required to observe all
safety rules and the rules and regulations of the Department of
Recreation.
E.
§ 165-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 165-5
1:448
Chapter 167
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 167, Motion-Picture Operators, adopted 11-13-1987 as
Ch. 23 of the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon
and approved 11-15-1957, as amended, was repealed 12-23-1987,
approved 12-24-1987.]
Chapter 170
MUNICIPAL FIELDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Baseball games on Sunday — See Ch. 84, Art.
III.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 186.
Department of Recreation — See Charter, Art.
VIII-A.
§ 165-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:449

ARTICLE I
Fees for Use of Hutchinson Field
[Adopted 11-13-1957, approved 11-15-1957]
§ 170-1. Fees established. [Amended 7-25-1962, approved
7-26-1962; 3-10-1965, approved 3-11-1965]
§ 170-1.1. Insurance. [Added 6-24-1992, approved 6-25-1992]
For purposes of this article "day" is defined as being between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., "night" is defined as being between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. The following per field fees shall
be charged for the use of Hutchinson Field, except amateur events
sponsored and promoted by the Recreation Department: [Amended
6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991; 5-22-1996, approved 5-23-1996;
3-23-2005, approved 3-24-2005]
Day softball: $25 per hour. Day baseball: $200 for four hours; $65
per hour thereafter.
(1)
Night softball: $95 for two hours. Night baseball: $120 for two
hours.
(2)
Day softball: $25 per hour from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Day baseball:
$50 per hour from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(3)
Tournament softball:
(a) Day: $250 per field;
(b) Night: $350 per field.
(4)
A.
Special rentals may be granted by the Recreation Board, subject to
approval by the City Council.
B.
Closing hours. [Added 6-26-1981, approved 6-26-1981; amended
6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
It shall be unlawful to loiter or remain in Hutchinson Field between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. without the prior special
permission of the Commissioner of Recreation.
(1)
The Commissioner of Recreation is hereby authorized and directed
to install at each entranceway a chain or gate which may be
secured during the hours Hutchinson Field shall be closed and post
at each said entranceway a sign stating clearly and legibly: FIELD
CLOSED 11:00 p.m. — 7:30 a.m.
(2)
C.
No permit shall be issued by the Commissioner of Recreation for the
use of Hutchinson Field until the applicant shall have first agreed to
indemnify and hold the City of Mount Vernon harmless from any and all
claims arising from the applicant's use of the aforesaid field, and the
A.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1.1
1:451
applicant shall agree to compensate the City for any damage done by
reason of the applicant's use of the aforesaid field.
No permit for use of Hutchinson Field shall be issued, except as
hereinafter provided, until the applicant shall have first placed on file
with the Commissioner of Recreation a public liability insurance policy,
indicating combined single limit bodily injury and property damage
coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for each occurrence, said
coverage including the City of Mount Vernon as an additional named
insured.
B.
§ 170-1.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-1.1
1:452
ARTICLE II
Memorial Field
[Adopted 11-13-1957, approved 11-15-1957; amended in its entirety
11-10-1976, approved 11-12-1976; amended 4-23-1980, approved
4-24-1980]
§ 170-2. Permit. [Added 4-10-1981, approved 4-13-198162]
No person shall use Memorial Field Stadium, press booth or the picnic areas
at Memorial Field, Brush Park or Hutchinson Field without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Commissioner of Recreation. The provisions of this
article shall not apply to activities sponsored by the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 170-3. Insurance. [Added 4-10-1981, approved 4-13-198163]
§ 170-3.1. Rental fees. [Added 4-10-1981, approved 4-13-198164]
No permit shall be issued by the Commissioner of Recreation for the
use of Memorial Field Stadium or the picnic areas at Brush Park,
Hutchinson Field or Memorial Field until the applicant shall have first
agreed to indemnify and hold the City of Mount Vernon harmless from
any and all claims arising from the applicant's use of the aforesaid
stadium and picnic areas, and the applicant shall agree to compensate
the City for any damage done by reason of the applicant's use of the
aforesaid stadium and areas.
A.
No permit for use of the stadium and picnic areas shall be issued,
except as hereinafter provided, until the applicant shall have first
placed on file with the Commissioner of Recreation a public liability
insurance policy, indicating combined single limit bodily injury and
property damage coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for each
occurrence, said coverage including the City of Mount Vernon as an
additional named insured. [Amended 12-9-1981, approved
12-10-1981; 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
B.
The Commissioner of Recreation shall charge the following fees for
use of Memorial Field Stadium: [Amended 8-12-1981, approved
8-13-1981; 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991; 5-22-1996, approved
5-23-1996; 3-23-2005, approved 3-24-2005]
A.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that former §§ 170-2, Scope, and 170-3, Field
rental fees, be replaced by the additions of new §§ 170-2, 170-3 and 170-3.1.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that former §§ 170-2, Scope, and 170-3, Field
rental fees, be replaced by the additions of new §§ 170-2, 170-3 and 170-3.1.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that former §§ 170-2, Scope, and 170-3, Field
rental fees, be replaced by the addition of new §§ 170-2, 170-3 and 170-3.1.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.1
1:453
Activity/Time Fee
Day: between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
Night: between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m.
Sporting events
Professional
Day $2,825
Night $3,125
Holiday $3,425
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Semiprofessional
Day $1,875
Night $2,175
Holiday $2,475
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
College and high school (located outside of
City)
Day $1,875
Night $2,175
Holiday $2,475
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Amateur (located in City)
Day $1,150
Night $1,300
Holiday $1,450
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Amateur (located outside of City)
Day $1,250
Night $1,400
Holiday $1,550
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Theatrical events (such as concerts and plays)
Day $1,875
Night $2,175
Holiday $2,475
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
§ 170-3.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-3.1
1:454
Activity/Time Fee
Lectures, meetings and rallies
Day $1,280
Night $1,430
Holiday $1,580
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Specialty shows (animal shows, bazaars,
business shows, merchandise shows,
circuses, antique shows, expositions, horse
shows, dog shows, flea markets)
Day $2,825
Night $3,125
Holiday $3,425
Additional night-rate fee for lights $1,600
Press booth. The Commissioner of Recreation shall charge the following
additional fees for the use of the press booth at Memorial Field
Stadium: [Amended 10-29-1981, approved 10-30-1981]
(1) The Mount Vernon Board of Education shall be charged $60.
Any other person or group shall be charged $125. [Amended
6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
(2)
B.
Picnic areas at Memorial Field, Brush Park and Hutchinson Field.
The following fees shall be charged by the Commissioner of
Recreation for use of the aforesaid picnic areas in accordance with
the following: [Amended 8-11-1993, approved 8-12-1993]
Number of People Fee
50 or fewer $50
Over 50 $75
(1)
The provisions of § 170-3B shall not apply to use of the aforesaid
picnic areas by less than 50 persons.
(2)
C.
Special rentals. The Commissioner of Recreation may set special rental
fees subject to the approval of the City Council, based on the following
factors:
(1) Size of activity.
(2) Duration of activity.
Organization sponsoring activity, such as charitable, not-for-profit,
religious, governmental.
(3)
D.
§ 170-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.1
1:455
§ 170-4. Tennis courts.
(4) Entrance fees, charged by permit holder for such activity.
Special rentals with promoters. [Added 6-12-1991, approved
6-13-199165]
The Commissioner of Recreation may set special rental fees for
special events with promoters subject to the approval of the City
Council based on the following factors:
(a) Size of activity.
(b) Duration of activity.
Organization sponsoring activity, such as charitable, not-forprofit,
religious, governmental.
(c)
(d) Entrance fees charged by permit holder for such activity.
(1)
All promoters will be assessed a nonrefundable application
processing fee of $50, which shall cover the cost of:
(a) Reference checks of promoters.
(b) Sponsorship guaranty.
(c) Confirmation of artist commitment.
Organization of the proposed event with the Department of
Public Safety regarding manpower and salaries.
(d)
(2)
For any event in which the crowd capacity exceeds 1,500,
promoters shall be assessed a special rate to be determined by the
Commissioner of Recreation.
(3)
E.
Parking lots at Memorial Field, Brush Park and Hutchinson Field.
[Added 1-8-1986, approved 1-9-1986]
The Commissioner of Recreation may issue permits for the use of
parking spaces in the parking lots at the aforesaid municipal fields.
(1)
The Commissioner of Recreation shall charge $16 per month for
each parking space.
(2)
(3) Permits are not transferable.
Permittees shall use only the parking spaces designated by the
Commissioner of Recreation for permit parking and shall use such
parking spaces at their own risk.
(4)
F.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E to become
Subsection F.
§ 170-3.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-4
1:456
Tennis courts under the jurisdiction of the Recreation Department are
available for legal residents of the City of Mount Vernon or owners of
property within the City of Mount Vernon and nonresidents, subject to
the conditions herein. [Amended 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
A.
All players must purchase a season permit in person and register with
the Department of Recreation, Room 3, Municipal Building, Mount
Vernon.
B.
Residents and City property owners. Adult permits (18 years of age or
older) are $55. Senior citizen permits (60 years of age or older) are $35.
Youth permits (under 18 years of age) are $35. Family permits are $85
(includes mother, father and all children under 18 years of age). Permits
for the disabled are $20. Permits are good for the calendar year issued
and do not include the tennis bubble at Memorial Field. [Amended
4-14-1982, approved 4-15-1982; 5-26-1982, approved 5-27-1982;
6-23-1982, approved 6-24-1982; 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991;
4-26-1995, approved 4-27-1995]
C.
D. Permits are not transferable.
Nonresidents. Adult permits (18 years of age or older) are $115. Senior
citizen permits (60 years of age or older) are $65. Youth permits (under
18 years of age) are $55. Family permits are $190 (includes mother,
father and all children under 18 years of age). Permits for the disabled
are $55. Permits are good for the calendar year issued and do not
include the tennis bubble at Memorial Field. [Amended 6-12-1991,
approved 6-13-1991; 4-26-1995, approved 4-27-1995]
E.
Before using the tennis courts, all players shall first register with the
attendant on duty by displaying a valid permit and providing name,
address and proper identification.
F.
Players not holding a valid season permit may play only as the guest of
a valid permit holder. Guests shall not play without at least one valid
permit holder on the court. All guest fees shall be paid before players
are admitted to courts. Guest fees shall be as follows: $10 per guest.
[Amended 4-26-1995, approved 4-27-1995]
G.
Attendants have been instructed to provide receipts for all fees paid.
Please take and keep your receipt.
H.
Telephone reservations will be accepted two days in advance. Names,
addresses and permit numbers must be given when reservations are
made. [Amended 4-14-1982, approved 4-15-1982]
I.
Reservations will be held only until 10 minutes after the hour
scheduled. In case those who have reserved the court are not present
on the exact hour scheduled, others waiting for courts will be
tentatively allowed to play until 10 minutes past the hour; then if the
scheduled players have not arrived, the tentative players shall pay for
the court and have the use of it for the balance of the hour.
J.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:457
§ 170-5. Regulatory powers.
The Commissioner of Recreation shall have the right to regulate the use of
the field on all matters not covered by these rules and regulations.
§ 170-5.1. Closing hours. [Added 6-26-1981, approved 6-26-1981]
A reservation may not be canceled later than one hour before the
scheduled hour on weekdays and three hours on Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays. Those failing to cancel reservations in accordance with
the foregoing shall thereafter be denied the privilege of making
reservations.
K.
Reservations shall be made for one hour only. If, however, at the close
of one hour of play a court is open, it may be booked by those who have
already played.
L.
M. There shall be no tennis lessons on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
N. There shall be no tennis lessons after 6:00 p.m. on weekdays.
Proper tennis attire must be worn at all times. Only those wearing
smooth, rubber-soled shoes without heels will be allowed to play on the
courts.
O.
Tournaments and leagues. The Commissioner of Recreation shall
charge the following fees for use of the tennis courts. [Added
6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
Activity/Time Fee
Tennis tournaments
Single $20
Doubles $25
Junior vets $15
Seniors $10
Junior boys and girls $8
Tennis leagues
Men's and women's singles, per play $10
Men's and women's doubles, per team $15
P.
Group rates. The group rate for the use of two or more courts, for
persons not holding a season permit, shall be $20 per court per hour.
[Added 4-26-1995, approved 4-27-1995]
Q.
It shall be unlawful to loiter or to remain in Memorial Field between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the prior special permission
of the Commissioner of Recreation.
A.
§ 170-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-5.1
1:458
The Commissioner of Recreation is hereby authorized and directed to
install at each entranceway a chain or gate which may be secured
during the hours Memorial Field shall be closed and post at each said
entranceway a sign stating clearly and legibly: FIELD CLOSED — 10:00
p.m. — 6:00 a.m.
B.
§ 170-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5.1
1:459

ARTICLE III
Doles Community Center
[Adopted 4-23-1980, approved 4-24-1980; amended in its entirety
2-11-1981, approved 2-13-1981]
§ 170-6. Purpose.
The facilities of the Doles Community Center shall be available to
individuals and organizations for charitable, educational, cultural and civic
purposes.
§ 170-7. Rental fees.
Rental fees for workshops, meetings, etc., based on a weekly or monthly
session, shall be as follows (minimum rental of three hours):
For groups interested in renting a meeting room for a once-a-month
meeting: $10 for three hours.
(1)
For groups interested in space on a more frequent basis, e.g., twice
a week or more than three times a month: $10 for each three-hour
session.
(2)
(3) An additional $10 for each additional hour over three hours.
A.
Theater. Rental fees for the theater shall be as follows: [Amended
6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
(1) Three-hour minimum: $300.
(2) Seventy-five dollars for each additional hour over three hours.
B.
Kitchen rental shall be as follows: [Amended 2-24-1993, approved
2-25-1993]
(1) Four-hour minimum: $125.
(2) Forty dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
C.
Rental fees for the youth and activities room shall be as follows:
(1) Four-hour minimum: $75.
(2) Fifty dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
D.
Senior room. Rental fees for the senior room shall be as follows:
[Added 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991; amended 2-24-1993,
approved 2-25-1993]
(1) Four-hour minimum: $150.
(2) Thirty dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
E.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7
1:461
§ 170-8. Permit required; exceptions.
No individual or organization shall use the Center without a permit issued
by the Commissioner of Recreation. This section shall not apply to events
sponsored by the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 170-9. Insurance.
Theater and senior room combined. Rental fees for the combined use
of the theater and senior room shall be as follows: [Added 6-12-1991,
approved 6-13-1991; amended 2-24-1993, approved 2-25-1993]
(1) Four-hour minimum: $500.
(2) One hundred dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
F.
Theater, senior room and kitchen combined. Rental fees for the
combined use of the theater, senior room and kitchen shall be as
follows: [Added 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991; amended
2-24-1993, approved 2-25-1993]
(1) Four-hour minimum: $500.
(2) One hundred dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
G.
Senior room and kitchen combined. Rental fees for the combined use
of the senior room and kitchen shall be as follows: [Added 2-24-1993,
approved 2-25-1993]
(1) Four-hour minimum: $200.
(2) Thirty dollars for each additional hour over four hours.
H.
No permit shall be issued by the Commissioner of Recreation until
the applicant shall have first agreed to indemnify and hold the City
of Mount Vernon harmless from any and all claims arising from the
applicant's use of the Center, and the applicant shall compensate the
City for any damage done by reason of the applicant's use of the Center.
A.
No permit for use of the Center shall be issued until the applicant
shall have first placed on file with the Commissioner of Recreation a
public liability insurance policy, indicating combined single limit bodily
injury and property damage coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for
each occurrence, said coverage including the City of Mount Vernon
as an additional named insured. [Amended 12-9-1981, approved
12-10-1981; 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
B.
C. (Reserved)66
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which listed additional fees, was repealed 8-11-1993,
approved 8-12-1993.
§ 170-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-10
1:462
§ 170-10. Annual permit.
Organizations or individuals desiring the use of a meeting room one time
each month for 12 consecutive months for non-revenue-producing activities
may obtain an annual permit from the Commissioner of Recreation, which
permit shall be available at a cost of $150 unless the applicant is unable to
furnish proof of insurance as required by § 170-9B, in which case the fee
shall be $200.
§ 170-11. Rules and regulations.
The Commissioner of Recreation is authorized to establish rules and
regulations necessary for the efficient operation of the Center.
§ 170-12. Use of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
Use of alcoholic beverages on the premises is prohibited.
§ 170-13. Seating capacity.
Seating capacities shall be as follows:
§ 170-14. Special rental.
Special rentals may be granted by the Commissioner of Recreation, subject
to approval of the City Council.
A. Theater: 335 persons.
B. Cafeteria: 125 persons.
C. Youth activities room: 250 persons.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-14
1:463

ARTICLE IV
Armory
[Adopted 2-11-1981, approved 2-13-1981]
§ 170-15. Purpose.
The facilities of the Armory shall be available to individuals and
organizations for charitable, educational, cultural and civic purposes.
§ 170-16. Permit required; exceptions.
No individual or organization shall use the Armory without a permit issued
by the Commissioner of Recreation. This section shall not apply to events
sponsored by the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 170-17. Rental fees.
Fees for workshops, meetings, etc., based on a weekly or monthly session,
shall be as follows (minimum rental of three hours):
§ 170-18. Annual permits.
Organizations or individuals desiring the use of a meeting room one time
each month for 12 consecutive months for non-revenue-producing activities
may obtain an annual permit from the Commissioner of Recreation, which
permit shall be available at a cost of $150 unless the applicant is unable to
furnish proof of insurance as required by § 170-19B in which case the fee
shall be $200.
§ 170-19. Insurance.
For groups interested in renting a meeting room for a once-a-month
meeting: $10 for three hours.
A.
For groups interested in space on a more frequent basis, e.g., twice
a week or more than three times a month: $10 for each three-hour
session.
B.
C. An additional $10 for each additional hour over three hours.
No permit shall be issued by the Commissioner of Recreation until
the applicant shall have first agreed to indemnify and hold the City
of Mount Vernon harmless from any and all claims arising from the
applicant's use of the Armory, and the applicant shall compensate the
City for any damage done by reason of the applicant's use of the
Armory.
A.
No permit for use of the Armory shall be issued until the applicant
shall have first placed on file with the Commissioner of Recreation a
public liability insurance policy, indicating combined single limit bodily
injury and property damage coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for
each occurrence, said coverage including the City of Mount Vernon
B.
§ 170-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-19
1:465
§ 170-20. Rules and regulations.
The Commissioner of Recreation is authorized to establish rules and
regulations necessary for the efficient operation of the Armory.
§ 170-21. Use of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
Use of alcoholic beverages on the premises is prohibited.
§ 170-22. Special rental.
Special rentals may be granted by the Commissioner of Recreation subject
to approval of the City Council.
as an additional named insured. [Amended 12-9-1981, approved
12-10-1981; 6-24-1992, approved 6-25-1992]
In the event that the applicant is unable to provide the insurance
described in Subsection B, the Commissioner of Recreation shall
charge fees in addition to the rental fees charged in § 170-17, as
follows:
(1) Rental of a meeting room for three hours: $15.
Rental of a meeting room for three hours twice a week or more than
three times a month: $60 per month.
(2)
C.
§ 170-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 170-22
1:466
ARTICLE V
City-Sponsored Events
[Adopted 6-12-1991, approved 6-13-1991]
§ 170-23. Purpose.
The Commissioner of Recreation may establish and sponsor athletic
tournaments, day-camp programs and similar events for the benefit of the
City of Mount Vernon.
§ 170-24. Sites; fees.
City-sponsored events shall be held at the various recreational facilities
located within the City of Mount Vernon at the discretion of the
Commissioner of Recreation.
A.
Fees to be paid by the public for participation in City-sponsored events
shall be determined at the discretion of the Commissioner of
Recreation. Such fees shall be based on the nature of the program, the
cost to the City to sponsor the programs, the recreational facility used
and other relevant criteria to be considered by the Commissioner of
Recreation in determining such fees.
B.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24
1:467
Chapter 174
NATIONAL ANTHEM
§ 174-1. Playing and singing of National Anthem.
Whenever in any public assemblage the National Anthem is played upon any
instrument or instruments or sung as a solo or otherwise, it shall be played
or sung with the dignity and respect to which it is entitled in the minds of a
patriotic people, and it shall not be played or sung as a part of a medley nor
interrupted by nor interspersed with other music which may detract from
its sublime character.
Chapter 178
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 116.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 170-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 174-1
1:468
ARTICLE I
Unnecessary Noise
[Adopted 3-12-1980, approved 3-13-198067]
§ 178-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Mount Vernon Noise Control Ordinance."
§ 178-2. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Mount Vernon to prevent
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which may jeopardize the
well-being or health or welfare of its citizens or degrade the quality of life.
The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are for
the above-mentioned purpose.
§ 178-3. Definitions.
All definitions used in this article, where applicable, shall be in conformance
with the terminology of the American National Standards Institute. A copy
of the American National Standards definitions shall be available at the
City Clerk's office for public use. Unless otherwise indicated by context, the
following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighing network and
designated as db(A).
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near
and far.
AIR COMPRESSOR — A device which draws in air or gas, compresses it and
delivers it at a higher pressure.
CONSTRUCTION — Any activity necessary or incidental to the erection,
demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, public
or private highways, roads, premises, parks, utility lines or other property,
including but not limited to related activities such as land clearing, grading,
earthmoving, excavating, blasting, filling and landscaping.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — Any location, including land and water, where
construction takes place.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not an impulsive sound.
DECIBEL (DB) — A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to
the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound,
and the quantities concerned are proportional to power (American National
Standards Institute terminology).
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 178, Art. I, Unnecessary Noise,
adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 25 of the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon,
approved 11-15-1957, as amended.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-3
1:469
DEVICE — Any machine, mechanism or equipment which is intended to or
which actually produces sound or vibration.
DISCRETE TONE — A sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure
varies essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of time (American National
Standards Institute terminology).
EXHAUST — A system which removes and transports air or gas from a
device.
FREQUENCY — A function periodic in time which is the reciprocal of the
period (American National Standards Institute terminology).
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound of short duration, usually less than one
second and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay
(American National Standards Institute terminology). Examples include an
explosion or discharge of a firearm.
L10 — The A-weighted sound level measured with slow response that is
exceeded 10% of the time in any one-hour interval. The measurement time
interval need not be one hour, provided that the measurement results are
representative of a one-hour interval.
L90 — The A-weighted sound level measured with slow response that is
exceeded 90% of the time in any one-hour interval. The measurement time
interval need not be one hour, provided that the measurement results are
representative of a one-hour interval.
MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT — The weight of the vehicle unladen, plus
the weight of the maximum load to be carried by such vehicle during the
registration period or the maximum gross weight for which the vehicle is
registered, whichever is greater (New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law).
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated or driven upon a public
highway which is propelled by any power other than muscular power (New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law).
MUFFLER — A device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal
combustion engine or other sound source.
NOISE-SENSITIVE ZONE — An area adjacent to a site, including but not
limited to any authorized school, church, senior citizen center, day-care
center or hospital, which requires specific noise limitations.
PAVING BREAKER — Any powered construction device that is designed to
be used or is actually used to cut or trench pavement, subbase macadam,
gravel, concrete or hard ground.
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and also any person, firm,
corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other form of
association or organization.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any highway, road, street, avenue, alley, public place,
public driveway or any other public way (New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law).
§ 178-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-3
1:470
RAILROAD — A railroad operated for public use for conveying people or
property for compensation, and includes all material and facilities used
therewith.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled by any power
other than muscular power that is designed for or capable of cross-country
travel, such as a motorcycle, trailbike or minibike. A "recreational vehicle"
is also classed as a motor vehicle when such recreational vehicle is operated
or driven upon a public highway. A snowmobile is any self-propelled vehicle
designed for travel on snow or ice.
REFUSE-COLLECTING VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed to compact
and transport refuse.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement or other
physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces (American National
Standards Institute terminology).
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted pressure level, measured by the use of
a metering characteristic and the weighing A, B, C (American National
Standards Institute terminology).
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter and frequency-weighing networks for the
measurement of sound levels (American National Standards Institute
terminology).
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device that is designed to be used
or is actually used for the production or reproduction of sound, including
but not limited to any musical instrument, radio, television, tape recorder,
phonograph or any other sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND SOURCE — Any activity or device that produces sound.
SOUND TRUCK — Any vehicle having mounted thereon or attached thereto
sound-amplifying equipment.
ZONING DISTRICT — Any zone as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Mount Vernon.68
§ 178-4. Prohibitions; enumeration of restricted noises. [Amended
7-12-1989; approved 7-13-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise.
A.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this article, namely:
Horns, signaling devices, etc.: the sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other
vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger
warning; or the use of any signaling device or the use of any horn,
(1)
B.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 178-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4
1:471
whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust, except when
such device is used to give notice of the time to stop and start work
or school.
Radios, phonographs, televisions, etc.: the using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as
to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighborhood inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are
in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of
any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such
a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
source of the noise shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section.
(2)
Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising: the using, operating
or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure.
(3)
Yelling, shouting, etc.: yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in
the vicinity. Yelling and shouting clearly audible at a distance of 50
feet from the source of the noise shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(4)
Animals, birds, etc.: the keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighborhood inhabitants. Animal or bird noises
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(5)
Air conditioning, air-handling devices and refrigeration units,
including those on trucks, audible at a distance of 50 feet.
(6)
Exhausts: the discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, internal combustion engine or other motor,
motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom.
(7)
Defect in vehicle or load: the use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(8)
§ 178-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-4
1:472
Loading, unloading or opening boxes: the creation of any
unreasonably loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers.
(9)
Construction or repairing of buildings: the erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building,
including the use of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other equipment, the
use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety and then only with a permit as provided for in § 178-4.14 or
178-4.15.
(10)
Schools, courts, churches and hospitals: unless a permit has been
issued pursuant to § 178-15, the creation of any excessive noise on
any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
that conspicuous signs are displayed in such street indicating that
the same is a school, hospital or court street.
(11)
Hawkers and peddlers: the shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood. Shouting and crying audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the source of the noise shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(12)
Musical instruments: the use of any musical instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to
any performance, show or sale.
(13)
Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns: the
transportation of rails, pillars or columns or iron, steel or other
material over and along streets and other public places upon carts,
trays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to be audible
at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise.
(14)
Testing of car alarms: The testing of automobile alarms through the
sounding of the alarm at an establishment for the installation or
repair of automobile alarms located within 100 feet of a residential
zoning district shall be prohibited, unless said testing occurs within
a building in an area within said building which has no open
windows or doors during the time of testing or unless a muffler has
been attached to said car alarm so as to prevent the emanation of
unreasonable noise which would disturb the quiet and comfort of
the neighborhood inhabitants. Noise audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the source of the noise shall constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
(15)
§ 178-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4
1:473
§ 178-4.1. (Reserved)69
§ 178-4.2. (Reserved)70
§ 178-4.3. Operational noise limits for motor vehicles.
§ 178-4.4. Stationary noise limit for motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
on a public highway any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles with a
maximum gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds and equipped with an
engine speed governor which generates an A-weighted sound level in excess
of 88 db(A), measured at, or adjusted to, a distance of 50 feet from the
longitudinal center line of the vehicle, when its engine is accelerated from
The operation of any electric-powered motor or device, the
operation of which causes unreasonable noise so as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of the neighborhood inhabitants. Noise
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(16)
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
on a public highway any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at any
time, under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration,
in such a manner as to exceed the applicable A-weighted sound level set
forth in this section. The maximum allowable sound levels are based on
a sound level measured at, or adjusted to, a distance of 50 feet from the
center of the lane in which the motor vehicle is traveling. These limits
shall apply to the total sound level emitted.
A.
This section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
Maximum Allowable A-Weighted Sound Levels
(Environmental Protection Agency Regulations)
Maximum Speed
Vehicle 35 mph or Less
Greater than 35
mph
Any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a
maximum gross weight in
excess of 10,000 pounds
86 db(A) 90 db(A)
Any motorcycle 82 db(A) 86 db(A)
Any other motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles
76 db(A) 82 db(A)
B.
69.Editors Note: Former § 178-4.1, which dealt with prohibitions, was repealed 7-12-1989,
approved 7-13-1989. See now § 178-4, Prohibitions; enumeration of restricted noises.
70.Editors Note: Former § 178-4.2, which dealt with prohibitions, was repealed 7-12-1989,
approved 7-13-1989. See now § 178-4, Prohibitions; enumeration of restricted noises.
§ 178-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-4.4
1:474
idle with a wide-open throttle to governed speed with the vehicle stationary,
transmission in neutral and clutch engaged. (Environmental Protection
Agency regulations.)
§ 178-4.5. Refuse-collecting vehicles.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated a refuse-collecting vehicle
which, when collecting or compacting, exceeds a sound level of 80 db(A) at
a distance of 10 feet from any surface of the collecting or compacting unit.
§ 178-4.6. Recreational vehicles, including snowmobiles.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any recreational vehicle
off a public highway at any time, at any speed or under any condition of
grade, load, acceleration or deceleration or in any manner whatsoever, as
to exceed the sound level limits set forth in the following tables for the
specified date of manufacture. The limits shall apply at a distance of 50 feet
from such recreational vehicle.
Recreational Vehicles
Sound Level Limit
Date of Manufacture
Displacement Less
than 240cc
Displacement
Greater than 240cc
6/1/1970 to 5/31/1973 89 db(A) 92 db(A)
6/1/1973 to 5/31/1978 87 db(A) 90 db(A)
6/1/1978 to 5/31/1983 83 db(A) 86 db(A)
6/1/1983 and after 76 db(A) 77 db(A)
Snowmobiles
Date of Manufacture Sound Level Limit
6/1/1972 to 5/31/1975 82 db(A)
6/1/1975 to 5/31/1978 78 db(A)
6/1/1978 and after 73 db(A)
§ 178-4.7. Operational noise limits for railroads.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any railroad locomotive,
cars, any other rolling stock or equipment so as to cause a violation of the
allowable sound levels adopted by the federal government.
§ 178-4.8. Operational noise limits for aircraft.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any aircraft so as to cause
a violation of the Federal Aviation Administration's certified noise levels
as presented in Advisory Circular 36-1 and/or in all future revisions and
publications.
§ 178-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4.9
1:475
§ 178-4.9. Air-conditioning and air-handling devices.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated an air-conditioning or airhandling
device that exceeds the maximum sound-level limitations provided
in this section.
§ 178-4.10. Air compressors.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated an air compressor unless
a muffler certified by the manufacturer of such muffler to provide a dynamic
insertion loss of not less than 20 db(A) of the sound emitted from the
exhaust of such compressor is installed on such exhaust.
§ 178-4.11. Paving breakers.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated a paving breaker
manufactured prior to December 31, 1974, other than one operated
electrically or hydraulically, unless a muffler certified by the manufacturer
of such muffler to provide a dynamic insertion loss of five db(A) of the sound
emitted from the air exhaust of such paving breaker is installed on such air
exhaust.
§ 178-4.12. Places of public entertainment.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated a place of public
entertainment, including but not limited to a restaurant, bar, cafe,
discotheque or dance hall, in which the sound level is equal to or exceeds
95 db(A) for more than 30 seconds at the location of the spectators.
§ 178-4.13. Provisions to be kept current.
The sections and provisions of §§ 178-4.3 through 178-4.13 shall be revised
or amended from time to time in order to be kept current with all updated
federal and/or state noise level standards.
§ 178-4.14. Limitations in zoning districts; construction sites;
noise-sensitive zones.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated in a zoning district, as
defined in the Mount Vernon Zoning Ordinance,71 any device that produces
a sound level exceeding the limitations in this section. The measurement of
In areas zoned residential, single-family or multiple-dwelling units,
continuous sound in air which has crossed the property line shall not
exceed 55 db(A) at any point.
A.
The provisions of this section shall not apply if the sound from the
air conditioner or air-handling device produces less than a five db(A)
increase in the sound level that exists in the absence of such sound.
(Provisions agree with recommendations of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Institute).
B.
§ 178-4.9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-4.14
1:476
any sound or noise shall be made with a sound-level meter using an A-scale
decibel level. The measurement shall be conducted at the property line on
which such noise is generated or perceived, whichever is appropriate, in
a residential district, or at the boundary lines of the receiving land use
district. The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas of federal
preemptions.
Residential zoned district.
During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., noise levels within any
residential zoned district shall not exceed 65 db(A) or an L10 in
excess of 60 db(A).
(1)
During the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., noise levels within any
residential zoned district shall not exceed 55 db(A) or an L10 in
excess of 50 db(A).
(2)
The sound levels specified in Subsection A(1) and (2) shall be
decreased by five decibels if the sound contains impulsive or
discrete tone characteristics.
(3)
A.
Commercial zoned district. Noise levels within any commercial/retail
zoned districts shall not exceed 65 db (A) or an L10 of 60 db(A).
B.
Manufacturing zoned district.
Noise levels within any manufacturing zoned districts shall not
exceed 70 db(A) for a duration of 24 hours per day.
(1)
At no point on the boundary of a residential zoned district shall the
sound level of any manufacturing operation exceed the following
L10 levels:
District Measured Level
M-1 At residential district
boundary
60 db(A)
M-2 At residential district
boundary
60 db(A)
M-3 At residential district
boundary
65 db(A)
(2)
At no point on the boundary of a commercial/retail district shall the
sound level of any manufacturing operation exceed the following
L10 levels:
District Measured Level
M-1, M-2, M-3 At commercial district
boundary
65 db(A)
(3)
C.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 178-4.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4.14
1:477
§ 178-4.15. Permits.
Applications for permits for relief from the noise level provisions of this
article on the basis of undue hardship shall be made to the City Clerk of
the City of Mount Vernon. Any permit granted shall contain all conditions
upon which said permit has been granted, shall specify a reasonable time
that the permit shall be effective and shall include a time schedule for
the installation of noise abatement procedures or devices. In determining
whether to grant a permit, the hardship of the applicant should be balanced
against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons
and property affected. A permit may be granted if it is found:
Noise regulations for workers in manufacturing districts is
regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
(4)
Construction sites. No person shall conduct or permit to be conducted
activities, such as the erection, including excavation, demolition,
alteration or repair, of any building other than between 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the event of urgent necessity in the
interest of safety and then only provided a permit in writing has been
issued by the Commissioner of Buildings, in a manner as to produce a
sound level exceeding the limitations in this section.
Residential zoned districts. During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. on weekdays, noise levels from a construction site shall not
exceed an L10 of 70 db(A) when measured at a distance of 400 feet
from the construction site; during the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m., on weekends, noise levels shall not exceed an L10 of 55 db(A)
when measured at a distance of 400 feet from the construction site.
(1)
Commercial/retail zoned districts. During normal business hours,
noise levels shall not exceed L10 of 75 db(A) when measured at
a distance of 400 feet from the construction site; during other
than normal business hours, noise levels shall not exceed an L10
of 80 db(A) when measured at a distance of 400 feet from the
construction site.
(2)
Manufacturing zoned districts. During a twenty-four-hour period,
noise levels shall not exceed 80 db(A) when measured at the
construction site boundary.
(3)
D.
Noise-sensitive zones. No person shall cause or permit the creation of
any unnecessary noise exceeding 55 db(A) on any street, sidewalk or
public place adjacent to any school, church, senior citizen center or
authorized day-care center while in use or adjacent to any hospital at
any time.
E.
That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his
activity or operation to comply with this article; or
A.
B. That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
§ 178-4.14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-4.15
1:478
§ 178-4.16. Public hearing.
A public hearing may be held if there is sufficient public interest concerning
an application for a permit.
§ 178-4.17. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the City of Mount Vernon, and it shall have the power to:
§ 178-4.18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-27-1984; 4-27-2005,
approved 4-28-2005]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $1,000 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
§ 178-4.19. Exemptions.
The operation of vehicles and equipment used by the Department of Public
Works in the performance of official duties shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article until such time as vehicles and equipment
capable of compliance are available and acquisition thereof is authorized by
City Council.
§ 178-4.20. Severability.
If any provision of this article is held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any
courts, the remaining provisions of this article shall not be invalidated.
The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration
and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this article.
C.
Order any person to cease and desist from any activity which causes, or
is conducted so as to cause, a violation of any provision of this article.
A.
Seal any device, after obtaining the proper judicial order, which causes,
or is maintained or operated so as to cause, a violation of any provision
of this article.
B.
§ 178-4.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4.20
1:479

ARTICLE II
Sound Trucks
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 37 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 178-5. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Soundamplifying
equipment" shall not be construed as including standard
automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in
which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or
horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety
purposes.
SOUND TRUCK — Any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle having
mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.
§ 178-6. Registration.
No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck with its soundamplifying
equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes before
filing a registration statement with the City Clerk in writing. This
registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the
following:
A. Name and home address of the applicant.
B. Address of place of business of applicant.
License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
applicant.
C.
D. Name and address of person who owns the sound truck.
E. Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck.
Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound
truck.
F.
G. The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
A general statement as to the section or sections of the City in which
the sound truck will be used.
H.
I. The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
J. The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck.
A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be
used.
K.
§ 178-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-6
1:481
§ 178-7. Registration fee. [Amended 10-11-1989, approved
10-12-1989]
The fee for filing the registration statement shall be $5 for each day of
operation, but in no event shall a single registration be for more than five
days of operation.
§ 178-8. Changes affecting registration statement.
All persons using or causing to be used sound trucks for noncommercial
purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to this
article within 24 hours after any change in the information therein
furnished.
§ 178-9. Possession and display of registration.
The City Clerk shall return to each applicant one copy of said registration
statement, duly certified by the City Clerk as a correct copy of said
application. Said certified copy of the application shall be in the possession
of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's
sound-amplifying equipment is in operation, and said copy shall be promptly
displayed and shown to any policeman of the City upon request.
§ 178-10. Regulations for use.
Noncommercial use of sound trucks with sound-amplifying equipment in
operation shall be subject to the following regulations:
The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying
equipment to be used in or on the sound truck, including:
(1) The wattage to be used.
(2) The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced.
The approximate maximum distance to which sound will be thrown
from the sound truck.
(3)
L.
A. The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
Operations are permitted for six hours each day, except on Sundays and
legal holidays, when no operations of sound trucks shall be authorized.
The permitted six hours of operation shall be between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:00
p.m.
B.
Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound
truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of
at least 10 miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded
by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, said sound-amplifying equipment
shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop.
C.
§ 178-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 178-10
1:482
§ 178-11. Commercial advertising.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck for
commercial sound-advertising purposes in the City of Mount Vernon, New
York, with sound-amplifying equipment in operation.
Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of any hospital, school,
church or courthouse.
D.
The human speech, music or other sound amplified shall not be profane,
lewd, indecent or slanderous.
E.
The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible
for a distance in excess of 100 yards from the sound truck and so that
said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a
nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
F.
No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with power in excess
of 15 watts in the last stage of amplification.
G.
§ 178-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-11
1:483
Chapter 183
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 227. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 183-1. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety of the City of Mount
Vernon, unless otherwise indicated.
PARKING LOT — Any outdoor space or uncovered plot of ground which
has the capacity to hold four or more motor vehicles and is used to
accommodate, store or keep any motor vehicle for the payment of a fee or
other consideration, charged directly or indirectly.
§ 183-2. License required; fee; expiration and renewal.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
maintain, operate or conduct a parking lot in the City of Mount Vernon
without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk.
A.
A license to maintain, operate or conduct a parking lot shall be granted
to a person of good character in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. If the applicant is a copartnership or a corporation, all
members of the copartnership and all officers of the corporation are
required to be persons of good character.
B.
The fee to be paid to the City Clerk for every such license, temporary
permit or for a renewal thereof shall be as follows:
For each parking lot which has the capacity to hold not more than
25 motor vehicles: $50.
(1)
For each parking lot which has the capacity to hold 26 but not more
than 50 motor vehicles: $100.
(2)
For each parking lot which has the capacity to hold 51 but not more
than 100 motor vehicles: $150.
(3)
For each parking lot which has the capacity to hold more than 100
motor vehicles: $200.
(4)
C.
A commuted license may be issued for a period not exceeding any six
months in the year at 1/2 the fee provided for hereinabove, except that
D.
§ 178-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 183-2
1:484
§ 183-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not, except as hereinafter provided,
apply to:
§ 183-4. License application.
the minimum rate for any such commuted license shall be not less than
$25.
Every such license shall expire on the 31st day of December next
succeeding the date of issuance thereof. All such licenses must be
renewed from year to year during the month of January by the payment
of the renewal fee for such licenses after permission therefor has been
authorized by the Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety of
the City of Mount Vernon. Each applicant shall have a grace period of
30 days from the 31st day of January to renew such license.
E.
A parking lot maintained or operated by the City, by any agency thereof
or by a public parking authority.
A.
A parking lot maintained or operated in conjunction with a business
solely for the accommodation of employees, patrons and/or invitees
thereof, provided that no parking fee is charged.
B.
A parking lot maintained or operated by the owner or lessee of a
multiple dwelling for the sole and exclusive accommodation of the
tenants or residents of such multiple dwelling. This exemption,
however, shall not apply when such parking lot is maintained or
operated by any concessionaire or lessee, by agreement with the owner
or lessee of such multiple dwelling and for which parking fees are
charged.
C.
Each applicant for a parking lot license shall file with the City Clerk a
written application in the form prescribed by the City Clerk, containing
such information and having annexed thereto such documents and
exhibits as may be required by said Clerk.
A.
Such application shall then be submitted by the City Clerk to the
Commissioner of Buildings, Commissioner of Public Works, Fire
Commissioner and the Commissioner.
B.
Such application shall have endorsed thereon the maximum number of
cars that may be permitted to be parking on said lot as stated on the
certificate of occupancy or as approved by the Building Commissioner.
C.
Such application shall also be endorsed by the Corporation Counsel to
signify his approval of the form and sufficiency of the public liability
insurance policy of the applicant.
D.
Such application shall include a sketch of the parking lot indicating
ingress and egress, lighting and the layout of parking spaces.
E.
§ 183-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-5
1:485
§ 183-5. Rate schedules; change of rates.
§ 183-6. Transfer of license prohibited.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred
to or assigned to any person or used by any person other than the licensee
to whom it was issued, nor shall such license be used at any location other
than the location stated in such license.
§ 183-7. Claim checks.
Every licensee, at the time of accepting a motor vehicle for parking or
storage, shall furnish to the driver of such vehicle a distinctive claim check
acknowledging the receipt of the vehicle and showing the date of such
acceptance. Every such claim check shall contain the name of the licensee
and his license number. Such licensee shall not be required to issue a claim
check for any vehicle which is parked or stored on a weekly or monthly
basis.
§ 183-8. Number and type of vehicles.
Every applicant for a license to maintain, conduct or operate a parking
lot shall file with the City Clerk a schedule of rates showing the prices
charged for daily, weekly and monthly parking or storage of motor
vehicles and all other rates charged therefor.
A.
No licensee shall make any charge for parking or storing any motor
vehicles in a parking lot in excess of the rates set forth in the schedule
filed with the City Clerk unless and until at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of such changed rates such licensee has filed with the
City Clerk in writing such change in rates and has posted such changed
rates on signs which conform to the requirements of § 183-16B hereof.
B.
No motor vehicle shall be accepted by a licensee for parking or storage
in excess of the capacity of the parking lot as shown in the license.
Whenever the maximum capacity of a parking lot has been reached, the
licensee shall post at the public entrance thereof a sign, composed of
letters at least six inches in height, stating that such maximum capacity
has been reached.
A.
The determinator of the maximum motor vehicle capacity of each
parking lot, which shall appear on the face of the license, shall be
made by the Commissioner of Buildings for the purpose of safeguarding
persons and property and permitting adequate inspection of the
premises and shall be figured in units of nine feet wide by 20 feet long,
exclusive of access driveways and turning areas.
B.
No commercial motor vehicle shall be permitted to be parked or stored
in any parking lot which is established in a residence zone district as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Mount Vernon, whether or not
such parking lot is required to be licensed under this chapter.
C.
§ 183-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 183-9
1:486
§ 183-9. Number of employees.
The application for a license must state the number of the applicant's
employees, including the number of full-time employees and the number of
part-time employees.
§ 183-10. Attendance and supervision.
The premises of licensed parking lots must be adequately attended and
supervised at all times during operation. The applicant must provide the
City Clerk with a telephone number where the applicant can be reached
when the lot is not in operation.
§ 183-11. Parking lot license number.
The license number of the parking lot must appear on all signs, bills,
invoices, letterheads, claim checks and other printed material.
§ 183-12. Insurance.
§ 183-13. Change of ownership.
In the event of a change of ownership of a licensed parking lot, the licensee
of record must make immediate notification to the City Clerk.
§ 183-14. Fingerprinting; denial of license.
No permit shall be issued by the Clerk until the applicant therefor
shall have first placed on file with the Clerk, without cost to the City,
satisfactory evidence of public liability insurance in the amounts of not
less than $250,000 for any one person and not less than $500,000 for
any one accident and property damage insurance in the amount of not
less than $25,000 for any one accident and $50,000 in the aggregate
and satisfactory evidence that said insurance has been approved as to
form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation Counsel, to insure
the City against any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of
the permit or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his agents,
servants or employees in connection with said obstruction or with any
work related thereto.
A.
Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective period
of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall
carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will
give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of any modification or
cancellation of any such insurance.
B.
When an original application for a license is presented, the
fingerprinting of an individual applicant and of his partner in a
copartnership will be required. When a corporation submits an original
application, an officer of the corporation or a representative thereof,
duly authorized in writing, will be required to be fingerprinted.
A.
§ 183-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-14
1:487
§ 183-15. Parking on public streets or places.
Motor vehicles shall not be stored or parked by licensees on public streets,
avenues, highways or public places.
§ 183-16. Signs.
§ 183-17. Grading; obstructions on sidewalks and streets.
The Clerk may disapprove an application for a license, after a hearing,
if, in his discretion, he determines that:
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact in connection with his application;
(1)
The applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or partner, or any
other person directly or indirectly interested in the application
was the former holder, or was an officer, director, stockholder
or partner in a corporation or partnership which was the former
holder of a license which had been revoked or suspended;
(2)
The applicant or any officer, director, stockholder, partner,
employee or any other person directly or indirectly interested in
the application has been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or
moral turpitude; or
(3)
The applicant is not the true owner of the business or for any
reason in the opinion of the Clerk may be deemed detrimental to
the best interest of the general public both in welfare and safety.
(4)
B.
Licensed parking lots having a separate entrance and exit must have
their main entrance and main exit clearly designated with signs 12
inches wide by 36 inches high marked "entrance" and "exit."
A.
A durable sign must be posted conspicuously at the public entrance
of each licensed parking lot, stating the name, address and telephone
number of the person operating the same, the hours during which it
is open for business and the license number, maximum motor vehicle
capacity and the parking or storage rates in letters and figures at
least six inches in height. When more than one rate is charged for
the parking or storage of a motor vehicle, the letters and figures
designating each such rate shall be of the same size and dimensions.
B.
C. The sign must be sufficiently illuminated and easily visible.
In the event that the maximum capacity of a parking lot has been
reached, a sign composed of letters at least six inches in height must
be posted at the public entrance of such parking lot, stating "capacity
full."
D.
§ 183-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 183-17
1:488
§ 183-18. Lighting.
All licensed parking lots which are operated during any portion of the
period from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise shall be
adequately lighted so as to meet with the approval of the Clerk and the
Commissioner of Buildings.
§ 183-19. Liability of licensee.
No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation made or issued
by any licensee with or to a person who parks or stores a motor vehicle
in a parking lot operated by such licensee shall exempt such licensee from
liability for damage or loss caused by the negligence of such licensee or any
employee of such licensee.
§ 183-20. Applicants using trade names; copartnerships.
Where a trade name is used by an applicant for a license or a copartnership
applies for a license, a certified copy of the certificate required to be filed
with the County Clerk must be filed with the application.
§ 183-21. Hearings.
§ 183-22. Payment of judgments.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension
or revocation upon the failure of such licensee to pay or satisfy any
judgment secured against him by anyone who stored or parked a motor
vehicle in the parking lot licensed hereunder, provided that such judgment
was secured in a court of competent jurisdiction against the licensee for
acts of commission or omission with regard to the business maintained,
operated or conducted by him pursuant to the license issued hereunder.
All licensed parking lots shall be graded as provided for in § 15.09 of
the Building Code.
A.
No licensee or any of its agents, employees or other representatives
shall place upon the sidewalks, streets or public highways any debris,
snow, ice or any other object which might obstruct the free use of
said sidewalks, streets or public highways, except where specifically
permitted under the ordinances and regulations of the City. In the event
of a violation of this provision, the licensee may be liable to loss of its
license and shall be liable to the payment of a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 for each violation.
B.
All licensees shall respond promptly to notices issued by the City Clerk
to appear at any hearing.
A.
B. All hearings will be conducted by the City Clerk or his designee.
C. At any hearing, licensees may be represented by an attorney.
§ 183-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-23
1:489
§ 183-23. License revocation or suspension.
Any license may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk and any
application for a renewal thereof denied for the failure of a licensee to
comply with any applicable provision of law or any of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 183-24. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this chapter is an offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Conviction of a violation of this chapter shall
be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license.
§ 183-25. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 186
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 116.
Minibikes — See Ch. 165.
Municipal fields — See Ch. 170.
Noise — See Ch. 178.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 186-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works having jurisdiction
of the parks or street parks, as hereinafter defined.
PARK — Any park, square, circle or part thereof under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Public Works.
PERMIT — A written authorization for the exercise of a specified park
privilege, issued by the Commissioner.
PLAYGROUND — Any park, square, circle or part thereof, play area, or
recreational area specifically designed to be used by children that has
play equipment installed, or any similar facility under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Recreation.[Added 6-26-1981, approved 6-26-1981;
amended 9-9-2009, approved 9-10-2009]
STREET PARK — Any trails, or planted area of any boulevard, avenue or
street under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works.[Amended
8-10-2011, approved 8-11-2011]
§ 183-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 186-1
1:490
SMOKE or SMOKING — The carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or
lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette
of any kind, including, but not limited to, tobacco, or any other weed or
plant.[Added 9-9-2009, approved 9-10-2009]
TOT LOT — Any designated play area within a public park for the use
by young children under the age of 12.[Added 9-9-2009, approved
9-10-2009]
§ 186-2. Subsurface disturbances.
No person shall open, expose or interfere with any water or gas pipe,
hydrant, stopcock, sewer, basin or other construction within or upon any
park or street park, nor make any connection therewith, except under the
authority of a permit and upon the deposit of such sum of money as may be
required by the Commissioner to ensure the restoration of the soil, plants,
trees, sidewalks, curb, gutter and flagging disturbed in the making of such
connection.
§ 186-3. Alterations to land or improvements.
No person shall modify, alter or in any manner interfere with the line or
grades of any park or street park, nor move or disturb any curb, gutter
stone, flagging, tree, railing, fence, sod, soil or gravel thereof, except by
direction of the Commissioner.
§ 186-4. Destruction of park property.
No person shall cut, break or injure any tree, shrub, grass, post, railing,
chain, lamp, lamppost, bench, tree guard, building, structure or other
property in or upon any park property. No building or structure of any kind
shall be removed wholly or partly without a permit.
§ 186-5. Preservation of lawns.
No person, unless issued a special permit, shall enter upon any lawn or
grassplot in any park where signs specifying KEEP OFF THE GRASS have
been posted by the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 186-6. Protection of trees, shrubs and flowers.
Bringing trees, plants and flowers into parks. No person shall take into
or carry within a park any tree, shrub, plant or flower or newly plucked
part thereof without a permit. No park trees or branches thereof shall
be cut or removed without a permit. Picking of cultivated or wild
flowers in any park is also prohibited.
A.
Tools. It shall be unlawful to take into any park any tool such as
a hatchet, axe or saw intended to be used for the cutting of trees,
branches of trees or other property, or any spade, shovel, rake or any
B.
§ 186-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-6
1:491
§ 186-7. Overhead wires.
No person or agent of any person shall attach any electric, telephone, aerial
or other wires to any tree, or adjust to carry same into or over any park
or playground, or construct any conduit whatever for the running of wires
beneath the ground, except when a permit shall have been issued.
§ 186-8. Roller skating.
No person shall use roller skates, pushmobiles or any similar device upon
any sidewalk or footpath in any park, park building or City Hall Plaza.
§ 186-9. Rubbish disposal.
No person shall throw or lay, or direct or permit any employee or person in
his charge to throw or lay, any ashes, vegetables, garbage, shells, shavings,
paper, dirt or rubbish of any kind on any lawn, path or walk within any park
or street park.
§ 186-10. Processions and drills.
No parade, drill or maneuver of any kind shall be conducted, nor shall any
person play upon a musical instrument or display any flag other than an
American flag, banner, target, sign, placard or transparency, in any park,
nor shall any civic or other procession form or move therein, without a
permit, to be granted by the City Council.
§ 186-11. Public meetings.
No persons shall hold any meeting or make a speech or address or erect any
structure, stand or platform in any park or street park without a permit, to
be granted by the City Council.
§ 186-12. Sale of merchandise.
No person shall exhibit, sell or offer for sale any merchandise or tickets of
any description or conduct any business whatsoever in any park or public
place under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works except
pursuant to a permit, to be granted by the City Council.
§ 186-13. Posting or distributing of notices; littering.
No person shall post any bill, notice or other paper or paint any
advertisement or notice upon any structure, tree, rock or thing within any
park or any street park. No person shall distribute or cast about any card,
pamphlet or other printed matter within any park or street park. The using
for any purpose other than reading, of newspapers, magazines or other
papers is forbidden. Papers shall not be placed upon lawns or benches of
of the so-called garden or agricultural implements or tools, whether of
working or toy size.
§ 186-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 186-13
1:492
any parks or street park but must be deposited in receptacles provided for
that purpose.
§ 186-14. Ball playing.
No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick or strike with any implement any
baseball, golf ball, football, basketball or other object in or upon any park
or street park except in spaces set aside for the purpose.
§ 186-15. Animals at large.
No animals shall be allowed to go at large in any park or street park. Dogs
that are restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length may
be permitted in any park or street park.
§ 186-16. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall, in any park or street park, commit any nuisance or do
any act tending to a breach of the public peace, or climb upon any wall,
fence, seat, statute or other structure, or enter or leave except at the
established entranceways.
A.
All persons doing any acts injurious to a park or part thereof may be
removed therefrom by the park keeper or the police.
B.
Closing hours. [Amended 9-3-1969, approved 9-4-1969;
6-26-1981, approved 6-26-1981; 11-22-1983, approved
11-23-1983]
During the months of May through October, it shall be unlawful
to loiter or remain in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. without the prior permission of the Commissioner
of Public Works. It shall be unlawful to loiter or remain in any
playground between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without
the prior special permission of the Commissioner of Recreation.
(1)
During the months of November through April, it shall be unlawful
to loiter or remain in any park between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. without the prior permission of the Commissioner
of Public Works. It shall be unlawful to loiter or remain in any
playground between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without
the prior special permission of the Commissioner of Recreation.
(2)
Securing of entranceways.
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized and
directed to install at each park entranceway a chain or gate
which may be secured during the hours that said park shall
be closed and to post at each said entranceway a sign stating
clearly and legibly:
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 186-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-16
1:493
§ 186-17. Tot lots. [Added 9-9-2009, approved 9-10-2009]
§ 186-18. No smoking. [Added 9-9-2009, approved 9-10-2009]
PARK CLOSED DURING FOLLOWING HOURS:
10:00 p.m. — 8:00 a.m., May through October
8:00 p.m. — 8:00 a.m., November through April
The Commissioner of Recreation is hereby authorized and
directed to install at each playground entranceway a chain
or gate which may be secured during the hours that said
playground shall be closed and to post at each said
entranceway a sign stating clearly and legibly:
PLAYGROUND CLOSED DURING FOLLOWING HOURS:
10:00 p.m. — 8:00 a.m., May through October
8:00 p.m. — 8:00 a.m., November through April
(b)
The following playgrounds are hereby designated as tot lots:
(1) Grove Street Playground;
Lorraine Avenue Playground (Lorraine Avenue and Claremont
Place);
(2)
(3) Sophie J. Mee Playground (South 3rd Avenue and 4th Street);
Old 7th Avenue Playground (7th Avenue between 2nd and 4th
Street);
(4)
(5) Purdy Park (South 9th Avenue and 2nd Street).
A.
No person 18 years or older shall remain in or enter a children's
playground area designated as a tot lot unless actually engaged in the
care, custody or supervision of a person younger than 12 years of age
who is using the facilities in the area.
B.
No person shall smoke a cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco-related
product within 25 feet of any playground, park, street park, or tot lot
area. [Amended 8-10-2011, approved 8-11-2011]
A.
No person shall dispose of cigarette butts, cigar butts, or any other
tobacco-related waste within 25 feet of a playground, park, street park,
or a tot lot area. [Amended 8-10-2011, approved 8-11-2011]
B.
No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal,
for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to
attain compliance with this section.
C.
Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and shall
be punished by a fine of $250 for each violation of this section.
D.
§ 186-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 186-18
1:494
Chapter 189
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 88.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Includes any person:
§ 189-2. License required.
No person shall hereafter carry on the business of pawnbroker without
having first obtained from the Mayor a license, countersigned by the City
Clerk, authorizing such person to carry on the same in the manner and upon
the conditions as hereinafter provided.
§ 189-2.1. Fingerprint requirements. [Added 4-13-1989, approved
4-13-1989]
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as the
Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall
have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant, together
with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice Services or other
appropriate agency for processing and investigation. No application for a
pawnbroker's license shall be approved nor any license issued under the
The prohibitions contained in Subsections A, B, and C shall not apply
to a public sidewalk located within 25 feet of a playground or tot lot
sandbox area.
E.
Lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than
securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or
A.
Dealing in the purchasing of personal property on condition of selling
back at a stipulated price; or
B.
Designated or doing business as a furniture storage warehouseman
and lending and advancing money upon goods, wares or merchandise
pledged or deposited as collateral security.
C.
§ 186-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-2.1
1:495
provisions of this chapter until after the commanding officer of the Bureau
of Criminal Identification in the Department of Public Safety has reviewed
and examined the criminal history record information disseminated by the
Division of Criminal Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any
applicant who has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor
involving violence, dishonesty or deceit.
§ 189-3. Issuance of license; fee; expiration; bond. [Amended
1-14-1959, approved 1-15-1959; 9-14-2005, approved 9-15-2005]
The Mayor may, from time to time, grant to such persons as he shall
deem proper and who shall produce to him satisfactory evidence of their
good character a license authorizing such persons to carry on the business
of pawnbroker, which license shall designate the premises in which such
persons shall carry on said business, and no person shall carry on the
business of a pawnbroker in the City of Mount Vernon without being duly
licensed nor in any premises other than the one designated in said license,
under a penalty of $500 for each day he or they shall exercise or carry on
said business without such license or at any other premises than the one
so designated. Any person receiving such license shall pay therefor to the
City Clerk the sum of $350 yearly, for the use of the City, and every such
license shall expire on January 1 of each year and may be renewed upon
application to the Mayor each and every year, upon payment of the same
sum and upon performance of the other conditions herein contained. Every
person so licensed shall, at the time of receiving such license, file a surety
company bond in the penal sum of $15,000, which bond shall be conditioned
for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the
business so licensed, and the Mayor shall have full power and authority to
revoke such license.
§ 189-4. Action on bond.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any such licensed
pawnbroker and shall recover judgment against him therefor, such person
may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution
issued upon said judgment, maintain an action in his own name upon the
bond of said pawnbroker in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
§ 189-5. Records.
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be plainly written, at
the time of each loan, an account and description of the goods, articles or
things pawned or pledged, the amount of money lent, the time of pledging
the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan and the name and
residence of the person pawning or pledging the said goods, articles or
things, and shall fill out a card containing the description of the articles
pawned, with any and all numbers and marks of identification contained
thereon, and such card shall be filed with the Police Department within 24
hours after receipt of the article.
§ 189-2.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 189-6
1:496
§ 189-6. Tickets for redemption of goods.
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person
pawning or pledging any goods, articles or thing a memorandum or note
signed by him containing the substance of the entry required to be made
in his book by the last preceding section, and no charge shall be made or
received by any pawnbroker for any such entry, memorandum or note. The
holder of such memorandum or note shall be presumed to be the person
entitled to redeem the pledge, and the pawnbroker shall deliver such article
to the person so presenting such memorandum or note on payment of
principal and interest. Should such ticket be lost or mislaid, the pawner
shall at once apply to the pawnbroker, in which case it shall be the duty
of the pawnbroker to permit such person to examine his books, and upon
finding the entry of said ticket, note or memorandum so lost and upon his
giving to the pawnbroker an exact description of the article pawned, the
pawnbroker shall issue a second or stop ticket for the same. If such pawner
neglects so to apply and examine said books and receive such memorandum
or note in the manner above stated, the pawnbroker will be bound to deliver
the pledge to any person producing such ticket for the redemption thereof.
This section is not to be construed as in any manner limiting or affecting
such pawnbroker's common-law liability in cases where goods are stolen or
other legal defects of title exist in the pledgor.
§ 189-7. Inspection of records.
The said book shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of
the Mayor, the Commissioner of Public Safety or any police officer, or of
any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that purpose by
any or either of them and who shall exhibit such written authority to such
pawnbroker.
§ 189-8. Interest rates. [Amended 4-10-1981, approved 4-13-1981]
No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive any greater rate of
interest than 3% per month or any fraction of a month, and a notice
containing a list of such rates of interest as herein provided and in
accordance with the Act of Congress entitled "Truth in Lending Act," 15
U.S.C.A. § 1601 et seq., and the regulations thereunder, as such Act and
regulations may from time to time be amended, shall be conspicuously
displayed within the premises of such pawnbroker. A minimum interest
charge of $0.25 per month may be made on any loan.
A.
No pawnbroker shall receive or be entitled to any interest or charge as
provided by this section on any loan for any period of time exceeding
15 months from the date of making such loan.
B.
Effective September 1, 1983, the interest rate shall be 2% per month or
any fraction thereof on each succeeding month after the first six months
and shall apply to all pawn transactions entered into on or after such
date.
C.
§ 189-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-9
1:497
§ 189-9. Purchase of secondhand goods restricted. [Amended
4-10-1981, approved 4-13-1981]
No pawnbrokers shall purchase, directly or indirectly, any secondhand
furniture, metals, clothing or other article or thing whatever, offered to
him as a pawn or pledge, nor shall it be lawful for any such pawnbroker,
licensed as aforesaid, to engage in any secondhand business nor to receive
in pawn or as a pledge any instrument or weapon mentioned in the first
three subdivisions of § 265.05 of the Penal Law, except that a pawnbroker
may purchase back any pledge offered for sale by him at public auction and
may thereafter sell such pledge if the pledgor fails to redeem within 10 days
or may purchase any pledge offered for sale by any other pawnbroker at
public auction.
§ 189-9.1. Dealings with minors. [Added 4-10-1981, approved
4-13-1981]
No pawnbroker or person in the employ of a pawnbroker shall receive or
purchase any goods, chattels, wares or merchandise from, or make any loan
or advance or permit to be loaned or advanced to, any child, actually or
apparently under the age of 18 years, any money, or in any manner directly
or indirectly receive any goods, chattels, wares or merchandise from any
such child in pledge for loans made or to be made to it or to any other
person or otherwise howsoever. It shall be no defense to a prosecution for a
violation of this section that in the transaction upon which the prosecution
is based the child acted as the agent or representative of another or that the
defendant dealt with such child as the agent or representative of another.
§ 189-10. Sales and auctions. [Amended 4-10-1981, approved
4-13-1981]
No pawn or pledge made with a pawnbroker shall be sold until the same
shall have remained six months in his possession. All sales of defaulted
pledges shall be by public auction with each such pledge being individually
offered for sale and shall be conducted by licensed auctioneers within the
State of New York. All bids for the purchase of any defaulted pledge offered
at such sale shall be oral and expressed in dollars and cents without the use
of any special signs, signals or motions, if less than 11 people attend such
sale.
§ 189-11. Notice of sale.
Notice of every such sale shall be published for at least six days previous
thereto in a daily newspaper printed in the City of Mount Vernon, and also in
a newspaper of the City where the sale is to take place and to be designated
by the Mayor, and such notice shall specify the time and place at which such
sale is to take place, the names of the auctioneers by whom the same is to
be conducted and a description of the goods or articles to be sold.
§ 189-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 189-12
1:498
§ 189-12. Surplus money after sale.
The surplus money, if any, arising from any such sale, after deducting the
amount of the loan, the interest due on the same and the expense of the
advertising and sale, shall be paid over by the pawnbroker to the person
who would be entitled to redeem the pledge in case no such sale had taken
place.
Chapter 191
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abatement of nuisances — See Ch. 80.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 140.
Graffiti — See Ch. 144.
Harassment of police officers — See Ch. 147.
Noise — See Ch. 178.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 186.
§ 189-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-12
1:499

ARTICLE I
Preservation of Good Order
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 26 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 191-1. Obstruction of enforcement officers.
No person shall obstruct, hinder or interfere with, or aid or assist in
obstructing, hindering or interfering with, any officer of the City in the
performance of his duty.72
§ 191-2. Damage to City property.
No person shall willfully injure, destroy, damage or deface any property, real
or personal, belonging to the City.
§ 191-3. Littering; fine.
No person shall litter, sweep, throw, cast or lay, or direct any servant,
agent, employee or other person under his control to litter, sweep,
throw, cast or lay, any rubbish or refuse of any kind, including but not
limited to ashes, offal, garbage, cinders, shells, straw, shavings, paper,
leaves, dirt, filth, broken glassware, crockery, bottles, tacks, sticks,
stones or any fruit or vegetables or any part or portion thereof, in or
upon any building, street, gutter, public place, sidewalk, vacant lot or
plot, whether privately or municipally owned. [Amended 12-2-1968,
approved 12-3-1968]
A.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
building or premises shall keep and cause to be kept free from litter,
rubbish, leaves, garbage, refuse, bottles, cans, broken glassware, dirt,
filth, obstructions, encumbrances and nuisances of any kind, the
sidewalk flagging, curbstone and gutter abutting said building or
premises. [Added 12-2-1968, approved 12-3-1968]
B.
No person, being the owner or in charge of or in control of any vehicle
or any receptacle, shall scatter, drop or spill, or permit to be scattered,
dropped or spilled therefrom, any dirt, sand, gravel, clay, loam, stone or
building rubbish, hay, straw, sawdust, shavings or other material of any
sort, or manufacturing, trade or household waste, refuse, rubbish of
any sort, or ashes, manure, garbage or other organic refuse, or permit
the same to be blown therefrom, in or upon any street or public place.
C.
Any person violating any provision of Subsection A, B or C shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter, which shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $250 nor more than $2,500. [Added 11-12-1987,
approved 11-13-1987; amended 2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
D.
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 147, Harassment of Police Officers.
§ 191-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-4
1:501
§ 191-4. Rubbish removal and burning. [Amended 6-22-1960,
approved 6-23-1960]
§ 191-5. Interference with garbage removal.
§ 191-6. Sewage.
No person shall permit slops, sewage or any kind of filth to run into any
street.
§ 191-7. Beanshooters and similar devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 191-8. Prize packages.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any prize package of merchandise
in any form having a value which is uncertain and dependent upon some
No person shall place upon any street or sidewalk any paper, shavings,
excelsior, hay, packing, rubbish, limbs of trees, leaves, grass, weeds,
rags, brush or other waste material or substances unless the same
be placed in receptacles or bundles for removal in accordance with
requirements of § 140-2 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, New
York.
A.
No person shall place or cause to be placed or leave on the sidewalk or
street in front of or in the entrance or hallway of any store, commercial
building or factory any paper, packing, rubbish, vegetables, garbage
or other waste material or substances between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. during weekdays nor at any time during any Sunday or
holiday.
B.
No person shall burn within the limits of any park area any material of
any kind.
C.
No person shall prevent, hinder or interfere with any employee or
licensee of the City in the sweeping or cleaning of any street or in
the removal therefrom of sweepings, ashes, garbage, trash, snow, ice
or refuse material; nor shall any person interfere or tamper with any
equipment or signs used in connection therewith.
A.
No person other than an authorized employee or licensee of the City
shall disturb or remove any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish placed
for removal.
B.
Sell or offer for sale a beanshooter or other instrument for throwing
bullets, stones or beans.
A.
Use any beanshooter or other such instrument for throwing bullets,
stones or other missiles, or carry the same with the intention of so
using.
B.
§ 191-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-8
1:502
unknown quantity of money or other property said to be contained therein
or therewith.
§ 191-9. Processions and parades. [Amended 4-13-1960, approved
4-19-1960; 1-25-1984, approved 1-26-1984]
§ 191-10. Conduct on buses. [Added 12-9-1964, approved
12-10-1964]
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match,
or spit or litter paper, debris or rubbish in and upon any public bus used
for the conveyance of passengers over any and all routes, for the operation
of which a franchise or terminable permit has been granted by the City of
Mount Vernon. A copy of this section shall be conspicuously displayed in
Unless otherwise permitted by law, all processions and parades over
any public streets or places are prohibited unless a prior written permit
signed by the Mayor is obtained. Such permit shall designate the street
or streets or public places over which processions and parades may
move as well as the day and hours thereof.
A.
Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk
accompanied by a fee of $100 for such permit and the filing of a
certificate of insurance to be approved by the Corporation Counsel
in the sum of $500,000, with the City of Mount Vernon as additional
insured, conditioned for the payment of any loss, damage or injury
resulting to persons or property by reason of carelessness or
negligence on the part of the applicant, its servants, agents or
employees.
B.
The provisions of this section as to the filing of a certificate of insurance
and the payment of a fee shall not apply to religious or funeral
processions, political parades, parades of departments of the
government of the City of Mount Vernon, parades sponsored by the
Board of Education of the Mount Vernon School District or parades of
United States military forces and local posts or chapters of veterans
organizations and their auxiliaries designated in § 183 of the Military
Law of the State of New York.
C.
The Memorial Day Parade, the Independence Day Celebration, the
Veterans Day Parade and any other regularly scheduled patriotic
service or procession dedicated to the memory of American war
veterans and sanctioned by the City of Mount Vernon shall not be
canceled or adjourned without the prior consent of the Mayor. A
parade, procession or service may be canceled or adjourned only when,
in the determination of the Mayor, the proposed parade, procession
or service will present a danger to the safety and well-being of the
participants, observers or citizens of this community or upon such other
grounds which in the opinion of the Mayor may be deemed in the best
interests of the general public.
D.
§ 191-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-10
1:503
each bus operated and used for the transportation of passengers within the
City of Mount Vernon.
§ 191-11. Public drinking and open containers. [Added 7-26-1978,
approved 7-27-1978; amended 9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999]
No person shall drink, or possess any open container of, beer, wine or other
intoxicating beverage on any public street, public sidewalk, public alley,
public highway, public playground or public parking area.
§ 191-12. Enforcement. [Added 6-22-1960, approved 6-23-1960]
§ 191-12.1. Indecent exposure. [Added 5-26-1993 by L.L. No.
3-1993, approved 6-10-1993]
A person is guilty of exposure if he appears in a public place in such a
manner that the private or intimate parts of his body are unclothed or
exposed. For purposes of this section, the private or intimate parts of a
female person shall include that portion of the breast which is below the top
of the areola. This section shall not apply to the breastfeeding of infants but
shall apply to any person entertaining or performing in a play, exhibition,
show or entertainment.
§ 191-12.2. Promoting indecent exposure. [Added 5-26-1993 by L.L.
No. 4-1993, approved 6-10-1993]
A person is guilty of promoting the exposure of a person when he knowingly
conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates or furnishes any public
premises or place where a person in a public place appears in such a
manner that the private or intimate parts of his body are unclothed or
exposed. For purposes of this section, the private or intimate parts of a
female person shall include that portion of the breast which is below the top
of the areola. This section shall not apply to the breastfeeding of infants but
shall apply to any person entertaining or performing in a play, exhibition,
show or entertainment.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works, together with
the Department of Public Safety, to enforce the provisions contained in
§§ 191-3, 191-4, 191-5 and 191-6 of this article.
A.
The Department of Public Works shall have the power, through
authorized employees designated by the Mayor, to issue summonses
and file informations concerning any violation of any such provisions.
B.
§ 191-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-12.2
1:504
ARTICLE II
Trespassing Upon Gardens
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 20 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 191-13. Trespassing prohibited.
No person shall, without lawful authority, enter upon any fruit, vegetable or
flower garden, orchard, vineyard or other ground whereon is cultivated any
fruit, vegetable, flower, tree, plant, grain or vine.
§ 191-14. Damaging and removing contents prohibited.
No person shall, without lawful authority, willfully injure, disfigure, pick,
pluck, sever, cut, remove, damage or destroy any standing crop, cultivated
fruit, vegetable, flower, tree, plant, grain or vine, the property of another,
growing or grown in any garden, orchard, vineyard or other grounds.
§ 191-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-14
1:505

ARTICLE III
Sale of Spray Paint
[Adopted 4-24-1985, approved 4-25-1985]
§ 191-15. Sale of spray paint cans or containers restricted.
§ 191-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person selling or offering for sale a can or container of spray paint to a
person under the age of 18 years shall be guilty of a violation of this article
and punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment, or both,
pursuant to § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
No person shall sell or offer for sale to any person under the age of
18 years any can or container containing paint and a propellant and
designed to spray paint, commonly known as a "paint spray can."
A.
It shall be the duty of any person who sells or offers for sale any
container described in Subsection A to require from any person
desiring to purchase such container, and appearing to be less than 18
years of age, identification and proof of such person's age before selling
or delivering a container to such a person.
B.
§ 191-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-16
1:507

ARTICLE IV
Possession of Spray Paint
[Adopted 5-22-1985, approved 5-23-1985]
§ 191-17. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that the problem of vandalism upon public
and private property has reached such proportions that the cost of removal
of graffiti and the cost of maintenance is no longer economically feasible;
that in many cases the graffiti has caused permanent damage to municipal
property, which cannot be corrected in an economical manner; that the
blighted condition caused by the graffiti increases the deterioration of
neighborhoods, prevents the creation of attractive business districts and
limits the ability of the City to improve its financial structure by increasing
the growth of municipal income through the enhanced value of property;
that the unchecked proliferation of this vandalism encourages and fosters
the further commission of such crimes and contributes to juvenile
delinquency and youth crime; that many of the acts of vandalism are caused
by persons using cans or containers of a product commonly known as "spray
paint"; and that unless the possession of a can or container of spray paint
in public places, streets and parks is prohibited, the acts of vandalism and
the resulting urban blight will increase, as well other conditions detrimental
to the public health, safety and welfare. It is further declared and found
that the possession of a can or container of spray paint in open view in
public places while such product is not being used for a lawful purpose is
unnecessary and should be prohibited.
§ 191-18. Possession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person or to have
in his or her possession in or on any public place, street or park a can or
container containing paint and a propellant and designed to spray paint,
commonly known as a "paint spray can."
§ 191-19. Exception.
The provisions of § 191-18 shall not apply to any person displaying or in
possession of a can or container of spray paint when such a product is being
used for or transported immediately to or from a place where it is used for
home repair or maintenance, automobile repair or such other employment,
trade or occupation customarily requiring the use of said product; or is
being transported directly from the place of purchase packaged in such a
manner as not to allow easy access to said spray paint while it is being
transported.
§ 191-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation
of this chapter and punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or to
§ 191-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-20
1:509
imprisonment, or both, pursuant to § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon.
§ 191-20 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-20
1:510
ARTICLE V
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 6-27-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001, approved 7-16-200173]
§ 191-21. Findings and purpose.
The Council finds that public nuisances exist in the City of Mount Vernon in
the operation of certain establishments and the use of property in flagrant
violation of the penal laws relating to prostitution, gambling, controlled
substances, dangerous drugs, stolen property and laws relating to the sale
and consumption of alcoholic beverages, all of which substantially and
seriously interfere with the interest of the public in the quality of life and
total community environment, commerce in the City, property values and
the public health, safety and welfare. The Council furthers finds that the
continued occurrence of such activities and violations is detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the City of Mount Vernon and
of the businesses thereof and the visitors thereto. It is the purpose of the
Council to authorize and empower the Commissioner of Public Safety to
impose sanctions and penalties for such public nuisances, and such powers
of the Commissioner of Public Safety may be exercised either in conjunction
with or apart from other laws without prejudice to the use of procedures
and remedies available under such laws. The Council further finds that
the sanctions and penalties imposed by the Commissioner of Public Safety
pursuant to this article constitute an additional and appropriate method
of law enforcement in response to the proliferation of the above-described
public nuisances. The sanctions and penalties are reasonable and necessary
in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the City and to
promote the general welfare.
§ 191-22. Declaration of public nuisances.
For the purposes of this section and § 191-23, the following are
declared to be public nuisances:
Any building, structure or place where violations of any of the
provisions of Article 230 of the Penal Law are occurring and where
two or more violations of such provisions which have resulted in
one or more criminal convictions and one or more arrests have
occurred within the twelve-month period of time prior to the
commencement of a proceeding pursuant to § 191-23. It shall be
prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where an arrest
for a violation of any of the provisions of such article has been made
within 30 days prior to the issuance of notice pursuant to § 191-23.
(1)
Any building, structure or place where violations of any of the
provisions of Article 220, 221 or 225 of the Penal Law are occurring
and where two or more violations of such provisions which have
(2)
A.
73.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. V, Public Nuisances, adopted
7-13-1988, approved 7-14-1988.
§ 191-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-22
1:511
§ 191-23. Powers of Commissioner of Public Safety; penalties for
offenses.
resulted in one or more criminal convictions and one or more
arrests have occurred within the twelve-month period of time prior
to the commencement of a proceeding pursuant to § 191-23. It shall
be prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where an
arrest for a violation of any of the provisions of such articles has
been made within 60 days prior to the issuance of notice pursuant
to § 191-23.
Any building, structure or place where violations of any of the
unlawful activities set forth in § 123 of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law are occurring and where two or more violations of
such provisions which have resulted in one or more criminal
convictions and one or more arrests have occurred within the
twelve-month period of time prior to the commencement of a
proceeding pursuant to § 191-23. It shall be prima facie evidence
that violations are occurring where an arrest for a violation of any
of the unlawful activities set forth in such section has been made
within 60 days prior to the issuance of notice pursuant to § 191-23.
(3)
Any building, structure or place where violations of any of the
provisions of § 165.40, 165.45, 165.50, 170.70, 175.10, 260.20 or
260.21 of the Penal Law or § 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
are occurring and where two or more violations of such provisions
which have resulted in one or more criminal convictions and one or
more arrests have occurred within the twelve-month period of time
prior to the commencement of a proceeding pursuant to § 191-23.
It shall be prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where
an arrest for a violation for any of the provisions of such sections
has been made within 60 days prior to the issuance of notice
pursuant to § 191-23.
(4)
For the purpose of this section, "conviction" shall be defined and
applied in accordance with the provisions of § 1.20 of the Criminal
Procedure Law.
B.
In addition to the enforcement procedures set forth in this Code and
any other law, the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee, after
notice, and an opportunity for a hearing, shall be authorized:
To order the discontinuance of such activity at the building,
structure, or place where such public nuisance exists; and/or
(1)
To order the closing of the building, structure, or place to the
extent necessary to abate the nuisance.
(2)
A.
Prior to the issuance of orders by the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's designee pursuant to Subsection A of this section, the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee shall give notice and
B.
§ 191-22 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-23
1:512
opportunity for a hearing to the owner, lessor, lessee and mortgagee
of a building structure, or place wherein the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained, or permitted. All notices required herein shall
be made pursuant Article 3 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The
person in whose name the real estate affected by the orders of the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee is recorded in the office
of the City Assessor or the County Clerk, as the case may be, shall
be presumed to be the owner thereof. The lack of knowledge of,
acquiescence or participation in or responsibility for a public nuisance
on the part of the owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees, and all those
persons in possession of or having charge of as agent or otherwise, or
having any interest in the property, real or personal, used in conducting
or maintaining the public nuisance shall not be a defense by such
owners, lessors and lessees, mortgages, and such other persons.
Orders of the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee issued
pursuant to this section shall be posted at the building, structure or
place where a public nuisance exists or is occurring in violation of law
and shall be mailed to the owner of record thereof within one business
day of the posting.
C.
Five business days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to
Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section and upon the written directive
of the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee, officers of the
Department of Public Safety are authorized to act upon and enforce
such orders.
D.
Where the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee closes a
building, structure or place pursuant to Subsection B of this section,
such closing shall be for such period as the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's designee may direct, but in no event shall the closing
be for a period of more than one year from the posting of the order
pursuant to Subsection C of this section. If the owner, lessor, or lessee
shall file a bond in an amount determined by the Commissioner or
the Commissioner's designee but which may not exceed the value of
the property ordered to be closed and submit proof satisfactory to the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee that the nuisance has
been abated and will not be created, maintained or permitted for such
period of time as the building, structure, or place has been directed
to be closed by the order of the Commissioner or the Commissioner's
designee, then the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee may
vacate the provisions of the order that direct the closing of the building,
structure, or place.
E.
A closing directed by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's
designee pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section shall not constitute
an act of possession, ownership or control by the City of the closed
premises.
F.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy or to
permit any other person to use or occupy any building, structure or
G.
§ 191-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-23
1:513
place or portion thereof ordered closed by the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's designee. Mutilation or removal of a posted order of
the Commissioner shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, provided that such
order contains a notice of such penalty.
Intentional disobedience or resistance, or resistance to any provision of
the orders issued by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee
pursuant to this section, in addition to any other punishment prescribed
by law, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000 or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
H.
The Commissioner may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out
and give full effect to the provisions of § 191-22 and this section.
I.
§ 191-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-23
1:514
ARTICLE VI
Sale of Box Cutters
[Adopted 6-26-1996, approved 6-26-1996]
§ 191-24. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOX CUTTER — Any knife consisting of a razor blade, retractable,
nonretractable or detachable in segments, attached to or contained within
a plastic or metal housing, including utility knives, snap-off knives and box
carton cutters.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization
or other legal entity.
SCHOOL PREMISES — The buildings, grounds or facilities or any portion
thereof owned, occupied by or under the custody or control of public
or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational
instruction to students at or below the 12th grade level and any vehicles
owned, operated or leased by such institutions which are used to transport
such students or the personnel of such institutions.
§ 191-25. Sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to sell or offer to sell or cause any
persons to sell or offer to sell a box cutter to any individual under 18 years
of age.
§ 191-26. Display.
No person who sells or offers for sale box cutters shall place such box
cutters on open display so that such implements are accessible to the public
without the assistance of such seller or his or her employee or other agent
offering such implement for sale; provided, however, that the restrictions
of this section shall not apply to those box cutters on open display which
are clearly and fully visible from a place of payment for goods or services
or customer information at which such seller or an employee or other
agent of such seller is usually present during hours when the public is
invited or which are in a package, box or other container provided by the
manufacturer, importer or packager that is larger than 41 square inches.
§ 191-27. Use on school premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 22 years of age to possess a
box cutter while on school premises; provided, however, that nothing in
this section shall preclude the temporary transfer on school premises of
such an instrument to a person under 22 years of age for a valid schoolrelated
purpose where such device is used only under the supervision of a
school staff person; and provided, further, that nothing in this section shall
preclude the use of such an instrument on school premises by any person
§ 191-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-27
1:515
under 22 years of age so long as such person is performing work on such
premises during the course of his or her employment and such instrument
is used only under the supervision of his or her employer or such employer's
agent or a school staff person.
§ 191-28. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each offense or imprisoned for a period not to exceed
15 days.
§ 191-27 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-28
1:516
ARTICLE VII
Weapons
[Adopted 5-26-1999, approved 5-27-1999]
§ 191-29. Prohibition on carrying of loaded rifle or shotgun.
§ 191-30. Prohibition on carrying unloaded rifle or shotgun.
In addition to any other laws and regulations prescribed under county, state
and federal law for the carrying of unloaded rifles and shotguns, no person
may carry or display an unloaded rifle or shotgun on any public property or
in any place of public assembly within the limits of the City of Mount Vernon
unless such unloaded rifle or shotgun is completely enclosed, or contained,
in a nontransparent carrying case.
§ 191-31. Exemptions from §§ 191-29 and 191-30.
The following are exempt from §§ 191-29 and 191-30:
In addition to any other laws and regulations prescribed under county,
state, and federal law for the carrying of loaded rifles and shotguns,
no person may carry or display a loaded rifle or shotgun on any public
property or in any place of public assembly within the limits of the City
of Mount Vernon.
A.
Peace officers, as defined in § 1.20, Subdivision 33, of the Criminal
Procedure Law.
A.
Participants in special events when authorized by the Police
Commissioner.
B.
§ 191-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-31
1:517
Chapter 194
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 88.
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 145.
Noise — See Ch. 178.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 189.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Special sales — See Ch. 215.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 249.
§ 191-31 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 191-31
1:518
ARTICLE I
Peddling
[Adopted 7-8-1992, approved 7-9-199274]
§ 194-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the article is to prevent dishonest business practices by
providing for the registration and regulation of the conduct of peddlers.
Inasmuch as the primary purposes of the public streets, sidewalks and
other public ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic, reasonable
regulation of peddling on public ways is necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants. Therefore, this
article is meant as an expression of the police power of the City and is
established for the public health, safety and welfare of the City and its
inhabitants.
§ 194-2. Definitions. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which or
where business is transacted dealing in goods, wares and merchandise, on
a regular, continuing, ongoing basis.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, beverages,
ingredients, ice or water used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
FOOD VENDING BUSINESS — The business of selling or offering food for
sale at retail in a public space engaged in by a food vendor.
FOOD VENDOR — A person who hawks, peddles, sells or offers food for sale
at retail in any public space.
ITINERANT VENDOR — A person or entity who or which sells goods, wares,
food or merchandise at a special event from various locations on public
streets or sidewalks in the City or in a City park.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the displaying, storing, preparing
and cooking or transporting of articles for sale, by a peddler or food vendor
which is required to be licensed and registered by the State Department
of Motor Vehicles. The term is to include trailers, trucks, automobiles and
motorcycles.
PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who in any public way,
or by traveling from house to house or established place of business to
established place of business, on foot or on or from any animal, bicycle, boat
or motor vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or exposes for sale
or barter any goods, wares or merchandise.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. I, Peddling, adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch.
31 of the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon, approved 11-15-1957, as
amended. This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect 1-1-1993.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-2
1:519
PUBLIC WAY — All areas legally open to public use, including but not
limited to public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways and
alleys.
PUSHCART — Any wheeled vehicle or device used by a food vendor, other
than a motor vehicle or trailer, which may be moved with or without
the assistance of a motor and which does not require registration by the
department of motor vehicles.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion, including but not limited to fairs, shows,
exhibitions, City-wide celebrations, and festivals, taking place within a
specifically defined area of the City for a period of time not to exceed three
days.
STAND — Any table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, bicycle or any
other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and registered
by the state department of motor vehicles, and is used for the display,
storage, preparation or transportation of articles, offered for sale by a
peddler or food vendor.
VEND — To hawk, peddle, sell or offer to sell food at retail in a public space,
delivered immediately upon consummation of purchase.
§ 194-3. License required. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or
food vendor, as defined in § 194-2 of this article, within the City of Mount
Vernon without having in force a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 194-4. Exemptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to apply to any of the
following:
§ 194-5. Application for license; insurance; bond.
A. A sale conducted pursuant to order of any court.
The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities on their own land, provided
that they have otherwise complied with any licensing and health and
safety requirements of any other competent governmental body or
agency and the sale takes place from a stationary location owned or
leased by the seller.
B.
Any person selling newspapers or periodicals or distributing free
samples from his or her person.
C.
The activities of a religious organization governed by Article III of this
chapter.
D.
§ 194-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-5
1:520
Written application. Any person desiring a license as herein provided
shall file with the City Clerk a written application therefor, duly verified
by the applicant upon blank forms provided by the City Clerk. A license
may be taken out only by such person and not in the name of a firm,
corporation, association, club, etc. Such application shall include but
not be limited to the following information:
The name, address, date of birth, social security number and
motorist identification number of such person and the name of
the corporation, firm, association, club, partnership or any other
organization represented by such person.
(1)
A certificate of authority which is issued by the State of New York
for the purpose of certifying that the possessor of said certificate
is authorized to collect and retain sales tax in accordance with the
laws of the State of New York. A photostatic copy of said certificate
of authority shall be made and attached to the written application.
(2)
A description of the type of goods, wares, food or merchandise
which the applicant intends to sell. [Amended 11-26-2013,
approved 11-27-2013]
(3)
If applicable, a description of the motor vehicle or pushcart which
the applicant intends to use in carrying out the proposed business
or occupation, the name of the owner of such vehicle and a copy
of the registration of such vehicle and insurance coverage.
[Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
(4)
(5) Any County Health Department permit number, if a food vendor.
Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a crime and, if so,
under what name, with a listing of such convictions, including
crime, jurisdiction, date and sentence imposed.
(6)
A.
Photographs and fingerprints. Each application for a license required
by this article shall be accompanied by a photograph of the applicant,
in quadruplicate, passport size, taken within 30 days prior to such
application, as well as the fingerprints of both hands, of the person
applying for the license and of each assistant and employee who shall
engage in peddling or food vending within the City. The taking and
processing of fingerprints shall be as directed by the Commissioner
of Public Safety. Said fingerprints shall be submitted to the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services or other appropriate agency
for processing and investigation. All costs incurred for this process
must be paid by the applicant. The fee for the processing of fingerprints
is mandated by the State of New York and § 126-2.2A of the Code of
the City of Mount Vernon. No application for a peddling or food vending
license shall be approved, nor any license issued under the provisions
of this article, until the commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal
Investigation in the Department of Public Safety has reviewed and
examined the criminal history record information disseminated by the
B.
§ 194-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-5
1:521
§ 194-6. Waiver of license fee; exemptions for persons sixty-five
years of age or over.
Division of Criminal Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any
applicant who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving
violence, dishonesty or deceit. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
Insurance coverage. In addition to filing a written application with
the City Clerk, any person desiring to procure a license shall provide
proof of financial responsibility consisting of a policy or certificate of
insurance. Said certificate shall be for comprehensive general liability
insurance, which includes products and completed operations
coverage, in an amount of $1,000,000. The City of Mount Vernon, New
York, shall be named as an additional insured on said certificate. If
a motor vehicle is used in the conduct of peddling or food vending
business, then a certificate of automotive liability insurance must also
be provided evidencing, at a minimum, the statutory limits of coverage
required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law. [Amended 11-26-2013,
approved 11-27-2013]
C.
Bond. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a bond in
the sum of $2,500, which bond shall be approved as to form and surety
by the Corporation Counsel. Said bond shall be conditioned for the due
observance of all ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon and laws of
the State of New York relative to peddling and food vending, including
but not limited to all provisions of the New York State and Westchester
County Sanitary Codes. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
D.
The maximum number of such licenses which may be in effect shall
be 20 and no new licenses shall be issued in excess of such maximum
number. [Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
E.
Provided that such person has completed the application for a license
and has met all other requirements as set forth in this article, there
shall be no fee for such license, other than the fingerprint processing
charge, for an honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the
United States, or surviving spouse of the same, who is the holder of a
license issued pursuant to § 32 of the General Business Law of the State
of New York.
A.
A person who is 65 years of age or over shall be exempt from the
fee for a license to peddle or vend as herein provided to the extent of
50% thereof, provided that such person is actually engaged in peddling
or food vending business within the City of Mount Vernon and is the
owner and operator of the business using or employing a motor vehicle,
pushcart or stand. Said exemption shall not include any fingerprint
processing charge and is contingent upon such person completing the
application for a license and meeting all other requirements as set forth
in this article. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
B.
§ 194-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-7
1:522
§ 194-7. Issuance or denial of license.
§ 194-8. Renewals. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
All renewal applications shall be processed as new applications. The City
Clerk shall review each application for renewal to determine that the
applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this article. If the City
Clerk finds that the application meets the above requirements, the City
Clerk shall issue a new license pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 194-9. Peddling and food vending fee. [Amended 6-26-2002,
approved 6-27-2002; 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
The City Clerk shall collect the following peddling and food vending
application or renewal fees:
§ 194-10. Licenses, identification badges and license decals.
The City Clerk, with such assistance from the Police Department as
may be reasonably necessary, shall investigate all applicants and shall
thereafter issue or deny such license to the applicant. No license shall
be issued for a period greater than one year. The date of issuance and
expiration of such license, as well as the purpose for which it has been
issued, shall be set forth on the face thereof.
A.
Authorizations to grant and refuse license.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue licenses under his
hand, to be sealed with the Corporate Seal and countersigned by
the Mayor, to such persons to peddle goods, wares or merchandise
or vend food within the limits of the City, if the applicant complies
with all application requirements and is found to have no
nonconformity rationally related to activity as a peddler or food
vendor. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
(1)
The City Clerk shall deny issuance of a license to any person
who fails to comply with all application requirements and/or to
any person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving violence, dishonesty or deceit and shall give written
notice to the applicant setting forth the reason or reasons for said
denial.
(2)
B.
For each license to any person to peddle goods, wares or merchandise
or to any person who is in the food vending business when using or
employing a motor vehicle or pushcart: the sum of $600 per year.
A.
For each license to any person to peddle goods, wares or merchandise
when using or employing a stand or carrying his or her merchandise:
the sum of $250 per year.
B.
For each license for an itinerant vendor who sells goods, wares, food or
merchandise: the sum of $225.
C.
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-10
1:523
§ 194-11. Restrictions.
Any license issued to a peddler or food vendor shall be carried with
said peddler or food vendor at all times when he or she is engaged
in the business of peddling or vending and shall be exhibited to any
person upon request. If said peddler sells food or beverages, the health
permit must also be displayed. [Amended 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
A.
In addition to such license, the City Clerk shall issue an identification
badge to every peddler or food vendor, who shall display such badge
so that the badge may be easily read while doing business. If a badge
becomes damaged or obscured, such peddler or food vendor shall
return it to the City Clerk for replacement. The City Clerk shall be
required to collect from each person to whom a badge is so issued
the sum of $10. [Amended 6-26-2002, approved 6-27-2002;
11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
B.
For each license issued employing a stand or motor vehicle, the City
Clerk shall issue two license decals containing the licensee's number
and date of expiration of the license; said license decals are to be placed
conspicuously on both sides of the stand or vehicle.
C.
Licenses and license decals shall be used only by the licensee to whom
they were issued, or the authorized assistant or employee of said
licensee, and may not be transferred to any other person. Identification
badges shall only be used by the person to whom they were issued.
D.
Licensed peddlers and food vendors shall not: [Amended 11-26-2013,
approved 11-27-2013]
Enter upon private or public property for the purpose of peddling
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. on any
day except:
Upon the express invitation of the owner or occupant of said
private property.
(a)
In the case of motor vehicles used to sell food, the hours
of operation shall be extended to 8:00 p.m., September 16
through June 14, and to 9:30 p.m., June 15 through September
15.
(b)
(1)
Resort to deceptive acts or practices, physical abuse, threats,
intimidation or harassment in the course of conducting business or
offer for sale any provision, food or merchandise that is unfit or
otherwise harmful to the user or consumer thereof.
(2)
Peddle or vend on private or public property which has displayed
a sign bearing words "No Peddling" or words of the like intent,
nor shall any licensee remain on the premises after the owner
(3)
A.
§ 194-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-11
1:524
or occupant thereof shall have requested the licensee's departure
therefrom.
Have an exclusive right to any location in the public way, nor be
permitted to stand or remain in one place in any public way for
more than 30 consecutive minutes without moving a minimum of
200 feet.
(4)
Be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation
would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard
to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner or
obstruct access to emergency vehicles.
(5)
Create, erect, maintain or place any stand, pushcart or obstruction
upon any public way for the selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares, food or merchandise which shall restrict the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(6)
Permit any stand, pushcart or vehicle used in such business to
stand or remain:
(a) In any crosswalk or driveway.
(b) Within 100 feet of any intersection.
Within 250 feet of any fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop,
loading zone, handicap area or driveway of a fire station, police
station or hospital.
(c)
(d) Unattended at any time.
(7)
Use any sound-amplifying device, including but not limited to any
loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or
similar device, to attract public attention.
(8)
Sell food, drink, ice cream or confections of any kind for immediate
consumption, unless the licensee has a litter receptacle available
for public use which shall be clearly marked and maintained, nor
shall any peddler leave any location without first picking up,
removing and thereafter disposing of all trash or refuse remaining
from any sales.
(9)
Exhibit, display, offer for sale or sell any goods, wares or
merchandise on the following public ways:
(a) Fourth Avenue between First Street and Third Street.
(b) Gramatan Avenue, Broad Street, and Grand Street.
(c) Fleetwood Avenue, Prospect Avenue and Sanford Boulevard.
(d) Fifth Avenue between First Street and Third Street.
(e) Third Street.
(10)
§ 194-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-11
1:525
(f) First Street between Second Avenue and Eleventh Avenue.
Any areas designated as "residential" on the Mount Vernon
Zoning Map.
(g)
No peddler or food vendor shall be allowed to sell within 250 feet of any
school between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
[Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
B.
Each license shall include the right to use only one stand, pushcart
or motor vehicle in carrying out the business for which the person is
licensed; provided, however, that said stand, pushcart or motor vehicle:
[Amended 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
Displays thereon the full name and location, by street and number,
of the licensee's place of business, in plain letters and figures not
less than 2 1/2 inches in length, painted on the both sides thereof;
and
(1)
Displays the license decals to be issued by the City Clerk,
containing the licensee's number and date of expiration of said
license in a conspicuous place on both sides of such stand, pushcart
or motor vehicle.
(2)
C.
Such license shall not be interpreted or construed to supersede any and
all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
D.
No vending vehicle or pushcart or any other item related to the
operation of a food vendor's business shall touch, lean against or be
affixed permanently or temporarily in any building or structure
including, but not limited to, lamp posts, parking meters, mail boxes,
traffic signal stanchions, fire hydrants, tree boxes, benches, bus
shelters, refuse baskets or traffic barriers. [Added 11-26-2013,
approved 11-27-2013]
E.
All items relating to the operation of a food vending business shall be
kept in or under the vending vehicle or pushcart, except that samples of
the nonperishable items sold may be displayed on the vending vehicle
or pushcart. No items relating to the operation of a food vending
business other than an adjoining acceptable waste container shall be
placed upon any public space adjacent to the vending vehicle or
pushcart, and no food shall be sold except from an authorized vehicle
or pushcart. [Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
F.
No vending pushcart shall be located against display windows of fixed
location businesses, nor shall they be within 15 feet of an entranceway
to any building, store, theatre, movie house, sports arena or other place
of public assembly. [Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
G.
Each food vendor who vends from a pushcart or vehicle in the roadway
shall obey all traffic and parking laws, rules and regulations as now
exist or as may be promulgated, but in no case shall a food vendor
H.
§ 194-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-11
1:526
§ 194-12. Suspension or revocation of license.
vend so as to restrict the continued maintenance of a clear passageway
for vehicles. Any vendors using portable heating units, propane tanks,
sternos, charcoal grills or any open flames must have a portable fire
extinguisher as per the New York State Fire Code, and must be first
approved by the Mount Vernon Fire Department for an additional fee of
$100. [Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
No person shall sell, give or otherwise transfer any food to an
unlicensed food vendor for resale. [Added 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
I.
Motorized, moving ice cream trucks shall not be included among the
licensed peddlers and food vendors restricted to areas set forth in
Subsection A(10). However, such ice cream trucks shall not be
permitted to remain stationary within park areas of the City unless
by written authorization of the Mount Vernon Recreation Department.
[Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
J.
Notwithstanding any of the areas restricted under Subsection A(10)
of this article, it shall be within the purview of the City Council, as
necessity demands, to modify and/or supplement prohibited as well as
permissible areas. [Added 11-26-2013, approved 11-27-2013]
K.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended
or revoked by the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon for cause, after
giving written notice to the licensee, including but not limited to the
following:
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(1)
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying out the licensee's trade, business or occupation.
(2)
(3) Any violation of this article.
Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude while holding a
peddler's or solicitor's license from the City of Mount Vernon.
(4)
Carrying out of the licensed business, trade or occupation in an
unlawful manner, or in such a way as to breach the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, welfare or safety of the public.
(5)
Conducting the business of peddling contrary to the conditions of
the license.
(6)
Cancellation of Health Department authorization for a food or
beverage vending unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation
violations.
(7)
A.
§ 194-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-12
1:527
§ 194-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk in regard to the
denial of application for a license as provided for in § 194-7 of this article or
in connection with the suspension or revocation of a license as provided for
in § 194-12 of this article shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a written statement
of appeal setting forth the grounds for the appeal within 14 days after the
notice of decision by the City Clerk has been mailed to such person's last
known address as indicated on the application or license. The City Council
shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal to be held no later
than 30 days after the written statement of appeal is filed with the City
Clerk, and notice of such hearing shall be given to such person no later than
10 days prior to the hearing date. The City Council shall give the appellant,
and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in
order to show cause why the determination of the City Clerk should not be
upheld. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final
and conclusive decision. This decision shall be immediately appealable to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 194-14. Expiration of license.
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall automatically expire on the
first day of May next following the date of its issuance.
§ 194-15. No transfer or assignment of license.
§ 194-16. Records.
The City Clerk, in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, shall
keep an accurate record of all licenses issued pursuant to this article.
Any license issued pursuant to this article is good only for the purposes
stated thereon, and a change of product being sold without written
consent from the City Clerk shall constitute cause for revocation of said
license, and the licensee shall thereby be guilty of violating this article;
no application for a further license may be made by said licensee for a
period of one year from the date of revocation.
B.
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall not be transferable nor
assignable. In the event that a licensee shall permit any other person
to possess or use such license other than the authorized assistant or
employee of said licensee, such licensee shall be guilty of violating this
article and said license shall be revoked by the City Clerk pursuant to
§ 194-12 herein; no further application for a license may be made by
said licensee for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
A.
No vehicle, trailer or pushcart used to vend food in a public place
shall be assignable or transferable with a license, permit or plate
that has been used under this article. [Added 11-26-2013, approved
11-27-2013]
B.
§ 194-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-17
1:528
§ 194-17. Duty of police to enforce.
It shall be the duty of any police officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the
City of Mount Vernon to require any person seen peddling who is not known
by such officer to be duly licensed to produce the appropriate identification
and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 194-18. Penalties for offenses.
§ 194-19. Repealer.
All ordinances, laws or parts of ordinances or laws in conflict with this
article are hereby repealed.
§ 194-20. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall for any reason
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article, but they
shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this article shall
stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $250 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both.
A.
Any person who fails to produce a proper license, identification badge
or applicable license decals issued pursuant to this article or in any
other way violates the provisions of this article may have his or her
merchandise seized and impounded by the City until the termination
of any action against said person to recover the fine therefor and
thereafter until the fine imposed by the court has been paid. Such
seizure and impoundment of any merchandise shall be at said person's
risk. Should said person fail to pay the fine imposed by the court as the
same shall be assessed, all merchandise seized and impounded shall be
forfeited to the City, subject to public sale. Notice of the sale, specifying
the date, place and hour of the sale, shall be served upon said person
personally or by registered mail, addressed to him or her at his or her
last known post office address and published not less than 10 days
before the sale. The publication of the notice of sale shall be made
in a newspaper or newspapers designated by the City Clerk having
general circulation in the City and county where such merchandise was
seized and impounded. The proceeds of the sale shall first be applied
in payment of the fine and expenses of sale and any remainder shall be
forfeited to the City.
B.
§ 194-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-20
1:529

ARTICLE II
Canvassing and Soliciting
[Adopted 12-10-1969 as Ch. 4-A of the General Ordinances,
approved 12-11-1969]
§ 194-21. License required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private residential property
in the City of Mount Vernon without prior consent of the occupant for the
purpose of canvassing, vending or soliciting orders for any merchandise,
device, books, periodical or printed matter whatsoever: or for the purpose
of soliciting alms, or for a subscription or contribution to any church,
charitable or public institution whatsoever; or for the purpose of
distributing any handbills, pamphlets, tract, notice or advertising matter,
except where expressly provided for in Chapter 145 of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon; or for the purpose of selling or distributing any ticket or
chance whatsoever, without first having obtained a license from the office
of the City Clerk and without the prior consent of the occupant of the
premises, except that no license shall be required:
§ 194-22. License application.
Of any holder of a license granted pursuant to § 32 of the General
Business Law.
A.
For the soliciting of orders for, or the vending or offering for sale of,
meats, fish, fruit or farm products by farmers or other persons who
produce the same.
B.
Of any person who has been a bona fide resident of the City of Mount
Vernon for at least six months last past, or of any person who has
maintained a place of business in the City of Mount Vernon for at least
six months prior thereto, or his duly authorized representative.
C.
Each application for a license required by this article must be filed with
the City Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon and must be accompanied by
the required license fee. Such application shall be on a form provided
by the City Clerk and must be sworn to before a notary public and
contain, among other things, the following information concerning the
applicant:
Applicant's name, residence, place of residence for past three years
previous, date and place of birth, height, color of eyes and hair,
whether a citizen of United States, and if naturalized, the place and
date of securing such citizenship.
(1)
(2) Names and addresses of past employers for the past five years.
Name and address of present employer and name and address of
immediate supervisor.
(3)
(4) Whether single or married.
A.
§ 194-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-22
1:531
§ 194-23. Photographs and fingerprints. [Amended 4-13-1989;
approved 4-13-1989]
Each application for a license required by this article shall be accompanied
by a photograph, in duplicate, in passport size, and also the fingerprints
of both hands of the person applying for the license and of each assistant
and employee who shall be so engaged within the City. If the applicant be
a corporation, such photograph and fingerprints of each agent or employee
who shall be so engaged within the City shall be submitted with the
application. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards provided by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under his/her supervision
by a senior police officer, and at such a place as the Commissioner shall
designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the authority to
submit the fingerprints of the applicant, together with the required fees,
to the Division of Criminal Justice Services or other appropriate agency for
processing and investigation. No application for a soliciting license shall be
approved nor any license issued under the provisions of this article until
after the commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in
the Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history record information disseminated by the Division of Criminal Justice
Services. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been
convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence, dishonesty
or deceit.
§ 194-24. Fees. [Amended 9-26-2012, approved 9-27-2012]
If the applicant satisfactorily meets the foregoing requirements for the
issuance of a license required by this article, the City Clerk shall issue to
the applicant a license upon the payment of a fee of $200 for a term of one
year.
All felonies or misdemeanors with which applicant has been
charged and the disposition of each such charge.
(5)
What, if any, licenses for peddling or vending issued by any state,
municipality or other such authority have previously been held by
applicant.
(6)
All instances in which any such licenses may have been revoked or
suspended and the details thereof.
(7)
Any other information of similar nature that may reasonably be
required.
(8)
No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a
felony or to a person convicted of a misdemeanor involving theft or
moral turpitude.
B.
§ 194-22 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 194-25
1:532
§ 194-25. Identification card. [Amended 9-26-2012, approved
9-27-2012]
The City Clerk shall also issue to each person receiving a license a pocket
card containing the photograph of the licensee, assistant or employee, as
the case may be, the name and residence address of such licensee, assistant
or employee and the name of the employer licensed hereunder, if any, and
bearing the notation that such card is a license to canvass, vend or solicit
and an imprint of the Official Seal of the City of Mount Vernon affixed
thereto. The City Clerk shall be required to collect from each person to
whom such card is so issued the sum of $5.
§ 194-26. Hours of business.
No person shall canvass, vend or solicit under a license issued pursuant to
this article except during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Monday
through Saturday of each week, other than legal holidays.
§ 194-27. Restrictions.75
Should an owner, tenant or manager of private property display a sign
prohibiting canvassing or soliciting, the permit granted hereunder shall not
authorize the permittee to enter upon such property. Further, no permittee
should engage in any unconsented touching of another person or interfere
with the pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow while conducting his or her
solicitation. Disregard of such prohibitions shall result in revocation of the
permit.
§ 194-28. Penalties for offenses.76
Any person who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 194-29. Severability.77
Should some or any one provision under this article be held unconstitutional
by a court, nothing herein shall affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.78
75.Editor's Note: This section, formerly § 194-37, was renumbered as § 194-27 6-26-2002,
approved 6-27-2002.
76.Editor's Note: This section, formerly § 194-27, was renumbered as § 194-28 6-26-2002,
approved 6-27-2002.
77.Editor's Note: This section, formerly § 194-40, was renumbered as § 194-29 6-26-2002,
approved 6-27-2002.
78.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Religious Organizations, adopted 5-23-1979 as Ch. 4-B of
the General Ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon, as amended, which immediately
followed this article, was repealed 6-26-2002, approved 6-27-2002.
§ 194-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-29
1:533
Chapter 197
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Repair of sidewalks; removal of ice and
snow — See Charter § 106.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 208.
§ 197-1. Abandoning property prohibited.
No person shall abandon or cause to be abandoned any property of any
description, including but not limited to automobiles, in or upon any lot or
portion thereof; nor shall any person store or place or cause to be stored or
placed any such abandoned property in or upon any lot or portion thereof;
nor shall any owner, occupant or tenant of any such lot or portion thereof
permit any abandoned property to remain thereon.
§ 197-2. Removal of property.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall serve written notice in the same
manner as provided in § 106 of the Charter upon the owner, occupant or
tenant of any lot upon which such abandoned property has been placed or
stored, requiring the removal thereof; and if said property is not removed
within 15 days thereafter, the Commissioner shall cause the same to be
removed from the realty, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and
collected in the manner provided by § 106 of the Charter.
Chapter 198
PROPERTY REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
§ 194-29 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 197-2
1:534
ARTICLE I
Absentee Real Property Owners
[Adopted 2-8-1961, approved 2-9-1961, as § 3-65 of Article 3 of the
City of Mount Vernon Building Code; amended 12-22-2010,
approved 12-23-2010]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABSENTEE REAL PROPERTY OWNERS — An absentee real property owner
is one who is not a permanent resident of the City of Mount Vernon. In the
case of a corporate owner, such owner shall be deemed an absentee owner
unless the corporation has its principal office within the City of Mount
Vernon.
§ 198-2. Registration requirements.
Every such absentee owner shall file annually with the Building
Department Commissioner a written absentee real property
registration form to be supplied by the Building Department containing
the name, address and telephone number of a managing agent, a
person or corporation, whose residence or place of business must be
in the City of Mount Vernon, which person or corporation shall be
designated by such absentee owner as the agent of the said owner
for the purpose of receiving notices of Building Code and Department
of Public Works violations and for the service upon him, as agent of
the owner, of sameness or other legal process directed to the owner
of said real property, which person shall be charged with the duty of
obeying all applicable statutes, ordinances, and orders relating to such
real property. The form along with the requisite fee as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Buildings must be filed with the Building Department
on or before March 15, 2011, and each year on or before March 15
thereafter. Such designation must be acknowledged by the owner and
duly notarized and the consent of the designee agent acknowledged by
the agent and duly notarized before the same are filed with the Building
Department Commissioner.
A.
The managing agent made pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall remain in full force and effect until changed or terminated as
hereinafter provided.
B.
The designation of a managing agent shall not relieve any such owner
of any responsibility or obligation as to compliance with the provisions
of this section and the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
C.
Where, after filing of any registration statement in relation to any
multiple dwelling under the applicable provisions of this section, the
owner of such dwelling shall have granted or transferred his or her
right, title or interest therein or in any part thereof, such owner shall
D.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:535
file with the Building Commissioner, within five days after such grant
or transfer, a written statement which shall contain the name and
residence and business addresses of the grantee, transferee or other
successor of such right, title or interest or if such grantee, transferee or
successor is a corporation, the name and address of such corporation.
Where, after the filing of any registration statement with the Building
Department pursuant to the applicable provisions of this section, any
change other than a designation of a different managing agent or a
change of ownership or interest occurs in any name, residence or
business address or list of officers required to be included in such
statement, the owner, within five days after such change, shall supply
the information necessary to make the last registration statement filed
current pursuant to the applicable provisions of this section.
E.
The designated managing agent made pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this section shall cease to be effective if such agent shall
die or be judicially declared incompetent.
F.
Termination of managing agent.
Any such agent may terminate his or her status as such by serving
upon the owner of the multiple dwelling involved by registered mail
or delivery in person and by filing with the Building Department,
with proof of service by affidavit, a written notice of such
termination signed by such agent, which shall state the date upon
which it shall become effective, and the name and address of such
owner and the address of such mailing. Such notice may be served
by delivery of a copy personally or by delivery of a copy to any
person of a suitable age and discretion at the residence or business
address of the owner set forth in the currently effective registration
statement filed with the Building Department or by transmitting a
copy of such notice by registered mail to the owner at the residence
or business address of such owner as set forth in such statement.
Such notice shall be not be valid or effective unless served on the
owner at least five days before its effective date if served personally
or by delivery to a person of suitable age and discretion, or at least
eight days before such date if served by registered mail, and unless
filed with the Building Department with proof of service affidavit at
least five days before such date.
(1)
An owner may terminate such designation by filing with the
Building Department a written designation of a new managing
agent made in conformity with the provisions hereinabove cited.
If any owner shall fail, on or before the effective date of any
notice of termination served and filed by a managing agent, or
within 15 days after any such agent shall die or be judicially
declared incompetent, to file with the Building Department a
designation of a new managing agent made in conformity with
(a)
(2)
G.
§ 198-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 198-2
1:536
§ 198-3. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to file an absentee real property registration form and pay the
requisite fee shall be punishable by a fine of $250.
§ 198-4. Unpaid fees.
If any charges, fees or assessments under this article are not paid by March
15 of the respective year, the City may, in addition to or in lieu of other
remedies, add such unpaid charges, fees or assessments to the subsequent
City property tax levy for the property on which such alarm system is
located, to be collected, bear interest and be enforced as provided by law
for City taxes.
the provisions herein, such owner shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
Any registration statement or designation of a managing agent required
to be filed with the Building Department by any owner or lessee of a
multiple dwelling under the provisions of this section shall be signed by
such owner or lessee, or if such owner or lessee is a corporation, by an
officer thereof.
H.
Any such registration statement or designation of a managing agent
shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained
in any violation and/or criminal prosecution instituted by a City agency
against the owner or managing agent of a multiple dwelling.
I.
Every such absentee owner shall comply with the provisions of this
section on or before January 15, 2011, and each January 15 thereafter.
J.
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-4
1:537
Chapter 200
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Theaters — See Ch. 240.
§ 200-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-14-1958, approved 5-15-1958]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC BUILDINGS — Includes a theater, opera house, church, municipal
building, hospital, nursing or convalescent home, home for the aged, public
building and any building used for the assembly or meeting of persons for
entertainment or amusement.
§ 200-2. Obstructions to ingress and egress prohibited.
No person shall place any chairs or benches or other obstructions in the
aisle of any public building so as to obstruct or interfere with the free
ingress and egress of persons to and from or the free movement within such
building.
§ 200-3. Aisles and passageways.
The owner, lessee or occupant, or manager, trustees or directors owning,
operating or in control of a public building shall at all times keep the
aisles, passageways, stairways, entrances and exits free from all and every
obstruction.
§ 200-4. Doors.
The owner, lessee or occupant, or manager, trustees or directors
owning, operating or in control of a public building shall cause the
doors thereof to swing outwardly only, shall keep same unfastened
during all the time such building is occupied and shall keep the same
clear of all obstructions.
A.
No public building shall hereafter be erected unless the plans and
specifications for such building, filed with the Commissioner of
Buildings, shall provide that the doors thereof shall be swung outwardly
only.
B.
§ 198-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 200-5
1:538
§ 200-5. Ashes and rubbish.
No ashes shall be kept or deposited in any public building except in metal
receptacles. All rubbish shall be promptly removed, and no paper, smokecreating
material or rubbish shall be burned therein except under such
conditions and in such manner as shall be approved by the Fire
Commissioner.
§ 200-6. Heating and electrical apparatus.
The heating and electrical apparatus of any public building shall be under
the supervision of a competent person. The determination as to competency
shall be made by the Fire Commissioner.
§ 200-7. Motion-picture machines.
All motion-picture machines operated for public amusement must be
enclosed in a suitable steel-clad booth and shall be provided with a suitable
smoke vent to the exterior of the building.
§ 200-8. Licensed motion-picture operator required.
In all public buildings where motion-picture machines are used or operated,
at least one motion-picture operator duly licensed by the City shall be
assigned to and remain in charge of each motion-picture machine therein;
and it shall be the responsibility of the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee or
other person in charge of such public building to comply with the provisions
of this section.
§ 200-9. Smoking.
The Fire Commissioner is hereby authorized to prohibit smoking or
carrying of any lighted articles in any public building, as hereinbefore
defined, or in any portion thereof, when he deems such action
necessary to safeguard life or property.
A.
The Fire Commissioner, when exercising the powers provided in
Subsection A, shall cause written notice thereof to be served personally
or by registered mail upon the owner, operator or lessee or the agent
thereof of such public building, and in which notice he shall designate
the precise area or portion of the building in which smoking is to be
prohibited. Such notice shall further provide for an effective date of
such prohibition as determined by the Fire Commissioner.
B.
The areas of public buildings in which the prohibition is to prevail shall
be clearly indicated by signs to be displayed by the owner, operator or
lessee of such building and which signs shall be of such size, wording
and location as shall be approved by the Fire Commissioner.
C.
The permit shall be revocable by the Fire Commissioner, in his
discretion, for cause satisfactory to him. All permits shall expire on the
31st day of December next succeeding their issuance.
D.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
1:539
§ 200-10. Exit signs. [Amended 5-14-1958, approved 5-15-1958]
All exits and passageways to exits in any theater, hospital, nursing or
convalescent home shall be marked in letters at least six inches in height
and shall be provided with an electric light with a globe, which said light
must be kept illuminated at all times while such building is in use.
§ 200-11. Additional regulations for exits.
All exits and passageways to exits in any public building shall conform to
such additional rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Fire
Commissioner.
§ 200-12. Fire extinguishers. [Added 5-14-1958, approved
5-15-1958]
The owner, lessee or occupant, or manager, trustees or directors owning,
operating or in control of a public building shall provide such fire hose, fire
extinguishers, buckets, axes, fire hooks, fire doors and other fire-preventing
devices for the prevention and extinguishment of fires as the Fire
Commissioner may direct.
Chapter 205
REAL ESTATE, CITY-OWNED
The permittee shall comply with all ordinances and laws relating to
the maintenance and operation of theaters, hospitals, nursing and
convalescent homes, and with all rules, regulations, directions and
orders of the Fire Commissioner.
E.
§ 200-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 200-12
1:540
ARTICLE I
Property Management, Sale and Lease
[Adopted 5-10-1939 by L.L. No. 3-1939, approved 5-22-1939]
§ 205-1. Responsibilities of Comptroller. [Amended 9-8-1982,
approved 9-9-1982]
In addition to his other duties prescribed by law, the Comptroller shall
have the care, custody and management of all property owned by the
City of Mount Vernon and not devoted to public uses; collect and receive
all rents and income from such properties; let the respective portions of
such premises on a month-to-month rental basis, at a rental to be fixed
by the City Council; make or have made all necessary repairs involving an
expenditure of $2,500 or less and all repairs involving an expenditure of a
greater amount shall be made only upon specific authorization by the City
Council; deposit all moneys received by him from such properties into the
general fund of the City of Mount Vernon; pay and disburse out-of-pocket
appropriations claims for repairs, costs of operation and maintenance
charges of such properties; and institute and prosecute all legal
proceedings necessary to enforce the payment of rent or moneys due the
City from such City-owned real property or to obtain possession of such
premises to which the City may be entitled, all such legal proceedings to be
conducted by the Corporation Counsel. On the 30th days of December and
June in each year, the Comptroller shall submit to the City Council and the
Board of Estimate and Contract a full detailed report of all such properties.
§ 205-2. Deposit prior to public auction.
When any person, prior to the holding of a public auction, offers to purchase
or lease real property belonging to the City, he shall submit his offer in
writing to the City Council and deliver to the City Clerk with said offer a
check or cash, in the amount of 25% thereof, as security that such person
will bid the amount offered by him at the public auction for the sale or lease
of such property and that he will execute and deliver all papers necessary to
carry such sale or lease into effect if his bid for the purchase or lease of such
property shall be accepted. Such deposit shall, in the event of the default
of the person depositing the same to bid the amount of his offer and no bid
of equal or greater amount is received by the City at the public auction, or
of his failure to execute and deliver the necessary papers as hereinbefore
provided, become the property of the City as liquidated damages. If on
or before its second regular meeting following that at which such offer is
submitted to it, the City Council shall not direct the sale or lease, as the case
may be, by public auction of such real property, the City Clerk is authorized
and directed to return the 25% deposit.
§ 205-3. Brokers' commissions. [Amended 7-10-1946 by L.L. No.
2-1946, approved 7-24-1946; 9-22-1948 by L.L. No. 3-1948,
approved 10-7-1948; 9-13-1950 by L.L. No. 3-1950, approved
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:541
9-28-1950; 9-23-1953 by L.L. No. 5-1953, approved 10-9-1953;
7-24-1963 by L.L. No. 2-1963, approved 8-12-1963]
Upon the sale or lease of real property belonging to the City as herein
provided, if such real property shall be sold or leased to a purchaser
or lessee procured by a broker, the broker shall be entitled to receive
commissions from the City, provided that all the requirements and
conditions of this article, the rules and regulations established
hereunder and the signed broker's agreement with the City are
complied with. Brokers' commissions shall be earned, due and payable
only if, as and when title is closed with the purchaser or lessee procured
by the broker, or by the assignee of such purchaser or lessee. When
any person offers, prior to the holding of a public auction, to purchase
or lease real property belonging to the City, he shall certify in writing,
duly acknowledged, whether any broker has induced or brought about
the making of such offer, and shall designate the name and address
of such broker and shall furnish such other information as shall be
required by the City Council. No commission shall be paid for procuring
any sale or lease to the person making the original offer unless the
written authority of the broker to make the offer and to bid at the public
auction, if such be the case, in behalf of any person for whom he is
acting, signed and acknowledged by such person, or the certification
provided above where the offeror himself makes such offer, shall be
filed with the City Clerk at the time the offer of purchase or lease is
delivered to the City Clerk. Where the broker, in bidding at the public
auction, is acting for a person other than the person making the original
offer, no commission shall be paid for procuring of any sale or lease
to such person unless the written authority of the broker to bid at the
public auction in behalf of the person for whom he is acting, signed and
acknowledged by that person, shall be filed with the City Clerk at any
time up to the hour of the day advertised for the sale to take place.
Where the broker has procured a person to bid at the public auction
other than the person who makes the original offer, no commission
shall be paid for procuring the sale or lease to such person unless that
person shall have filed with the City Clerk at any time up to the hour of
the day advertised for the sale to take place, a certification in writing,
signed and acknowledged by such person, that the broker has induced
that person to bid at such public auction, designating the name and
address of such broker and furnishing such other information as may be
required by the City Council. Where no such certificate is filed or where
there is no originating broker, the broker of the successful bidder shall
be paid the full commission. The filing of authorizations or certifications
provided for in this section shall be within the regular business hours
of the City Clerk's office.
A.
In addition to the foregoing, no broker shall be entitled to receive a
commission from the City for the sale or lease of City property unless he
shall have executed the real estate broker's agreement prescribed by
the City. The Comptroller shall pay the broker's commission as provided
B.
§ 205-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 205-3
1:542
for in this section out of the moneys received by him from the sale or
lease of the particular parcel of property.
§ 205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:543

ARTICLE II
Payment of Commissions; Real Estate Committee
[Adopted 2-26-1947, approved 2-27-1947; amended 3-9-1955,
approved 3-10-1955]
§ 205-4. Amount of commissions; requirements for payment.
The following regulations shall govern the payment of commissions to real
estate brokers upon the sale or lease of real property belonging to the City
and not needed for municipal purposes, in accordance with the provisions
of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No. 2-1946:79
Amount of commissions.
A real estate broker who has complied with the provisions and
regulations of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No.
2-1946 and Local Law No. 3-1953, shall be entitled to commissions
from the City of Mount Vernon, as hereinafter more fully provided,
if such broker produces a purchaser who has submitted a minimum
bid for the property in question, satisfactory and acceptable to the
City Council, and who has deposited with the City Clerk a certified
check or cash in the amount of 25% of such minimum bid, and if at
the time of the public sale such prospective purchaser or his agent
actually does bid the minimum bid specified by him at the time of
the deposit of his certified check or cash. If, however, such person
is not the successful bidder and the final bid of another is approved
and accepted by the Board of Estimate and Contract, then such
broker who produced the original prospective purchaser who made
the minimum bid approved and accepted by the City Council shall
be entitled to receive a commission of 2 1/2% of the final sales
price. In such case the broker for the successful bidder shall also
be entitled to receive a commission of 2 1/2% based upon the
highest bid made by the successful bidder; provided, however, that
such broker has fully complied with the provisions and regulations
of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No. 2-1946
and Local Law No. 3-1953. Under no circumstances shall the total
commissions on a specific sale exceed 5% of the final sales price.
(1)
Where a minimum bid is received as hereinbefore mentioned and
the sale is directed by the City Council and the prospective
purchaser who made the minimum offer actually is the highest
bidder at the public sale and if the sale is approved and accepted by
the Board of Estimate and Contract, the broker for such purchaser
shall receive a commission of 5% based upon the highest bid made
at the public sale by his successful purchaser.
(2)
No commissions shall become due or payable unless the broker or
brokers claiming commissions have complied with the provisions
and regulations of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law
(3)
A.
79.Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
§ 205-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-4
1:545
§ 205-5. Committee established. [Amended 11-8-1961, approved
11-9-1961]
No. 2-1946 and Local Law No. 3-1953, and the final bid is approved
and accepted by the Board of Estimate and Contract, and until the
title is closed in accordance with the terms of the contract entered
into between the City of Mount Vernon and the successful bidder.
When an auctioneer or agent is employed by the City in connection
with a public auction for the sale or lease of City owned real estate,
the amount of commissions payable by the City to the successful real
estate brokers, other than such auctioneer or agent, shall be 2 1/2%,
subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in Local Law
No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No. 2-1946, and the real estate
broker's agreement provided for therein. The foregoing commissions
shall be paid by the City in addition to any commissions paid to such
real estate brokers by the auctioneer and shall be payable as and when
title is closed with the successful purchaser.
B.
No commissions shall become due or payable unless the broker or
brokers claiming commissions have complied with the provisions and
regulations of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No.
2-1946, and the final bid is approved and accepted by the Board of
Estimate and Contract, and until the title is closed in accordance with
the terms of the contract entered into between the City of Mount
Vernon and the successful bidder.
C.
There is hereby created a committee to be known as the "Real Estate
Committee," consisting of the Comptroller, President of the City Council
and the Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation. Said Committee
shall recommend to the City Council the sale of surplus real property
owned and/or acquired by the City not needed for municipal use and
what buildings, if any, on such property should, in the interest of public
health, safety and public good, be demolished.
A.
The Committee shall elect annually a Chairman from its members. The
members shall meet upon the call of the Chairman or as directed by the
rules and regulations of the Committee or otherwise required by law
and shall act by a majority vote.
B.
The Committee shall have power to adopt rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with law or the directions of the City Council, for the
transaction of its business. The Committee shall elect annually an
individual who shall serve as Secretary to the Committee and shall
keep the minutes of its meetings. Said individual shall be an employee
or appointee of the City, employed in the Office of the Comptroller or
Office of the Assessor or Office of the City Council, and shall serve
as Secretary to the Committee without additional compensation.
[Amended 6-26-2015, approved 6-26-2015]
C.
§ 205-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 205-5
1:546
Said Committee shall be in charge of negotiations for the purchase,
listing, advertising and marketing of City-owned properties not needed
for public use.
D.
All offers for the sale or lease of City-owned property received by the
City Clerk shall be delivered forthwith to the Real Estate Committee.
E.
Simultaneously, the City Clerk shall forward a communication to the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, the City Planning
Board, the Department of City Planning, the Mount Vernon Urban
Renewal Agency and the Department of Law that such offer has been
made. [Amended 10-28-1970, approved 10-29-1970]
F.
Within 30 days after receipt of such communication from the City Clerk,
the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, the City Planning
Board, the Department of City Planning, the Mount Vernon Urban
Renewal Agency and the Department of Law shall notify the Real Estate
Committee, in writing, whether they have any objections to the sale of
said property. The Commissioner of the Department of Public Works
shall state whether the City has or should retain any easement rights
over the said property. The City Planning Board, the Department of
City Planning and the Mount Vernon Urban Renewal Agency shall state
whether the property is or may be needed for municipal use. Copies
of said communications shall be forwarded by the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Works, the City Planning Board, the Department
of City Planning, the Mount Vernon Urban Renewal Agency and the
Department of Law to the City Council. [Amended 10-28-1970,
approved 10-29-1970; 9-13-2011, approved 9-15-2011]
G.
Within one week after receipt of said communications from said City
officers and departments, the Real Estate Committee shall meet to
approve or disapprove said offers and the said Committee shall submit
its report to the City Council on or before the next meeting of said
Council.
H.
If said Committee disapproves an offer, it shall recommend to the
offeror the amount of offer it will approve.
I.
The Real Estate Committee, on its own initiative and discretion and
without prior offer, is hereby authorized and empowered to select
parcels of City-owned property not needed for municipal use, fix upset
prices thereon and submit the same to the City Council for approval
and the authorization for sale thereof at public auction. Said bulk sales
shall be conducted by the Comptroller in the City Council chambers.
There shall be no originating brokerage commission on the sale of said
parcels selected by the Real Estate Committee and approved by the
City Council, and the real estate broker for the successful bidder shall
be entitled to receive a commission of 5% of the sale price, provided
that the provisions of Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law
No. 2-1946 and Local Law No. 5-1953,80 and the rules and regulations
J.
§ 205-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-5
1:547
§ 205-6. Repealer.
This article shall supersede any and all ordinances upon the same subject
matter inconsistent herewith.
§ 205-7. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately, and its terms, conditions and
provisions shall apply to and determine the commissions payable to any real
estate broker who, subsequent to the effective date of this article, files a
certification and authority pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 3 of
Local Law No. 3-1939, as amended by Local Law No. 2-1946.82
regarding brokerage agreements are complied with by the successful
real estate broker representing the purchaser.
The Comptroller is hereby authorized and directed to use display
advertising on this type of bulk sales, the cost thereof to be defrayed
out of moneys in the City of Mount Vernon Real Estate Account. Said
Real Estate Committee shall have such further power and duties as may
be provided by ordinance of the City Council.
K.
The President of the City Council may appoint a member of the City
Council to serve as a member of the Real Estate Committee in lieu of
the President of the City Council, provided said appointment is made
via duly adopted resolution of the City Council. Said appointment shall
be for a term of one year commencing in January and terminating in
December of the applicable year. [Added 2-22-201781]
L.
80.Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
81.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted this date was vetoed by the Mayor but said veto was
overridden by vote of the Council on 3-8-2017.
82.Editor's Note: See Art. I, § 205-3, of this chapter.
§ 205-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 205-7
1:548
Chapter 208
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned property — See Ch. 197.
§ 208-1. Safety measures required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded
refrigerator or one not in use to remain in any place accessible to children
unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door or doors of the same
has been removed or unless the door or doors of the same are bolted and
locked in such a manner that it is impossible to open the same by use of the
hands.
Chapter 210
RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-1
1:549

ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 12-23-2003, approved 12-24-2003]
§ 210-1. Legislative intent.
The City Council of the City of Mount Vernon, being concerned with the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Mount Vernon,
being concerned about the effect of certain retail establishments open
during the late evening hours and early morning hours upon police
facilities, the crime rate, public disorder, public safety, public health,
physical and mental health, public welfare, environmental pollution, noise
pollution, air pollution, littering, sanitation and local motor vehicle traffic,
have created this article.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises used for the purpose
of carrying on or exercising any trade, business, profession, vocation or
commercial or charitable activity.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any store, shop, market, station or place of
business in which goods, wares, food, beverages, liquids or merchandise of
any type, nature or description are offered for sale on a direct basis to a
purchaser.
§ 210-3. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any retail establishment, other than those set forth
in § 210-4 hereof, to operate and remain open to the public except between
the following hours on the following days:
§ 210-4. Exceptions. [Amended 5-10-2006, approved 5-11-2006;
6-14-2006, approved 6-15-2006; 2-24-2010, approved 3-22-2010]
This article shall not apply to:
A. Monday through Saturday: 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
B. Sunday: 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Restaurants, bars and grills, movie theaters, gasoline service stations;
provided, however, that gasoline stations may only sell gasoline and
automotive products during the excepted time period.
A.
Retail establishments having in excess of 25,000 square feet of interior
retail space.
B.
Retail establishments which include a licensed pharmacy from which
prescription medications are prepared and dispensed by a licensed
C.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:551
§ 210-5. Applicability of other laws.
This article is in addition to any other law, ordinance or regulation affecting
the subject matter herein and is not in limitation hereof.
§ 210-6. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for a violation of this article shall be a fine of $1,000 for each
offense or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
pharmacist, provided that the pharmacy remains in operation during
the excepted time period.
§ 210-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 210-7
1:552
Chapter 211
ROOMING HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131. Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
§ 211-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT — A person nine years of age or older, or two children under the age
of nine years.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building the floor of which is not less than
two feet below and the ceiling is not less than four feet six inches above
grade.
BATHROOM — An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and a washbasin, with each providing hot and cold
running water, and also including one or more toilets.
CELLAR — That portion of a building the ceiling of which is entirely below
or less than four feet six inches above grade.
CENTRALLY SUPPLIED HEAT — Heat which:
CENTRALLY SUPPLIED HOT WATER — Water from a central source of
supply and heated to a temperature of 120° F. at the tap.
CLUB — An organization of persons incorporated pursuant to the provisions
of the Membership Corporations Law or the Benevolent Orders Law, or
an incorporated association, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a
building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes, and which
is operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent,
religious or athletic purpose and not for pecuniary gain.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Buildings.
OCCUPIED or USED — Shall be construed as if followed by the words
"arranged, designed or intended to be occupied or used."
Is sufficient to maintain the minimum temperature required by the
provisions of Section 3 of Article VIII of the Sanitary Code of the City;
and
A.
Is furnished from a central source of supply which is approved by the
Commissioner of Buildings and Fire Commissioner as consistent with
the requirements of safety and health, and which may be located within
or without the building or dwelling required to be heated.
B.
§ 210-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-1
1:553
OWNER — An owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, tenant, agent or any other person, firm
or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a dwelling.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any lodging house, rooming house, furnished
rooming house, tourist home and any other similarly occupied building,
structure or portion thereof having more than three sleeping rooms which
are directly or indirectly let, sublet, used or occupied for single-room
occupancy; also any multiple dwelling which has been converted or altered
or is used for single-room occupancy.
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY — An occupancy for hire by one or more
persons living independently of those occupying other rooms in any
apartment or suite or portion of a building or structure.
§ 211-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate,
or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, a rooming house
without a license therefor. No license shall be issued except to a person
of good moral character, nor to a partnership, joint venture or corporation
if any partner, member, officer, director or stockholder thereof has been
convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 211-3. License application.
Any person desiring to procure such rooming house license shall file
with the Commissioner a written application on blank forms furnished
by the Commissioner, subscribed and verified by the applicant.
A.
The Commissioner shall submit every such application to the Police
Department, the Fire Department and the Department of Health for
their respective written approvals or rejections.
B.
No application shall be approved unless the applicant complies with
and the premises conform to all provisions of law enforced by such
Departments and by the Commissioner and unless there has been
a physical inspection by the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative.
C.
Every applicant for a rooming-house license shall file, together with
the application, fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be
placed upon cards provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety
and shall be taken, under the Commissioner's supervision, by a senior
police officer and at such place that the Commissioner shall designate.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the authority to submit
the fingerprints of the applicant, together with the required fees, to
the Division of Criminal Justice Services or other appropriate agency
for processing and investigation. No application for a rooming-house
license shall be approved nor any license issued under the provisions of
this chapter until after investigation and examination of the fingerprints
D.
§ 211-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 211-3
1:554
§ 211-4. Content of application.
Every application shall contain the following:
§ 211-5. Fees; license renewal.
of the applicant. No license will be granted to any applicant who has
been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit. [Added 3-14-1990, approved 3-15-1990]
A. A description of the premises by street number or otherwise.
The name, residence and business address of each owner; if the owner
is a corporation, the name and address of such corporation and the
names, residences and business addresses of every officer thereof. If
the applicant is a lessee or sublessee, a confirmed copy of the lease is
to be attached and, if oral, the material terms of such lease shall be set
forth.
B.
If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership or other business
entity, or if the applicant is a nonresident, such applicant shall
designate the name and address of an individual residing within the
City upon whom any notice or order of the Commissioner may be served
and such individual's written consent thereto. The designation of such
person shall not relieve any such owner or lessee of any responsibility
or obligation to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C.
A diagram showing all rooms to be used for single-room occupancy,
designated by letters for identification, and each bathroom facility,
together with the dimensions and aggregate floor area of each room.
D.
The maximum number of occupants to be permitted to occupy each
room and the maximum number of occupants to be permitted to occupy
the entire rooming house.
E.
The zoning district in which the premises sought to be licensed are
located.
F.
The fee for filing an application for a license pursuant to this chapter
shall be $10. If disapproved, the filing fee shall not be refunded.
A.
The license fee, upon approval of the application, shall be $20 for a
rooming house containing less than 10 rooms to be occupied for singleroom
occupancy and $40 where 10 or more rooms are to be occupied
for single-room occupancy.
B.
All fees are to be paid to the Commissioner, who shall issue appropriate
receipts showing payment thereof.
C.
D. All licenses shall be renewed annually.
Every licensee desiring a renewal of a license shall file an application
for same within 30 days prior to the expiration of such license. If there
E.
§ 211-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-5
1:555
§ 211-6. Changes requiring amended application.
In the event that the licensee desires to make any change or alteration in
a licensed rooming house which will result in a change of the maximum
lawful occupancy or creation of additional rooms for single occupancy as
set forth in the application and license, such licensee shall file an amended
application with the Commissioner, for which no fee shall be charged,
and shall obtain written approval for such change or changes prior to
the altering of such licensed premises or change in the maximum lawful
occupancy thereof. The written approval of the Fire and Health
Departments shall be obtained before the Commissioner shall authorize
such changes.
§ 211-7. Form of license; required signatures.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in such form as
established by the Commissioner and shall be signed by the Commissioner
and countersigned by the Mayor.
§ 211-8. Index of licenses.
An index of all licensed rooming houses shall be compiled and maintained
by the Commissioner. Such index shall be available to the public and to
the Mayor, City Councilmen or to any person duly authorized by them.
Copies of such index shall be filed with the Health Commissioner, the
Fire Commissioner, the Police Commissioner and the Commissioner of
Assessment and Taxation.
§ 211-9. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dormitories operated by
colleges or schools nor to clubs as hereinbefore defined.
§ 211-10. Rules and regulations.
The Commissioner may promulgate such rules and regulations as he may
deem necessary for the proper regulation of rooming houses, and he shall
file copies thereof with the City Clerk and the City Council.
§ 211-11. Revocation or suspension of licenses.
have been any changes in the nature of the occupancy of the licensed
premises since the filing of the previous application, such changes shall
be fully set forth in the renewal application.
The fees for the application and renewal of such license shall be the
same as for an original application and license.
F.
The Commissioner, at any time after having given to any licensee or
his designee five days' written notice of hearing and an opportunity to
be heard, may revoke or suspend the license of such licensee for any
A.
§ 211-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 211-11
1:556
§ 211-12. Minimum standards.
violation of any provision of law. The licensee shall be entitled to be
represented by counsel.
Whenever any license shall be revoked, at least six months from the
date of such revocation shall elapse before another license may be
issued to conduct a rooming house in the same premises and at least
one year from the date of such revocation shall elapse before the
licensee shall be eligible for another license.
B.
No license shall be issued unless the application establishes that the
rooming house complies with the following minimum standards, and it
shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee not to comply with
each of the following:
Every room occupied or used for sleeping purposes shall contain
a minimum gross floor area of 90 square feet for each adult
occupant, as hereinbefore defined, and when occupied or used
by more than one adult occupant, it shall contain an additional
minimum gross floor area of 70 square feet for each additional
adult occupant thereof.
(1)
Every occupied room shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven
feet six inches over 90% of the floor area and only over 50% where
located in an attic.
(2)
No space in any cellar shall be used or occupied for sleeping or
living purposes.
(3)
Every room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate area available for
unobstructed light shall be not less than 10% of the floor area of
such rooms.
(4)
Every room shall be ventilated either by openable areas equal to
45% of the required window area or by equivalent mechanical
ventilation.
(5)
Every bathroom shall be adequately ventilated either by openable
areas the total of which shall not be less than 1 1/2 square feet
facing open space or by equivalent mechanical ventilation.
(6)
Every licensee shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the licensed
premises.
(7)
There shall be provided for each six adult persons who are lawful
occupants of licensed premises at least one bathroom and one
additional bathroom for any remainder of less than six adults.
Every bathroom shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and the
facilities therein in a state of good repair.
(8)
A.
§ 211-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-12
1:557
Each such required bathroom shall be so arranged and located that
each occupant for whom same is required shall have ready access
thereto without passing through any portion of any room or rooms
rented to or exclusively occupied by any other occupant or roomer.
(9)
No room shall be occupied unless such room shall have free and
unobstructed access to each required means of egress from the
premises without passing through any other sleeping room or
bathroom.
(10)
All doors opening from any room to any hall or passage shall be
self-closing, and all transoms shall be permanently sealed with fireretardant
material of at least one hour's rating.
(11)
Every hall or passage shall be unobstructed and well lighted at all
times.
(12)
Any room rented for single occupancy and all furniture and
bedding therein shall be thoroughly cleansed before occupancy
and every sleeping room at least once a week thereafter. When
bed linens are provided, they shall be changed at least once every
week. When the rent includes the use of towels, at least one bath
towel and two hand towels shall be provided every week for each
occupant. Such cleaning and services shall be the exclusive
obligations of the licensee.
(13)
There shall be a central heating system adequate to heat every
sleeping room in conformity with the requirements of the Sanitary
Code.
(14)
There shall be centrally supplied hot water as hereinbefore defined
in § 211-1.
(15)
The walls and ceiling of every entrance hall, stair hall or other
public hall, every hall or passage not within a room or rooms used
for single occupancy, and every dumbwaiter, elevator and every
other shaft, including stairs, connecting more than two successive
stories, shall be sealed off from every other portion of the premises
with fire-retarded materials, or, in lieu thereof, except in the case
of elevator shafts, shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler
system. A fire-detecting system shall not be acceptable for any of
the requirements of this section.
(16)
Electric wiring and equipment shall be designed and installed so as
not to be a potential source of ignition of combustible material or a
potential source of an electrical hazard.
All electrical installations and repairs shall be made by an
electrician duly licensed by the City, who, upon completion,
shall file with the Commissioner a certificate of the New York
Board of Fire Underwriters.
(a)
(17)
§ 211-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 211-12
1:558
§ 211-13. Display of license; exterior lighting.
§ 211-14. Register.
The licensee shall at all times maintain a current register setting forth the
name of every occupant, adult or child, and the room or rooms occupied,
and such room or rooms shall be identified by such designations as conform
to the diagram as provided for in § 211-4D of this chapter. The register
shall also contain the license registration of any motor vehicle owned by any
occupant.
All branch circuits shall have a minimum capacity of 15
amperes, with wiring no smaller than No. 14 wire as defined
by the National Electrical Code.
(b)
The rating of the overcurrent protective devices shall not
exceed the current-carrying capacity of the branch circuits'
conductors as defined by the National Electrical Code.
(c)
Every branch circuit may supply lighting outlets, receptacle
outlets or permanently connected appliances or any
combination of such loads, but shall not be used to supply
any appliance rated at more than 1,200 voltamperes, and not
more than 10 outlets shall be supplied through any 15-ampere
branch circuit.
(d)
Every fixed electrical appliance shall be provided with a
separate branch circuit of sufficient capacity to carry the
nameplate ampere rating of the device.
(e)
(f) Each room shall contain a minimum of two receptacle outlets.
The conductors and equipment for delivering electrical energy
from the main or feeder to the wiring systems of the premises
shall be adequate for the proper and safe use of the electrical
equipment, fixtures and appurtenances therein.
(g)
The licensee, unless otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter,
shall not be relieved of any of the duties and obligations to provide the
services and facilities required by the Sanitary Code.
B.
The licensee shall cause the license to be suitably framed or mounted
and placed and maintained in the main entrance or vestibule of the
premises in such manner and position as to be easily visible.
A.
The exterior area immediately in front of the main entrance shall be
illuminated by electric light at all times after sunset.
B.
§ 211-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-15
1:559
§ 211-15. Posting of maximum occupancy.
The Commissioner may require a licensee to post a sign in each occupied
room stating the maximum lawful number of occupants permitted in such
room.
§ 211-16. Transfer of licenses.
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable or assignable. There shall
be no prorating of the fees paid hereunder, and every applicant for a license
for premises for which a license has previously been issued to another
licensee shall be required to comply with all the provisions of this chapter
applicable to an original applicant. Every licensee who has transferred,
sold, assigned or otherwise disposed of his interest in the licensed premises
to another shall serve notice of same in writing upon the Commissioner
either by personal service or by registered or certified mail within 10 days
from the occurrence thereof.
§ 211-17. Operating without license.
§ 211-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the
regulations of the Commissioner or any other City agency affecting the
conduct of the business licensed hereunder shall be subject, in addition to
the imposition of any applicable fines or penalties as provided in Article II
of Chapter 1, General Provisions, to the suspension or revocation of the said
license.
The operation of any premises as a rooming house without complying
with this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
A.
Whenever the Commissioner finds or has reason to believe that any
premises is being operated as a rooming house without a license,
he may, without prior notice or hearing, order the premises or any
part thereof to be vacated, as constituting a nuisance. A copy of such
notice to vacate shall be served personally upon the owner, lessee,
agent or any other person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in
control of the premises and upon each tenant or occupant. In the event
that personal service upon any of the foregoing cannot be made after
diligent effort, then such notice may be served by posting a copy thereof
in a conspicuous place upon the premises and by sending a copy thereof
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
such person at his last known address or place of residence.
B.
The Commissioner may, in his discretion, post suitable placards on the
premises ordering the vacating of the building and may institute such
further appropriate legal action as he deems necessary to compel the
vacating of the premises.
C.
§ 211-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 211-19
1:560
§ 211-19. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on October 1, 1959. All licenses issued
pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of September of each
succeeding year.
Chapter 215
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 88.
Gasoline sales — See Ch. 142.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 249.
§ 211-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-19
1:561

ARTICLE I
Going-Out-of-Business Sales
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 35 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 215-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING — Any and all
means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to
conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by
magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed notice,
by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement,
by television and any and all means, including oral, written or printed.
SALE — The sale of or an offer to sell to the public goods, wares and
merchandise of any kind and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in
stock in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising
on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the termination,
closing, liquidation, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of
the business in connection with such sale. It shall also include any sale
advertised to be a "fire sale," "creditors' sale," "trustees' sale," "liquidation
sale," "executor's sale," "insolvent sale," "insurance salvage sale,"
"assignees' sale," "receiver's sale," "wholesaler's closeout sale," "creditors'
committee sale," "forced-out-of-business sale" and, in addition thereto, any
and all sales advertised in such manner as reasonably to convey to the
public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business
will cease and be discontinued.
§ 215-2. Regulation.
The City Clerk is authorized to supervise and regulate sales as defined in
§ 215-1.
§ 215-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish or conduct any sale of the type
herein defined without a license therefor.
§ 215-4. License application.
All applications for such license shall be in writing and shall be verified
under oath by the applicant.
A.
Such application shall contain:
(1) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(2)
B.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:563
§ 215-5. Stock.
During any such going-out-of-business sale, no additions whatsoever shall
be made to the stock of merchandise set forth in the itemized list of goods,
wares and merchandise contained in the application for a license, and
nothing shall be offered for sale or sold at any such sale which is an addition
to the stock of merchandise described in said application. Goods, wares
or merchandise not listed in the original application and in the possession
of or kept, held or received by the licensee shall, prima facie, be deemed
additions to the stock.
§ 215-6. Term of license.
Upon the filing of such application with the City Clerk and after
investigation thereof, he may issue such license, in his discretion, for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 215-7. License renewal.
§ 215-8. Rules and regulations.
The City Clerk may make such rules and regulations for the conduct and
advertisement of such sales as in his opinion will serve to prevent deception
and to protect the public.
The means to be employed when publishing such sale, together
with the proposed content of every advertisement.
(3)
An itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered
for sale.
(4)
The place where such stock was purchased or acquired and, if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
(5)
(6) Any additional information the City Clerk may require.
Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock itemized in the
original application has not been disposed of and that no goods, wares
and merchandise have been added to the said stock, the City Clerk may
renew such license for an additional thirty-day period.
A.
Such proof shall be furnished on a form supplied by the City Clerk.
It shall contain an itemized list of stock on hand and shall be verified
under oath.
B.
The City Clerk shall cause the same to be examined and investigated,
and if satisfied as to the truth of the statements therein contained,
the City Clerk may issue a renewal license for a period not exceeding
30 days; provided, however, that a maximum of three such renewals
may be granted for any such sale. [Amended 3-1-1967, approved
3-2-1967]
C.
§ 215-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 215-9
1:564
§ 215-9. Fees.
Upon filing an application for an original or renewal license to advertise and
conduct such sale, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee of $25. If
any such application be disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited to the
City Clerk to defray the cost of investigating the statements contained in
such application.
§ 215-10. Display.
Upon commencement of any such sale, the license therefor shall be
conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises.
§ 215-11. Stock records.
§ 215-12. Advertising.
§ 215-13. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant to which
such license was granted shall be available at all times to the City
Clerk or to his authorized inspectors, and the licensee shall permit such
inspectors to examine all merchandise on the premises for comparison
with such stock list.
A.
At the close of business each day, the stock list attached to such
application shall be revised and items on such list disposed of during
such day shall be noted thereon.
B.
Suitable books and records as prescribed by the City Clerk shall be kept
by the licensee and shall be available at all times to the City Clerk or
his inspectors.
C.
All advertising shall be descriptive of the nature of such sale as stated
in the application therefor. The language in such advertising shall be
identical with the advertising content as indicated in the applications.
A.
It shall be unlawful to indicate in such advertising, either directly or
indirectly, that such sale is held with the approval of the City Clerk.
B.
Such advertising shall contain a statement in the following words and
no others: "Sale held pursuant to License No. _____ of the City of Mount
Vernon, N.Y., granted by the City Clerk the _____ day of _____, 19_____,"
and in such blank spaces the license number and the requisite dates
shall be indicated.
C.
Persons acting pursuant to an order or the process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
A.
Sheriffs and marshals acting in accordance with their powers and
duties as public officers.
B.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-14
1:565
§ 215-14. Revocation or suspension of license.
The City Clerk shall have power to suspend or revoke at any time, for cause,
any license granted in accordance with this article.
§ 215-15. Termination of license.
No licensee shall continue in the same business at the same location after
the termination of said license, nor shall such licensee directly or indirectly
engage in a similar business at the same location for a period of one year
after the termination of such license.
§ 215-16. Administration and enforcement.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall render such aid and assistance
to the City Clerk as the latter may require in the administration and
enforcement of this article.
§ 215-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 215-16
1:566
Chapter 218
SHOOTING RANGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131. Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 218-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHOOTING RANGE — Any indoor range or gallery wherein firearms and
firearms ammunition are used.
§ 218-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a shooting range within
the limits of the City without first obtaining and keeping in full force and
effect a license therefor, and the same shall be conducted and maintained in
compliance with the regulations hereafter set forth.
§ 218-3. License application.
Application for a license to maintain a shooting range shall be made by the
person desiring to maintain such range, upon forms to be furnished by the
City Clerk, and said application shall contain the full name and address of
such person, and in the case of a club, society, partnership or corporation,
the full names and addresses of the trustees, partners and/or officers. Such
application shall also set forth the street address of the premises where
such shooting range is located.
§ 218-4. Inspection of premises.
No license shall be issued nor such license renewed until the premises
wherein such shooting range is located shall have been inspected by or
under the direction of the Commissioner of Public Safety and said range
certified by him as conforming to the specifications hereinafter set forth.
Said certification shall be endorsed by the Commissioner of Public Safety
upon the application. If the Commissioner of Public Safety refuses to so
certify, the reasons for his so doing shall be set forth by him in detail upon
such application.
§ 218-5. Issuance of license.
If, upon such inspection, a shooting range is found and certified by
the Commissioner of Public Safety to be in proper condition and
constructed in accordance with the specifications prescribed by this
chapter, then, upon payment to the City Clerk of the license fee
A.
§ 215-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-5
1:567
§ 218-6. License fee. [Amended 12-27-1989, approved 12-28-1989]
The annual license fee for each shooting range shall be $100.
§ 218-7. Rules and regulations.
Shooting ranges where firearms are used and their operators and
employees shall be subject to the following regulations:
hereinafter set forth, a license shall issue to such person applying for
same.
No person previously convicted of a felony shall be a licensee or shall
work or be employed upon the premises of any shooting range.
B.
All licenses shall be issued by the Mayor and countersigned by the City
Clerk.
C.
License to be displayed. The license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall at all times be prominently displayed upon the premises where
such range is located.
A.
Liability insurance. Every person applying for a license to operate a
shooting range shall carry liability insurance for damages arising out of
the operation of such range to one person in an amount of not less than
$25,000 and in an amount of not less than $50,000 for damages arising
out of injuries to any number of persons.
B.
Competency of employees. The licensee of a shooting range shall
employ no one who is inexperienced in the use and care of ammunition
and firearms. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be the final judge
of the competency of attendants at shooting ranges and shall demand
proof of such competency.
C.
Type of ammunition. None but soft lead, spatterproof or spatterless
ammunition shall be used at shooting ranges.
D.
Safety precautions. No person, marksman or attendant shall be
permitted on the range forward of the firing point at any time while the
range is officially open for business.
E.
Loading of firearms. While the magazine of a firearm may be loaded
when the firearm is not in use, in no case shall a live cartridge be
injected into the firing chamber until the firearm is being handed to a
marksman ready on the firing line.
F.
Inventory of firearms. The licensee of the shooting range shall supply
to the Commissioner of Public Safety a complete list of all the firearms
used on such shooting range, giving the type, caliber, manufacture and
serial number of each firearm. All licensees shall immediately report
the loss or disappearance or substitution of any such firearm to the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
G.
§ 218-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 218-7
1:568
§ 218-8. Construction specifications.
Shooting ranges wherein firearms are used shall be maintained and
constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
Good order; minors. Every licensee of a shooting range shall maintain
good order and allow no person under 16 years of age upon the
premises unless accompanied by his parent or guardian.
H.
Zoning regulations. No shooting range shall be licensed or permitted in
any area zoned by the City as a residential area.
I.
Backstop. The backstop or bullet stop shall be constructed of steel
plates at least 3/8 of an inch thick, substantially fastened and reinforced
at the seams or butts to form a continuous plate from wall to wall. The
plates shall extend from floor to ceiling or at least eight feet above
the floor and be mounted at an angle of 45° to the line of fire and
floor. No horizontal seams or butts will be permitted to cause dangerous
ricochets. If bolts are used for fastenings, they shall be flatheads and
the plates countersunk so that bolt heads are flush with the surface of
the plates.
A.
Sand trap. There shall be installed on the floor from wall to wall,
directly beneath the entire backstop, a sand trap to catch the bullets
deflected from the backstop. The sand shall be either white beach or
fine building, at least six inches deep throughout and shall be held in
place by means which will not cause dangerous ricochets.
B.
Firing stalls. There shall be installed at the firing point and parallel to
the line of fire, steel plates at least 1/4 of an inch thick, six feet long and
at least seven feet high, faced with a fire-retardant, sound-absorbent
material at least 1/2 inch thick. These plates shall be spaced at least 36
inches apart to form firing stalls. In the center of each firing stall and at
a convenient height from the floor, there shall be installed a wood shelf
at least 12 inches wide, to mark the firing point and act as a barrier
to prevent participants from entering the range forward of the firing
point. Angle iron or the like shall not be used for bracing on the front
edge of the partition plates but may be used on the rear edges.
C.
Target carriers. There shall be installed in each firing stall an electrical
or mechanical target carrier capable of transporting the target to and
from the firing point to the position where it is to be fired upon. These
target carriers are to be constructed so as to present no right-angle
surfaces to the marksman which may cause dangerous ricochets.
D.
Range proper. The range proper must be completely enclosed beyond
the firing point and lined with bulletproof material. All surfaces on the
range forward of the firing point presenting a right angle to the line of
fire, including pipes, columns, etc., shall be properly treated so as to
eliminate the possibility of a dangerous ricochet. All electrical wiring in
E.
§ 218-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:569
§ 218-9. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to see that the provisions of
this chapter are enforced and obeyed.
§ 218-10. Applicability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as applying to or governing the
military forces of the state or United States or police authorities or nonprofit
clubs and nonprofit associations which are members of the National Rifle
Association.
Chapter 219
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 219-1. Definitions.
The following words as used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
PERSON — Includes a person of either sex, a corporation, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, societies and other entities capable of
being sued.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes a street, sidewalk, avenue, road, alley, lane,
highway, roadway, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, every class of
road, square, place and municipal parking lot.
SHOPPING CART — A hand-drawn or -propelled vehicle or wheeled
container made of wire, metal, wood or other material, such as is generally
the range proper must be concealed and all electrical wiring for target
equipment must be installed behind the firing point.
Soundproofing. All walls and ceilings shall be faced with satisfactory
sound-absorbent material.
F.
Ventilation. Ventilation shall be installed to exhaust the powder smoke,
gases and sand dust from the range away from the marksman, in the
direction of the backstop.
G.
Repairs. Whenever any exposed surface in a shooting range shall show
holes or undue wear from being constantly struck by the missiles used,
such exposed surface shall be immediately repaired or replaced.
H.
Regulations of other departments. In addition to the specifications
hereinbefore provided, such shooting ranges shall conform in all
respects to all health and fire prevention regulations of the City.83
I.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Fire Prevention.
§ 218-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 219-1
1:570
provided by merchants for carting or carrying merchandise or food stuffs to
automobiles or other places, hereinafter referred to as cart.
§ 219-2. Removal from premises restricted.
No person shall remove a shopping cart, as defined herein, or suffer or
permit such removal from the property of any food-dispensing or other
establishment or business, except to convey the same to an adjoining
private parking lot or a sidewalk area immediately in front of or contiguous
to such food-dispensing or other establishment or business, and except that
the owners of such food-dispensing or other establishments or businesses
may move or cause to be moved shopping carts, in bulk, from one store to
another store or to another location.
§ 219-3. Leaving in public place prohibited.
No person, his agent or employee shall leave or suffer or permit to be left
upon any public place any shopping cart, either owned by him or in his
possession, custody or control.
§ 219-4. Carts to be marked.
Every person who, in connection with the conduct of a food-dispensing or
other establishment or business, owns or makes any shopping cart available
to the public shall make or cause the same to be marked and identified
conspicuously with the name and address of the owner. Such identification
shall be in the form of a tag or label securely fastened to the shopping cart
or a cutting or stamping on the frame of the shopping cart.
§ 219-5. Removal by Commissioner of Public Works.
The Commissioner of Public Works of the City shall remove or cause to
be removed, from time to time, any shopping cart found upon any public
place and shall take the same to City property, where it shall be held until
redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided.
§ 219-6. Redemption of carts; fee; proof of ownership.
Whenever the City shall remove any shopping cart bearing identification
of ownership, the Commissioner of Public Works shall mail a notice to
the owner at the address shown on the identification tag, cut or stamp.
Such notice shall advise that such shopping cart or carts may be redeemed
upon payment to the City of Mount Vernon of the sum of $10 for each
shopping cart so redeemed and shall set forth the place for the redemption
of such shopping cart or carts or where possession of the same may be
procured. Payment for redemption shall be made to the Department of
Finance, and a receipt shall be given therefor, which receipt shall entitle
such owner to redeem, at the place of storage thereof, one or more shopping
carts, as provided for in said receipt, upon surrender of the same at the
place of storage of such shopping cart or carts. No shopping cart shall be
delivered to a person seeking to redeem the same unless proof is submitted
§ 219-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:571
establishing, to the satisfaction of the City, such person's ownership or right
to possession. Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by the City,
from the proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense of the City against
any other person claiming to be entitled thereto.
§ 219-7. Disposition of unredeemed carts.
At least 10 days after the mailing of the notice provided for in § 219-6 hereof
and such shopping cart or carts not having been redeemed or after removal
of a shopping cart bearing no identification of ownership, the City shall,
from time to time, sell such shopping carts at public auction. Notice of such
public auction shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
City by publication at least once, the first date of publication to be not less
than 10 days prior to the date of public auction and shall set forth the time
and place of holding such public auction and shall also advise that said
shopping carts will be sold at public auction for not less than $15 each. Any
shopping cart or carts may be redeemed by the owner thereof at least two
days prior to such public auction upon payment to the City of the sum of
$10 for each shopping cart. No shopping cart shall be delivered to a person
seeking to redeem the same unless proof is submitted establishing, to the
satisfaction of the City, such person's ownership or right to possession.
Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by the City, from the
proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense of the City against any other
person claiming to be entitled thereto. Such sale at public auction shall be
conducted by the Commissioner of Public Works or such other person as he
shall designate.
§ 219-8. Disposition of unsold carts.
If said shopping cart or carts are not sold at public auction, the City may
similarly offer the same again for sale at public auction or may dismantle or
destroy or otherwise dispose of such shopping cart or carts. Any disposition
of such shopping cart or carts made pursuant to this chapter shall be
without any liability on behalf of the City or to any person lawfully entitled
thereto or having any interest therein.
§ 219-9. Proceeds of redemption or sale.
Upon a redemption or sale of a shopping cart the proceeds shall be
deposited in the general funds of the City.
§ 219-10. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any shopping cart or personal property which
may come into the possession or custody of any department of the City
pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation.
§ 219-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
§ 219-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 219-11
1:572
exceeding $15 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both
fine and imprisonment for the first offense; and by a fine not exceeding $30
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment for each subsequent offense.
Chapter 221
SIGNS AND POSTINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gasoline sales — See Ch. 142.
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:573

ARTICLE I
MacArthur Circle
[Adopted 5-13-1959, approved 5-14-1959]
§ 221-1. Signs, posters and billboards prohibited.
The display of signs, posters and billboards in MacArthur Circle in the City
of Mount Vernon after May 25, 1959, is hereby prohibited.
§ 221-2. Repealer.
All prior ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby rescinded.
§ 221-3. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-3
1:575

ARTICLE II
Postings84
[Adopted 3-10-2006,85 approved 3-10-2006]
§ 221-4. Prohibited acts; exceptions; presumption of guilt.
§ 221-5. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print, nail or
attach or affix by any means whatsoever any handbill, poster, notice,
sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material upon any curb,
gutter, flagstone, tree, lamppost, awning post, telegraph pole,
telephone pole, public utility pole, public garbage bin, bus shelter,
bridge, elevated train structure, highway fence, barrel, box, parking
meter, mailbox, traffic control device, traffic stanchion, traffic sign
(including pole), tree box, tree pit protection device, bench, traffic
barrier, hydrant, public pay telephone, any personal property
maintained on a City street or other City-owned property pursuant to
a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted by the City or
other such item or structure in any street, or to direct, suffer or permit
any servant, agent, employee or other person under his or her control
to engage in such activity; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to any handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or
other printed material so posted by or under the direction of the City
Council, or by or under the direction of any City department
A.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person whose name,
telephone number, or other identifying information appears on any
handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed
material on any item or structure described in this section in any
street violated this section by either pasting, posting, painting, printing,
nailing or attaching or affixing by any means whatsoever such handbill,
poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material, or
directing, suffering or permitting a servant, agent, employee or other
individual under such person's control to engage in such activity.
B.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that if a telephone number
that appears on any handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement
placed in violation of Subsection A of this section belongs to a telephone
answering service and no other telephone number or address is readily
obtainable to locate the person or business advertised therein, such
telephone answering service shall be held liable for a violation of
Subsection A.
C.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
article of the Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 in
A.
84.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 145, Handbills and Posters, and Ch. 267, Art. XIII, Signs.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 3-22-2006 to change its placement in the Code
from § 227-59 to Ch. 221 Art. II.
§ 221-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-5
1:577
amount or to imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Every handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement,
sticker or other printed material shall be deemed a separate violation.
Each and every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation for which a separate fine or penalty shall be
imposed. Anyone found to have violated this article, in addition to any
penalty imposed, shall also be responsible for the cost of the removal of
the authorized postings.
Anyone found to have violated this article of this chapter by affixing
any handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement to a tree by means
of nailing or piercing the tree by any method shall have an additional
penalty imposed equal to the amount of the original penalty.
B.
Liability and responsibility for any civil penalty imposed pursuant to
this article for any violation of this article of the Code shall be joint
and severable on the part of any corporation found to be liable and
responsible and its officers, principals, and stockholders owning more
than 10% of its outstanding voting stock.
C.
§ 221-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 221-5
1:578
Chapter 224
SOCIAL CLUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131. Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 224-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is the regulation and licensing of social clubs
to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages on premises not duly licensed by
the State Liquor Authority; to ensure that the occupants of such clubs are
not exposed to fire and health hazards; to protect business premises duly
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages from unfair competition by unlicensed
clubs or organizations; to exert some reasonable control and surveillance of
social clubs to discourage the clandestine sale and use of illicit drugs and
other criminal activity, all pursuant to Article 2-A of the General City Law of
the State of New York and Article III of the City of Mount Vernon Charter.
§ 224-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLUBROOM — A room, place or space used by members of a social club and
their guests for club purposes.
PRIOR CONSENT FOR INSPECTION — The consent of the applicant for
a social club license permitting access, without prior notice, for the
reasonable inspection of the clubroom by the Building Department and
Health, Fire and Police Department personnel of the City of Mount Vernon
or County of Westchester as delineated hereinafter such § 224-18, Periodic
inspections.
SOCIAL CLUB — A person or any association of people, whether
incorporated as a membership corporation or not-for-profit corporation or
unincorporated, which owns, occupies or leases premises for use by club
members and their guests exclusively, for recreational, patriotic, social,
benevolent or athletic purposes.
SOCIAL CLUB LICENSE — The permit issued by the City Clerk authorizing
for a definite license period of one year the use of a particular clubroom as
the meeting place for social club members and their guests.
§ 224-3. Location restrictions.
Social clubs shall be located only in a B-1 Office District, B-2 Neighborhood
Business District, on the second or upper floor of premises in a B-3 General
Business District or on the second or upper floor of premises in a B-4
Commercial District, and shall be at least 200 feet from any residential
§ 221-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-3
1:579
district. No social club shall be located within 200 feet of a building
occupied exclusively as a school, church, synagogue or other place of
worship, the measurement to be taken in a straight line from the center of
the nearest entrance of such school, church, synagogue or other place of
worship to the center of the nearest entrance of the premises in question;
nor within a circumference of 200 feet of any public housing project, to
be measured from the property line of the public housing project which is
closest to the nearest property line of the premises in question.
§ 224-4. Prohibited hours of operation.
No social club shall operate between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon
on Sunday nor from 4:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on all other days.
§ 224-5. Social club license and fee. [Amended 4-10-1981, approved
4-13-1981]
The applicant for a social club license, upon payment of a fee of $250 to
the City Clerk, shall furnish the following data on an application form to be
furnished by the City Clerk:
§ 224-5.1. Fingerprint requirements. [Added 4-13-1989, approved
4-13-1989]
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as the
Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall
have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant, together
with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice Services or other
appropriate agency for processing and investigation. No application for a
social club shall be approved nor any license issued under the provisions of
this chapter until after the commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification in the Department of Public Safety has reviewed and
examined the criminal history record information disseminated by the
Division of Criminal Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any
applicant who has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor
involving violence, dishonesty or deceit.
A. Name of social club and clubroom address of the social club.
B. Names and addresses of its officers.
C. The purposes or goals of the social club.
D. Copy of certificate of incorporation, if incorporated.
E. Prior consent to reasonable inspections during license period.
F. Name and address of landlord.
§ 224-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 224-6
1:580
§ 224-6. Inspection prior to issuance of license.
Upon the acceptance of the application, the City Clerk shall advise the
Mount Vernon Fire and Building Departments and Westchester County
Department of Health to make a team inspection of the clubroom of the
applicant to ascertain and report whether such clubroom is free of Fire,
Building and Health Code violations. Such prior inspection and report shall
be made within two weeks of the filing of the application.
§ 224-7. Denial of license.
Should the inspections required by § 224-6 reveal existing violations of the
Health, Fire or Building Department regulations,86 the City Clerk shall deny
the application and forward in writing to the applicant the reason for the
denial within 48 hours of such denial.
§ 224-8. Demand for hearing.
Within one week of the receipt by the applicant of the denial in writing of
the City Clerk, the applicant may elect to demand a hearing. The demand
shall be in writing, addressed to the City Clerk, stating clearly the reason
why the denial should be set aside. Within one week of such challenge and
demand for a hearing, the City Clerk shall forward the hearing demand to
the Social Club Appeal Board, which Board shall schedule a hearing within
two weeks of the receipt of the notice from the City Clerk.
§ 224-9. Social Club Appeal Board.
The Mayor shall appoint a Social Club Appeal Board upon the enactment
of this chapter. The Board shall consist of the Police Commissioner and
two laymen, one of whom possess experience of at least 10 years in the
building and construction field, who shall act as hearing officers. The Board
members shall select one of their members to act as Chairman. Upon the
scheduled hearing date, the testimony will be given first by the department
or departments citing the violation and thereafter by the applicant. The
burden of supporting the denial shall be upon the City of Mount Vernon,
which must sustain its denial by a preponderance of the evidence. To
sustain a denial, 2/3 of the Board must vote in the affirmative to it. If
there be no such affirmative vote to sustain the denial, the denial shall be
withdrawn, and forthwith the City Clerk shall issue a social club license to
the applicant, with leave to the City to take any further permissible legal
action to reestablish the denial.
§ 224-10. Procedure when denial is sustained. [Amended 4-10-1981,
approved 4-13-1981]
In the event that the denial of the license is sustained by the Social Club
Appeal Board, the decision shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Fire Prevention.
§ 224-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-11
1:581
§ 224-11. Issuance and term of license.
The license, if not denied, shall be issued to the applicant within one week
of the departmental inspections, for a period of one year from the date of its
issuance.
§ 224-12. Display of license.
The social club license shall be conspicuously displayed and be visible from
the street side of a clubroom having a glass window or door; otherwise, it
shall be conspicuously displayed in the interior of the premises within six
feet of the entrance to the clubroom.
§ 224-13. License renewal. [Amended 4-10-1981, approved
4-13-1981]
Application for renewal of a license shall be submitted to the City Clerk
30 days prior to the expiration thereof. The procedure for renewal shall be
identical to the procedure for the application for the license as set forth in
this chapter.
§ 224-14. License suspension or revocation.
No license issued hereunder shall be revoked or suspended without notice
in writing by the City department making the complaint to the applicant,
stating clearly the facts upon which the suspension or revocation is being
made. Upon receipt of the revocation or suspension notice, an aggrieved
licensee shall, within one week of the receipt of the notice of revocation,
state in writing its objection to the revocation or suspension and demand a
hearing. Within one week of the receipt of the challenge or objection of the
aggrieved licensee, the Social Club Appeal Board shall schedule a hearing
as stated in § 224-8 of this chapter, and, in the sustaining of a denial, must
affirm any revocation or suspension by an affirmative vote of 2/3 of its
members.
§ 224-15. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
A license hereunder shall be suspended or revoked if the clubroom premises
are used in violation of this chapter or if the social club or its officers,
members or employees are convicted of a crime while on the club premises
or in the use of the club premises under any state or federal criminal law.
§ 224-16. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the application of this chapter:
Any club or premises duly licensed by the State Liquor Authority to sell
alcoholic beverages on its premises.
A.
Religious organizations which have been granted tax exemption as such
by either the State of New York or the federal government.
B.
§ 224-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 224-17
1:582
§ 224-17. Insurance coverage. [Amended 4-12-2006, approved
4-13-2006]
Every licensee shall keep in force a liability insurance policy to cover
accidental injuries sustained therein by its members or guests. The
minimum limits shall be $1,000,000 for each occurrence and $2,000,000 for
aggregate claims.
§ 224-18. Periodic inspections.
§ 224-19. Penalties for offenses. [Added 3-12-1980, approved
3-13-1980]
Any person or association of people operating a social club as defined under
this chapter without first securing a social club license shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter punishable by a fine of not more than $150 or to
imprisonment not exceeding 150 days, or both, pursuant to § 1-4 of the Code
of the City Mount Vernon.
Chapter 225
SPECIAL POLICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 7.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 50.
Dogs — See Ch. 116.
Noise — See Ch. 178.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 186.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 225-1. Legislative findings.
The City's regular police personnel, properly addressing themselves to
crime prevention and detection, are unable to enforce a number of the City's
General Ordinances relating to littering, noise control, adequate patrolling
of the City's parks, playgrounds and recreational areas to deter vandalism
and other illegal activities therein and in traffic and crowd control in
Access to the clubroom shall be given to inspectors of the City Fire,
Building and Police Departments and the Health Department of the
County of Westchester for the periodic routine inspection of the social
club rooms.
A.
Such inspections shall not single out any particular club but must
routinely be made of at least three other clubs on the same day or night.
No single inspection shall last more than one hour's duration. Routine
inspections of three other clubs on the same day or night are not
required when inspections are made in response to specific complaints.
B.
§ 224-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-1
1:583
emergencies. This enforcement gap has led to pollution of the City's
environment and waste and deterioration of municipal property, to the
discomfort and disquiet of our City's citizens.
§ 225-2. Purpose.
This chapter intends to supplement, by special police volunteers, our police
surveillance of City property.
§ 225-3. Appointing authority.
The Mayor of the City of Mount Vernon shall appoint those qualified men
and women volunteering to act as special police.
§ 225-4. Qualifications.
A volunteer special policeman shall be a resident of the City of Mount
Vernon, at least 21 years old, have a high school diploma or its equivalent
and be free of any criminal convictions.
§ 225-5. Supervising authority.
The special police shall come under the supervision of the Police
Commissioner, who shall promulgate rules and regulations relating to their
conduct and duties consistent with this chapter.
§ 225-6. Uniforms and badges.
Special police shall be provided with distinctive uniforms and badges
provided to them by the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 225-7. Limitations; powers and duties. [Amended 9-8-1982 by L.L.
No. 4-1982, approved 9-23-1982]
The special police will not be police officers or peace officers. They
will be empowered to issue appearance tickets for violation of those
ordinances that they are authorized to enforce. They may, when
necessity requires, make citizens' arrests pursuant to the provisions of
the Criminal Procedure Law relating to arrests made by those who are
neither police or peace officers.
A.
The following are the areas in which the special police are authorized
to perform their duties:
Patrol the City's parks, playgrounds and recreational areas and
the City's highways and streets to prevent vandalism and deter
illegal activities, such as drinking of alcoholic beverages thereon,
gambling, drug abuse and disorderly conduct.
(1)
Enforce the City's Antilitter Ordinance and those ordinances
relating to the leashing of dogs and to dog defecation in public
areas.
(2)
B.
§ 225-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 225-7
1:584
§ 225-8. Training. [Amended 9-8-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982, approved
9-23-1982]
Every appointed volunteer special policeman shall be instructed in the
interpretation of the general ordinances he or she is assigned to enforce.
§ 225-9. Meeting rooms. [Amended 9-8-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982,
approved 9-23-1982]
The City shall provide the special police with adequate meeting rooms to be
used by the members of the special police.
Chapter 226
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Surfacing and paving materials — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
(3) Aid in traffic and crowd control.
(4) Enforce the Antinoise Ordinance.87
C. The above areas of authority may be enlarged or modified by local law.88
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 178, Noise.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 225-8, Defense and indemnification; insurance, which immediately
followed this section, was superseded by L.L. No. 4-1982, which local law also
redesignated §§ 225-9 and 225-10 as §§ 225-8 and 225-9.
§ 225-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9
1:585

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 226-1. Findings of fact.
It has been determined by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) that:
§ 226-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within the City and
Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
A.
This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species;
B.
Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
C.
Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation;
D.
Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
E.
Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the state;
F.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
G.
The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
H.
Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
I.
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-2
1:587
to address the state's findings of fact in § 226-1 hereof. This chapter seeks
to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 226-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the City Council of the City of Mount Vernon has the authority
to enact local laws and amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety or general welfare of the City of Mount Vernon and for the
protection and enhancement of its physical environment. The City Council
of the City of Mount Vernon may include in any such local law provisions
for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or independent
contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 226-4. Applicability.
Meet the requirements of minimum measures four and five of New
York State's SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from
Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No.
GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
A.
Require land development and redevelopment activities to conform to
the substantive requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Construction Activities,GP-02-01, or as amended or
revised;
B.
Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development and
redevelopment activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases
in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the
integrity of stream channels, watercourses or waterways;
C.
Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development and redevelopment activities which would otherwise
degrade local water quality;
D.
Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development and
redevelopment to the maximum extent practicable; and
E.
Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices, devices and/or structures, and to ensure that these
management practices, devices and/or structures are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
F.
This chapter shall be applicable to all land development and
redevelopment activities as defined in § 226-6 of this article.
A.
The City shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer who shall
accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and
B.
§ 226-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-4
1:588
§ 226-5. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from review under this chapter:
forward such plans to the City Council. The Stormwater Management
Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
Engage the services of a licensed/certified professional to review
the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to
exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board, upon
approval by the City Council of the City of Mount Vernon; or
(2)
Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(3)
All land development or redevelopment activities subject to review and
approval by the Planning Board of the City of Mount Vernon under
subdivision, site plan and/or special permit regulations shall be
reviewed subject to the standards contained in this article.
C.
All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
§ 226-4C of this article shall be required to submit a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management
Officer who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
D.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter.
B.
Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity
or original purpose of a facility.
C.
Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
D.
Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the City on or before the effective date of this chapter.
E.
Land development or redevelopment activities for which a building
permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this
chapter.
F.
G. Cemetery graves.
Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
H.
Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
I.
§ 226-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-5
1:589
§ 226-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth in this section:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development or redevelopment activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon, New York.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Mount Vernon, New
York.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, which serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the "New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control" manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
J.
Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
K.
§ 226-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-6
1:590
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT/REDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction
activity, including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or
placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than
one acre, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land development or redevelopment activities may
take place at different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State or a certified professional in erosion
and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC — New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Mount Vernon.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development or redevelopment activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
§ 226-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-6
1:591
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and
habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA and/or NYSDEC established
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, subsurface drainage and
snowmelt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The City Engineer of
the City of Mount Vernon (or the person serving in the capacity of the
City Engineer) or his/her authorized deputies, agents or representatives,
including employees of other City Departments, as appropriate. The SMO
is designated by the City to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
§ 226-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-6
1:592
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STREAM CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite
bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water (see
also "watercourse"; "waterway").
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons, which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water
(see also "stream channel"; "waterway").
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain (see also "stream channel"; "watercourse").
§ 226-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-6
1:593

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
§ 226-7. Requirement.
No application for approval of a land development or redevelopment activity
shall be reviewed until the Planning Board or SMO has received a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with
the specifications in this article.
§ 226-8. Contents.
All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and
erosion and sediment controls:
Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project;
(1)
Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could
be affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s). The site
map should be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
(2)
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP;
(4)
Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(5)
Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill-prevention and response;
(6)
Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
(7)
A.
§ 226-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-8
1:595
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project close-out;
A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(8)
Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(9)
Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures;
(10)
Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place;
(11)
Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(12)
(13)Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part
of the site;
(14)
Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable; and
(15)
(16)Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
Land development or redevelopment activities as defined in § 226-6
of this chapter and meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also
include water quantity and water quality controls (post-construction
stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 226-8C below as
applicable:
Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activities discharging a pollutant of concern to
either an impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d)
list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(1)
Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activities disturbing five or more acres.
(2)
Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activity disturbing between one and five acres of
land during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction
of single-family residences and construction activities at
agricultural properties.
(3)
B.
§ 226-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-8
1:596
§ 226-9. Other environmental permits.
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits
have been or will be acquired for the land development or redevelopment
activity prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
§ 226-10. Contractor certification.
SWPPP requirements for Condition A, B and C:
(1) All information in § 226-8A of this chapter;
Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(2)
Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(3)
Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components
of the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms;
(4)
Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(5)
Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
post-construction stormwater management practice;
(6)
Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(7)
Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain
in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(8)
Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with Article IV of this chapter; and
(9)
For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the
requirements in this chapter.
(10)
C.
Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development or redevelopment
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
A.
§ 226-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:597
to comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards."
The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the
site; and the date the certification is made.
B.
The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the
land development activity.
C.
A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development or redevelopment activity during construction from the
date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final
stabilization.
D.
§ 226-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-10
1:598
ARTICLE III
Performance and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 226-11. Standards.
All land development or redevelopment activities shall be subject to the
following performance and design criteria.
Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(1)
New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
(2)
A.
Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in § 226-11A of this chapter and the SWPPP shall be prepared
by a licensed professional.
B.
Water quality standards. Any land development or redevelopment
activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that will result in
substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of
the State of New York.
C.
§ 226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-11
1:599

ARTICLE IV
Maintenance, Inspection and Repair of Stormwater Facilities
§ 226-12. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
§ 226-13. Maintenance easement(s).
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management
facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute
a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement
shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic
inspection by the City to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor
in the office of the City Clerk after approval by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 226-14. Maintenance after construction.
The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices
installed in accordance with this chapter shall ensure they are operated
and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation and
maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the following:
The applicant or developer of the land development or redevelopment
activity or their representative shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter.
Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds
whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
A.
For land development or redevelopment activities as defined in § 226-6
of this chapter and meeting Condition A, B or C in § 226-8B of this
chapter, the applicant shall have a qualified professional conduct site
inspections and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm
event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site logbook.
B.
The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at
all times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices.
C.
A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities
and systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which
are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of
this chapter.
A.
§ 226-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-14
1:601
§ 226-15. Maintenance agreements.
The City shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater
management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded
in the office of the City Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior
to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with
the terms and conditions of Schedule B found at the end of this chapter
entitled "Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."
The City, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility,
provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and
includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel.
B.
Discharges from the SWMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with
§ 226-11C of this chapter.
C.
§ 226-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-15
1:602
ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 226-16. Construction inspection.
Erosion and sediment control inspection. The City's SMO may require
such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter and may either approve that portion of the work completed
or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as approved.
To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the City
enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the following as
required by the SMO:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(1)
If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified, in writing, of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the SMO.
(2)
A.
Stormwater management practice inspections. The City's SMO is
responsible for conducting inspections of stormwater management
practices (SWMPs). Inspections may be performed by City staff or the
City's SMO may designate an inspector required to have a professional
engineer's (PE) license or certified professional in erosion and sediment
control (CPESC) certificate, as long as the designated inspector is
required to submit a report. All applicants are required to submit asbuilt
plans for any stormwater management practices located on site
after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final
design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must
be certified by a professional engineer.
B.
Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including, but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
C.
§ 226-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-16
1:603
§ 226-17. Performance guarantee.
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the NYSDEC SPDES
General Stormwater Permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
Submission of reports. The City's SMO may require monitoring and
reporting from entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
D.
Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection
is made between private property and the public stormwater system,
the landowner shall grant to the City the right to enter the property
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection as specified in Subsection C.
E.
Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the City in its approval of
the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the City may require the
applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance
bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate
financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion
of the project and names the City as the beneficiary. The security shall
be in an amount to be determined by the City based on submission
of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force
until the surety is released from liability by the City, provided that such
period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance
or such other certification that the facilities have been constructed
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a
one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been
found to be acceptable to the City. Per annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability.
A.
Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
B.
§ 226-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-17
1:604
§ 226-18. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the City with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities
are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to
properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities, the City may draw upon the account
to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs.
Recordkeeping. The City may require entities subject to this chapter to
maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
C.
Notice of violation. When the City determines that a land development
or redevelopment activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(2)
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development or redevelopment activity into compliance with this
chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial
action;
(4)
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(5)
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the City by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service
of notice of violation.
(6)
A.
Stop-work orders. The City may issue a stop-work order for violations
of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required
to halt all land development or redevelopment activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order.
The stop-work order shall be in effect until the City confirms that the
land development or redevelopment activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
B.
§ 226-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-18
1:605
§ 226-19. Fees for services.
The City may require any person undertaking land development or
redevelopment activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs
at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SWMP
maintenance performed by the City or performed by a third party for the
City.
§ 226-20. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter.
Violations. Any land development or redevelopment activity that is
commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained
by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
C.
Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both
of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period
of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
D.
Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development or redevelopment activity is installed or conducted in
violation of this chapter, the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said
building or land.
E.
Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the City may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
F.
§ 226-18 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 226-20
1:606
Chapter 227
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157.
Noise — See Ch. 178.
Surfacing and paving material — See Ch. 230.
Auto wreckers — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:607

Part 1
Construction; Sewer Connections, Drains And Water Mains;
Obstructions
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 227-1. Definitions and word usage.
Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of Part 1 of this chapter, have the meanings
herein indicated:
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon, New York.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works of the City of
Mount Vernon or his duly authorized representative.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Corporation Counsel of the City of
Mount Vernon or his duly authorized representative.
DRAINAGE SERVICE LINE — Refers to the pipe or conduit laid
between its connection point on a stormwater drain and a building
or property for the purpose of conducting waste, other than domestic
sewage and other than injurious water liquids, from the said building or
property into the said stormwater drain.
INVERT — The lowest point in the internal cross section of a sanitary
sewer, stormwater drain, house sewer or drain.
PERMIT — Refers to written permission issued with the approval and
signature of the Commissioner of Public Works and specifically
authorizing a person, firm or corporation to perform certain work in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the
City of Mount Vernon.
PERMITTEE — The person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit,
or his or its duly authorized representative, agent, employee or
subcontractor.
SANITARY SEWER — Refers to the lateral or street sewer or manhole
built thereon in a public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or
other public area and under control of the City.
SEWER SERVICE LINE — The pipe or conduit laid between its
connection point on a sanitary sewer and a building for the purpose of
conducting domestic sewage and noninjurious water liquids from such
building into such sanitary sewer.
SIDEWALK DRAIN AND CURB DRAIN — Refers to the pipe or other
conduit laid under or across the sidewalk area between the curb or
curbline and the property line for the purpose of conducting roof and
surface water from buildings and ground into the gutter.
A.
§ 227-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-1
1:609
§ 227-2. Restrictions as to performance of work.
§ 227-3. Expenses incurred by City.
STORMWATER DRAIN — Refers to the lateral or main stormwater
drain in a public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other
public area and under the control of the City.
Word usage.
The words "directed," "required," "permitted," "ordered,"
"designated," "selected," "prescribed," "determined," "certified,"
"specified" or words of like import used in Part 1 of this chapter
shall mean, respectively, the direction, requirement, permission,
order, designation, selection, prescription, determination,
certification or specification of the Commissioner of Public Works.
(1)
The words "approved," "authorized," adequate, "suitable,"
"acceptable," "satisfactory," "equal," "necessary," "competent," or
words of like import used in Part 1 of this chapter shall mean,
respectively, approved by, authorized by, acceptable to, satisfactory
to, or equal, necessary, adequate, suitable or competent in the
opinion of, the Commissioner of Public Works.
(2)
B.
The permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of the work provided
to be done under any permit issued in accordance with the provisions
of Part 1 of this chapter, except in the event of approved emergencies,
without first notifying the Commissioner not less than 24 hours in
advance thereof (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays not included) and
obtaining the Commissioner's prior approval thereof.
A.
No work provided to be done under said permit shall be performed on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays except with the prior approval of the
Commissioner or in the event of an emergency.
B.
In case of an emergency when a permit cannot first be obtained
because the office of the Commissioner of Public Works is closed,
proper excavations may be made, in which event the permit above
specified shall be obtained within four hours after the office of the
Commissioner of Public Works is open or the work shall cease thereon.
C.
Any expenses that may be incurred by the City in connection with
the work to be done under the provisions of the permit and/or in the
enforcement of Part 1 shall be paid by the permittee within 10 days
after the Commissioner shall have sent the permittee a statement of
such expenses as certified by said Commissioner.
A.
The said permittee shall be billed by the City for any inspection and/
or any other expenses incurred by the City by reason of any failure or
default on the part of said permittee, as determined and certified by the
Commissioner, and any such bill shall be paid within 30 days after the
same shall have been rendered by the City.
B.
§ 227-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-4
1:610
§ 227-4. Materials.
§ 227-5. Responsibilities of permittee; adherence to standards.
All work related to any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Part 1
of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in this Part 1, shall be performed
by the permittee at said permittee's own expense and strictly in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, the applicable
rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works and such
specifications as may be promulgated by the Commissioner, and to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner.
§ 227-6. Availability of permit.
The permit must be in the possession of the parties actually doing the
work and must be exhibited to the Commissioner or to any authorized
representative of the City upon request.
§ 227-7. Revocability of permit.
The Commissioner shall have the right to revoke or cancel the permit at any
time should the permittee fail to comply with any of the terms, agreements,
covenants and conditions thereof.
§ 227-8. Transfer of permit.
The permit shall not be assigned or transferred except upon the prior
written consent of the Commissioner.
§ 227-9. Cleanup and restoration of site.
The permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the
work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated material and debris,
and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and orderly condition. Where
topsoil, seeded areas, sod or sidewalks are disturbed in the course of the
work, the permittee shall restore the ground surfaces and sidewalk to their
former condition.
All materials used or incorporated in any work done under the
provisions of Part 1 of this chapter shall conform to such specifications
as may be promulgated by the Commissioner.
A.
In general, the current standard specifications of the Department of
Public Works shall be followed, subject to the prior approval of the
Commissioner, before these materials are incorporated in the work.
B.
Materials shall, at the discretion of the Commissioner, be submitted
to such tests as may, in his opinion, be necessary to determine their
quality and acceptability. Such tests may be made in any laboratory
designated by the Commissioner, and the City shall be reimbursed by
the permittee for any expense incurred on account of such tests.
C.
§ 227-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-9
1:611

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks, Curbs and Driveways
§ 227-10. Permit required, effective date.
§ 227-11. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a permit for such work shall make application therefor
to the Commissioner upon forms provided for that purpose. The said
application shall contain the names and addresses of the applicant and of
the owner of the property in front of which or for whom the work is to
be performed; the location of such property; the block and lot designation
thereof; the extent and nature of the work to be done, the date or dates
when the work is to be done, together with such necessary sketches and
additional information as the Commissioner may require; a signed
statement by the applicant that said applicant agrees to perform the work
for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with the conditions
of the permit, the provisions of the Charter, the ordinances of the City and
the applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works, and
that the City is to be saved harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising
out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of said
applicant, his servants or agents in connection with any of the work done
under or in connection with said permit.
§ 227-12. Specifications for construction, repair or removal.
Sidewalks, curbs and driveways shall be constructed, removed, replaced or
repaired in accordance with the following specifications:
No person shall construct, remove, replace or repair a sidewalk or
driveway or lower a curb within the limits of any public street, highway
or other public property without first obtaining therefor from the
Commissioner a written permit as hereinafter provided.
A.
Such permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 30
consecutive calendar days, to be determined and specified therein
by the Commissioner. Such effective period may be extended, if so
requested in writing by the permittee prior to expiration thereof, for
such additional period as the Commissioner, at the latter's discretion,
may authorize.
B.
Concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalk shall consist of not less than five
inches of one-to-two-to-four mix and five inches of steam cinders well
tamped. Expansion joints shall be inserted where and as ordered by the
Commissioner. Steel forms and cross strips of required depth shall be
used throughout.
A.
Driveways. The above specifications shall apply except that six inches
of concrete shall be used with one-fourth inch round rods as
reinforcement, six inches on centers in both directions shall be
installed.
B.
§ 227-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-12
1:613
§ 227-13. Depressed curb for driveway entrance.
All concrete for curbs and sidewalks shall be air entrained (four-percent
to six-percent air in concrete).
C.
Dropped curb. All granite or bluestone curb must be dropped when
lowering. No cutting will be permitted. Concrete curb shall be taken
out and new curb poured.
D.
Bluestone flag walk. All flagstone walk shall be a minimum of two
inches thick and laid on a bed of sand two inches thick.
E.
The permittee shall perform the work so as to meet the grade and
alignment of the adjoining sidewalk, curb and driveway and/or such
established line and grade as may be determined by the Commissioner,
and in accordance with his directions.
F.
The current standard specifications of the Department of Public Works
shall be followed, subject to the prior approval of the Commissioner.
G.
The Commissioner shall not issue a permit for any curb lowering in
front of an unimproved tax lot or parcel, or in front of an improved tax
lot or parcel where the application is for a curb lowering exceeding
12 lineal feet, unless written approval is first obtained by the applicant
from the City Council.
A.
The Commissioner shall not grant permission for more than one curb
lowering in front of the same improved tax lot or parcel.
B.
This section shall not apply to work done under a contract with the City
for the improvement or repair of streets or the doing of any public work,
except that the specifications set forth in Part 1 of this chapter shall be
complied with by persons performing work under a contract with the
City.
C.
Any person applying to the Commissioner for a curb-lowering permit
shall file three detailed sketches of the proposed curb lowering and
pay a fee of $10 to the City Clerk for each linear foot of curb, curbing
or curbstone sought to be lowered before such permit shall be issued.
No fee shall be charged for any application for a curb-lowering permit
for municipal, county, state, federal, school or nonprofit incorporated
or chartered hospital purposes. [Amended 6-25-1969, approved
6-26-1969; 5-8-1974, approved 5-9-1974; 7-8-1987, approved
7-9-1987]
D.
Bluestone and granite curbs shall not be cut but shall be lowered in
an acceptable manner. Concrete curbs may be cut if so authorized by
the Commissioner and provided that such cutting can be done in a
workmanlike and satisfactory manner.
E.
The lowering of existing curbs or the construction of new depressed
curbs for the purpose of providing driveway entrances or exits will not
F.
§ 227-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-13
1:614
§ 227-14. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic is to be adequately protected by the
permittee by means of suitable protective barricades and red lanterns
illuminated during the nighttime around the work, and the work is to be
so arranged as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and hazard to such
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
be allowed unless the permittee shall provide and install in each such
case, during the effective period of the permit, an adequate driveway
ramp or apron between the said curb and the abutting property line and
extending over the entire width of the existing or proposed driveway.
The said driveway ramp or apron shall be surfaced with reinforced
concrete six inches in thickness or not less than two inches of
bituminous surfacing material over four inches of crushed stone,
between inside edge of sidewalk and property line, of satisfactory
workmanship and construction.
G.
The portion of the driveway ramp or apron common with the sidewalk
and forming a part thereof shall, unless otherwise authorized, consist
of reinforced concrete six inches in thickness.
H.
§ 227-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-14
1:615

ARTICLE III
Street Openings
§ 227-15. Permit required; effective period.
§ 227-16. Application for permit.
§ 227-17. Insurance.
No person shall open or cause to be opened, by cutting or excavating,
the surface or soil of any street, highway, sidewalk area or public
ground for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining therefor
from the Commissioner a written permit for a street opening; except,
however, that the construction, removal, replacement or repair of a
sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be done under a permit for sidewalk,
curb or driveway as hereinbefore provided in Article II in lieu of a
permit for street opening.
A.
Such permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 30
consecutive calendar days, to be determined and specified therein
by the Commissioner. Such effective period may be extended, if so
requested in writing by the permittee prior to expiration thereof, for
such additional period as the Commissioner in his discretion may
authorize.
B.
Any person desiring a permit for a street opening shall make
application therefor to the Commissioner for each such opening upon a
form to be provided for that purpose.
A.
Said application shall contain the names and addresses of the applicant
and of the owner or the property in front of which or for whom the
work is to be performed; the location of such property; the block and
lot designation thereof; the size and purpose of the opening to be made
and the maximum size of such opening; the date or dates when the work
is to be performed; and the type of pavement or surface to be disturbed,
together with such necessary sketches and additional information as
the Commissioner may require and a signed statement by the applicant
that the said applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit
is granted strictly in accordance with the conditions of the permit, the
provisions of the Charter and of the ordinances of the City and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works.
B.
No permit for street opening shall be issued by the Commissioner
until the applicant therefor shall have first placed on file with the
Commissioner, without cost to the City, satisfactory evidence of
commercial general liability in the amount of not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate, and
satisfactory evidence that the said insurance has been approved as to
form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation Counsel, to insure
the City against any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of
the permit or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his agents,
A.
§ 227-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-17
1:617
§ 227-18. Fees. [Amended 7-9-1969, approved 7-10-1969;
6-27-1973, approved 6-28-1973; 7-25-1973, approved 7-26-1973;
9-11-1974, approved 9-12-1974; 1-24-1979, approved 1-26-1979;
7-8-1987, approved 7-9-1987; 1-9-1991, approved 1-10-1991;
5-13-2015, approved 5-15-2015; 6-10-2015, approved 6-12-2015]
No permit for street opening shall be issued by the Commissioner to any
applicant therefor, except a public service corporation, until the applicant
shall have first paid to the City Clerk on behalf of the City a fee of $350
as determined by the Commissioner. A public service corporation shall be
charged $275 or $5.50 a running linear foot, whichever sum is greater;
provided, however, that a public service corporation shall be charged
$27.50 for each street opening not larger than 12 inches by six inches
made pursuant to the utilization of the keyhole method for inspecting and
repairing gas leaks. Said fee is to cover the cost of issuing and recording the
permit and the supervision and inspection of the work done in connection
therewith. No permit for a street opening shall be issued to a public service
corporation by the Commissioner until a deposit in the amount of $275 or
$5.50 a running linear foot, whichever sum is greater, has been paid to the
City Clerk on behalf of the City, in cash or by check payable to the City of
Mount Vernon.
§ 227-19. Responsibility for backfilling and pavement restoration.
servants or employees in connection with the said opening or with any
work related thereto. [Amended 5-13-2015, approved 5-15-2015;
6-10-2015, approved 6-12-2015]
Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective period
of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall
carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will
give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of any modification or
cancellation of any such insurance.
B.
Except with respect to a public-service corporation, upon completion of
the excavation by the permittee and acceptance by the Commissioner,
the permittee will backfill said opening and apply temporary and/or
permanent pavement at a time and in a manner which the
Commissioner deems to be in the best interests of the City. All work
of backfilling and pavement restoration, including reconstruction of
backfill area where necessary, is to be performed by the permittee.
[Amended 6-10-2015, approved 6-12-2015]
A.
Upon the completion of the excavation, whenever a public-service
corporation is the permittee, and acceptance by the Commissioner,
the public-service corporation will perform all work of backfilling and
pavement restoration, including reconstruction of backfill area where
necessary, in accordance with the provisions of Part 1 of this chapter.
B.
§ 227-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-20
1:618
§ 227-20. Bonds for other than public-service corporation
permittees. [Amended 2-9-2005; approved 2-10-2005]
Every permittee, except a public-service corporation, shall file with the
City a bond in the sum of $25,000, said bond to be approved as to form
and sufficiency of surety by the Corporation Counsel and said bond to
be retained as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of
all terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the
applicant's part to be done and/or performed.
§ 227-21. Bonds and insurance for public-service corporations.
A public-service corporation shall file and keep on file with the City
a bond of $25,000, said bond to be approved as to form, amount and
sufficiency of surety by the Corporation Counsel and said bond to
be retained as security for the faithful performance by the applicant
of all terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on
the applicant's part to be done or performed. [Amended 5-13-2015,
approved 5-15-2015; 6-10-2015, approved 6-12-2015]
A.
A public-service corporation may, in lieu of the insurance hereinbefore
specified for street opening, file and keep on file with the Commissioner
of Public Works an agreement, approved as to form by the Corporation
Counsel, to indemnify and save harmless the City from claims, suits,
actions, proceedings, losses, injuries, damages and costs of every kind
and description arising out of or resulting from any act or omission on
the part of such public-service corporation under any permit granted to
it, or from any negligence or fault of such public-service corporation, its
contractors, agents, servants or employees in connection with sidewalk,
curb or driveway work or repairs or street openings or any work
related thereto, and also to defend on behalf of the City any actions
or proceedings which may be instituted against the City. Public-service
corporations shall be billed by the Commissioner of Public Works on
behalf of the City for any expense incurred by the City as a result of
failure or default on the part of such corporation in the performance
or completion of the work, as may be determined and certified by the
Commissioner.
B.
In the event of an emergency due to breakage of pipes, etc., street
openings may be made by a public-service corporation prior to
obtaining a permit for street opening; provided, however, that the
said public-service corporation shall have filed the required bond and
evidence of insurance or indemnity agreement as specified in this
section, and provided further that the said public-service corporation
shall make application for the necessary permit for street opening not
later than 24 hours (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays not included)
after said opening has been commenced.
C.
Such work shall be carried on so that not over 500 lineal feet of trench
shall remain open at any time unless otherwise specifically permitted
by the Commissioner in writing.
D.
§ 227-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-22
1:619
§ 227-22. Protection of existing structures.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to give written notice to any company
whose pipes, conduits or other structures are laid in the street in which
any work is to be done by such permittee under the provisions of a street
opening permit not less than 24 hours before commencing such opening
or work; and such permittee doing such work shall, at its own expense,
carefully support, maintain in operation and protect from injury such pipes,
conduits or other structures and, in case of injury, shall restore same, at its
own expense, to their former condition.
§ 227-23. Traffic safety.
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and fences
around all of his work while excavation or other work is in progress
and shall arrange his work in such a manner as to cause a minimum
of inconvenience and delay to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The
Commissioner may provide in his written permit that the work be so
arranged as to make possible the complete removal of obstructions
to traffic on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. In the event that such
requirement is not complied with by the permittee, the Commissioner
may, in the latter's discretion, cause all or part of the work covered
by the permit to be backfilled and temporarily resurfaced by the City's
own forces or by contract or otherwise, in which event the City shall
be reimbursed for any expense incurred thereby in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1 of this chapter, and the permittee shall have no
claim against the City for loss of anticipated profits or for any other
losses by reason thereof.
A.
Warning flags or signs and suitably lighted red lights shall be provided,
and watchmen shall be provided, if so ordered by the Commissioner and
in accordance with the latter's directions.
B.
Where the free flow of traffic is interfered with, the permittee shall
designate competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by means of
lights or flags.
C.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner, vehicular traffic
shall be maintained at all times during the progress of the work being
performed under the permit.
D.
§ 227-22 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-23
1:620
ARTICLE IV
Poles and Wires
§ 227-24. Permit required.
No person shall erect or cause to be erected by telephone, telegraph or
electric light or electric transmission pole or poles, or install any conduits or
change the location thereof, or string any wires in, over or upon any street,
highway or public place, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Commissioner. No fee shall be charged for any such permit.
§ 227-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-24
1:621

ARTICLE V
Excavations
§ 227-25. Storage of excavated material.
Excavated material shall be stored in neat piles and so placed as to cause
the least interference with the use of roadways or sidewalks. If so ordered
by the Commissioner, such excavated material shall be promptly removed
from the site of the work.
§ 227-26. Sheathing and shoring.
§ 227-27. Rock excavations; blasting.
When so directed by the Commissioner, tight sheathing at least two
inches in thickness, securely fastened in place with whalers and braces
throughout the duration of the work, shall be placed in all trenches;
shall be driven to the same depth as the lowest part of the pipe, conduit
or structure proposed to be installed; and shall be carried down in such
a manner that the bottom of the sheathing shall at no time be more than
one foot above the bottom of the excavation.
A.
Whenever conditions make it necessary, the Commissioner may require
that the sheathing be driven ahead of the excavation as the latter
proceeds.
B.
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Commissioner, sheathing
and shoring shall be left in place with a cutoff line 18 inches below
ground surface.
C.
In rock excavation, drilling and blasting shall be conducted with all
possible care. All blasting operations shall be conducted in strict
accordance with existing ordinances and regulations relating to rock
blasting and the storage and use of explosives.
A.
Any rock excavation within five feet of water or gas main, pavement
or other subsurface pipe, conduit or structure shall be done with very
slight charges of explosives and the utmost care shall be used to avoid
disturbing or injuring said structure.
B.
The permittee shall use the utmost caution in properly protecting all
surface or subsurface structures from the effects of blasting, and any
damage done to such structures shall be promptly repaired by the
permittee or by such other parties as the Commissioner may direct, at
the said permittee's own expense.
C.
Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the
work before blasting. The site of the blast shall be covered with heavy
timbers, blasting mats or other devices to prevent damage from flying
rock fragments.
D.
§ 227-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-27
1:623
§ 227-28. Backfilling by public-service corporation.
The time of blasting and the manner and size of charges must be
satisfactory to the Commissioner. The blasting shall be done only by
properly licensed individuals.
E.
The permittee shall give adequate notice to the City and to the
appropriate public-service corporations before proceeding with
blasting in the vicinity of water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or
other drains or other public utility lines.
F.
No backfilling shall be done by a public-service corporation until the
work being done under the permit shall have first been inspected and
backfilling authorized by the Commissioner. In the event of failure to
comply with this requirement, the Commissioner shall have the right
to require that the work be uncovered by the permittee at the latter's
expense so that proper inspection may be made.
A.
The material used to backfill the bottom of the trench up to a level of
two feet above the completed pipe or other structure shall be clean
earth, sand or rock dust and shall contain no broken rock, stone or
frozen earth.
B.
Above a level two feet higher than the top of the completed pipe
or other structures, the material used for backfill shall be approved
material containing no frozen earth and not more than 1/3 broken rock,
and no stone in place thereof shall exceed 1/2 cubic foot in size.
C.
The space between the pipe or other structure and the bottom and sides
of the trench shall be packed full by hand and thoroughly tamped as fast
as placed and up to the level of the top of the pipe or other structure,
which shall then be covered by hand to a level at least three feet higher
than the top thereof, the backfill material being carefully deposited and
tamped in layers not more than six inches thick.
D.
Tamping shall be done with a light tamper weighing from six to eight
pounds and shall be conducted in such a manner as to secure
compacted backfill without in any way injuring or disturbing the
completed pipe or structure. At least one man shall be provided for
tamping for each man engaged in backfilling.
E.
The use of power equipment or other mechanical means for backfilling
will not be allowed except with the prior written authorization of the
Commissioner.
F.
Compacting the backfill by means of flooding or puddling with water
will not be allowed except with the prior written authorization of the
Commissioner.
G.
§ 227-27 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-29
1:624
§ 227-29. Driving small pipes and conduits.
Tunneling under pavements or sidewalks is prohibited, but small pipes or
conduits having a dimension of six inches or less may be driven beneath
pavements or sidewalks, provided that the surface shall not be disturbed or
injured and further provided, that:
A. The prior written approval of the Commissioner is obtained.
No excavation in connection therewith shall be closer than one foot to
the edge of the sidewalk or 18 inches to the edge of a pavement.
B.
Such pipes or conduits shall be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes
so that required replacements or repairs may be made in the future
without disturbance or injury to the pavement or sidewalk.
C.
In the event of damage to a pavement, sidewalk or subsurface pipe or
structure caused by driving such pipe or conduit, the permittee shall
repair and make good the damage at the permittee's own expense.
D.
§ 227-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-29
1:625

ARTICLE VI
Connections to Sanitary Sewers, Stormwater Drains and Water
Mains
§ 227-30. Service lines.
§ 227-31. Type and amount of discharge.
The installation and repair of sewer, drainage and water service lines
within the limits of any public street, highway, easement or other
public property and the connection of such service lines to the sanitary
sewers, stormwater drains and water mains of the City shall be done
in accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Department of Public Works and shall also conform to such
specifications as may be promulgated by the Commissioner.
A.
The tapping of water mains and the installation and repair of water
service lines, in addition to such rules, regulations and specifications,
shall also conform to the rules and regulations of the Board of Water
Supply of the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
A sewer service line between its connection point at the sanitary sewer
and existing building shall be of heavy cast-iron pipe with lead joints or
such other approved types of joints as may be allowed by the Plumbing
Code of the City of Mount Vernon and shall be laid by a licensed
plumber.
C.
A drainage service line between its connection point at the stormwater
drain and existing building shall be of heavy cast-iron pipe with lead or
other approved joints.
D.
Such service lines shall be laid on a straight alignment and uniform
gradient of not less than 1/4 inch per foot, unless otherwise specifically
authorized by the Commissioner, and having all changes in direction
made with approved fitting.
E.
No domestic sewage or industrial wastes and no injurious waste
substances shall be discharged into a stormwater drain, watercourse or
body of water through any connection thereto.
A.
No industrial wastes nor any injurious waste substances shall be
discharged into a sanitary sewer unless the method and degree of
treatment prior to discharge have been approved by the Commissioner
of Health of the County of Westchester and the Commissioner of Health
of the City of Mount Vernon and unless such method and degree of
treatment continue at all times to meet with such approvals.
B.
Subject to the prior approval of the Commissioner, waste lines from a
swimming pool shall be connected into a sanitary sewer, and discharge
of wastewater from a swimming pool into the sanitary sewer shall be
restricted to the period between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. The size
of the discharge line at the point of connection shall not, in general,
C.
§ 227-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-31
1:627
§ 227-32. Connections.
exceed four inches, and may be further reduced by the Commissioner
at his discretion.
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, connections to sanitary
sewers and stormwater drains shall be made by means of forty-fivedegree
or ninety-degree M-D cut-in connections of approved size as
manufactured by Joseph G. Pollard Co. Inc., or approved equal.
A.
The use of an existing Y-branch or other existing fitting for the purpose
of connecting a service line thereto shall be allowed only when such
branch or fitting is already available and in place as a part of a sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain, is in satisfactory condition, at an acceptable
location and is of adequate size to receive said service line.
B.
Whenever the proposed service line to be connected is greater than five
inches when the sanitary sewer or stormwater drain is eight inches,
or greater than six inches when the sanitary sewer or stormwater
drain is 10 inches or more, a manhole shall be built over said sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain at the point of connection unless otherwise
specifically authorized. The above sizes refer to the internal diameter
of pipe or conduit.
C.
M-D cut-in connections and other approved types of connections shall
be installed in such a manner that the invert of said connection shall
be higher than the invert of sanitary sewer or stormwater drain by an
amount not less than 1/2 the vertical diameter of said sanitary sewer or
not less than 3/4 the vertical diameter of said stormwater drain unless
otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
D.
Connections to an existing cast-iron sanitary sewer or stormwater
drainpipe shall be made by burning and opening in said pipe in an
approved manner or by such other means as may be authorized by the
Commissioner.
E.
When a connection is made into an existing manhole or when a manhole
is required to be built at the point of connection, as specified
hereinabove, the invert of the service line at the point of connection
shall be higher than the invert of the sanitary sewer or stormwater
drain by an amount not less than the vertical diameter of said sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain, unless otherwise authorized by the
Commissioner.
F.
When the difference in invert elevation in the manhole at the point of
connection exceeds three feet, a drop connection shall be installed in
the said manhole.
G.
An adequate provision shall be made so that the discharge from a
service line within a manhole shall be conducted smoothly into and
in the direction of flow of the main channel of the sanitary sewer or
stormwater drain by means of a built-up channel or by extending said
H.
§ 227-31 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-32
1:628
§ 227-33. Discharge from business, commercial and industrial
buildings.
§ 227-34. Sidewalk and curb drains.
service line partly into the manhole as may be necessary and in such
manner as may be approved by the Commissioner.
Construction of new manholes, drop connections and any other
necessary structures and connections to existing structures shall
conform to such specifications as may be promulgated by the
Commissioner. In general, the current standard specifications and
construction details of the Department of Public Works shall be
followed, subject to the prior approval of the Commissioner.
I.
Roof and other drainage from properties on which buildings are
hereinafter constructed to be used in whole or in part for business,
commercial, industrial or public purposes shall be discharged through
drainage service lines directly into a stormwater drain through an
approved connection thereto when such a stormwater drain is available
and unless such connection, in the opinion of the Commissioner, is
deemed impracticable.
A.
Discharge of such drainage into a catch basin or through sidewalk or
curb drains will not be allowed except with the prior approval of the
Commissioner and provided that the owner of said property has filed
with the Commissioner a signed statement by said owner that the City
is to be saved harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising out of
the approval by the Commissioner of the discharge of drainage into a
catch basin or through sidewalk or curb drains.
B.
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Commissioner, drainage
outlets laid under or across the sidewalk area between the property line
and the curbline and discharging into the gutter or into a catch basin
or curb inlet shall be of approved cast-iron or steel construction.
A.
When holes are cut through curbs for the purpose of providing drainage
outlets, care shall be taken not to damage the curb, and any damage
or injury to said curb shall be repaired by the permittee at his own
expense and to the satisfaction of the Commissioner.
B.
§ 227-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-34
1:629

ARTICLE VII
Resurfacing Specifications for Public-Service Corporations.
§ 227-35. Temporary resurfacing.
§ 227-36. Concrete pavements.
Immediately after backfilling and excavation, the public-service
corporation shall place thereon an acceptable temporary resurfacing as
hereinafter provided. Such temporary resurfacing shall be maintained
even with the roadway or other surface, as directed, until permanent
restoration of the surface is ordered by the Commissioner.
A.
The temporary resurfacing shall consist of not less than two inches of
Amiesite or Colprovia or approved equal thereto when opening is made
in an existing concrete, asphaltic bitulithic or macadam pavement, and
not less than two inches of acceptable cinders in all other cases, except
that where topsoil, seeded areas or sod have been disturbed by the
excavation, the permittee shall restore the ground surface to the same
condition as existed before the work began.
B.
Permanent restoration of the surface over a street opening excavation
shall not be made until satisfactory settlement of the backfill has taken
place, in the opinion of the Commissioner.
C.
Before proceeding with pavement resurfacing, the existing concrete
pavement shall be neatly cut back at a distance of not less than 18
inches beyond the edges of the excavation, care being taken not to
remove any existing steel reinforcement. Such distance shall not be
reduced without prior approval of the Commissioner and may be
increased as provided herein.
A.
Where the existing pavement has been undermined by the excavation
or by any work connected therewith, or where spalled or scaled surface
areas of existing pavements adjoin the area to be resurfaced, the
permittee shall remove additional pavement beyond the distance stated
hereinabove, as ordered by the Commissioner.
B.
In the event that any portion of the proposed concrete resurfacing, as
finally determined by the Commissioner, as provided hereinabove, is
nearer than eight feet from a joint, then such removal shall be extended
to said joint. The smallest horizontal dimension of the concrete
resurfacing shall be not less than eight feet.
C.
None of the subgrade so exposed shall be disturbed in any way except
when, in the opinion of the Commissioner, such subgrade is unstable,
in which case the unstable material shall be removed as ordered and
replaced with approved stable material in layers not to exceed four
inches, each layer being thoroughly compacted and tamped.
D.
§ 227-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-36
1:631
§ 227-37. Bituminous pavements.
The upper edges of the existing concrete pavement shall be uniformly
plumbed and tooled for a depth not to exceed one inch, the remaining
depth being left with straight but rough edges.
E.
Reinforcement consisting of deformed steel bars not less than 3/8
inch in size, spaced as ordered, shall be placed two inches above
the subgrade and shall be adequately tied in with the existing
reinforcement, if any.
F.
The edges of the existing concrete pavement shall be thoroughly
washed, wire-brushed, dampened and painted with a one-to-one neat
cement coating immediately previous to the placing of the new concrete
resurfacing.
G.
The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed, placed, finished and cured
as ordered. The Commissioner may, in his discretion, require the use
of an approved high early-strength cement placed under approved
methods. The use of admixtures and work in freezing weather will be
allowed only with the Commissioner's prior approval and directions.
H.
I. Approved joints shall be installed where directed.
The resurfaced area shall not be opened to traffic until so ordered by
the Commissioner.
J.
Prior to the replacement of bituminous pavements, the subgrade shall
be properly prepared and a concrete foundation of required thickness
and proportions shall be placed thereon, together with necessary
temporary reinforced materials, all in accordance with the
requirements for concrete pavements outlined hereinabove.
A.
The existing bituminous pavement shall then be neatly cut back a
distance of not less than eight inches from the edges of the new
concrete foundation. The entire foundation so exposed shall be
thoroughly cleaned in an acceptable manner and a new bituminous
pavement surface of approved type and thickness shall be placed
thereon and rolled in an acceptable manner.
B.
§ 227-36 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-37
1:632
ARTICLE VIII
Street and Sidewalk Obstructions
§ 227-38. Permit required; exception. [Amended 6-22-1966,
approved 6-23-1966]
No person shall obstruct, encumber or occupy in any manner or for any
purposes whatsoever any public street, highway or sidewalk area without
first obtaining therefor from the Commissioner a written permit. No permit
shall be required, however, for the placing of floral pieces along public
thoroughfares in conjunction with any urban beautification program
authorized by the City, except that such authorization for the placing of said
items must be obtained from the City Council.
§ 227-39. Machinery and equipment.
The use and operation of construction machinery or equipment in
connection with building operations, when such machinery or equipment
obstructs, encumbers or occupies any portion of a public street, highway or
sidewalk area, is prohibited unless a written permit has first been obtained
from the Commissioner.
§ 227-40. Duration of permits.
The permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive
calendar days, to be determined and specified therein by the Commissioner.
Such effective period may be extended, if so requested in writing by the
permittee prior to expiration thereof, for such additional period as the
Commissioner in his discretion may authorize.
§ 227-41. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a permit for street obstruction shall make application
therefor to the Commissioner upon forms provided for that purpose. The
said application shall contain the names and addresses of the applicant and
of the owner of the property in front of which the street obstruction is
proposed, the location of such property, block and lot designation thereof,
the extent and nature of the proposed obstruction, the date or dates thereof,
together with such necessary sketches and additional information as may
be required by the Commissioner, and a signed statement by the applicant
that the said applicant agrees to abide by all the conditions of the permit,
the provisions of the City Charter and the ordinances of the City and the
applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works.
§ 227-42. Insurance.
No permit for street obstruction shall be issued by the Commissioner
until the applicant therefor shall have first placed on file with the
Commissioner, without cost to the City, satisfactory evidence of public
liability insurance in the amounts of not less than $200,000 for any one
person and not less than $300,000 for any one accident and property
A.
§ 227-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-42
1:633
§ 227-43. Permit fee. [Amended 6-25-1969, approved 6-26-1969;
5-8-1974, approved 5-9-1974; 7-8-1987, approved 7-9-1987;
1-9-1991, approved 1-10-1991]
No permit for street obstructions shall be issued by the Commissioner until
the applicant therefor shall have paid to the City Clerk a fee of $5 per
week per linear foot of material and machinery to be placed parallel to
the curb or $75, whichever amount is greater. No fee shall be charged for
any application for a street obstruction permit for municipal, county, state,
federal, school or nonprofit incorporated or chartered hospital purposes.
§ 227-44. Fee for extension of permit period.
For each extension of 30 days or less, the applicant shall pay to the City
Clerk, in cash or by check, payable to the City of Mount Vernon, an
additional fee to be computed as outlined in § 227-43.
§ 227-45. Additional fees.
When a permittee exceeds the maximum authorized obstruction specified
in a permit, such permittee shall, when so ordered, pay to the City Clerk
such additional fees as the Commissioner may require, based on § 227-44.
Failure on the part of the permittee to comply promptly with said order shall
be sufficient cause for revocation of the permit.
§ 227-46. Permissible area of obstruction.
damage insurance in the amount of not less than $25,000 for any one
accident and $50,000 in the aggregate and satisfactory evidence that
the said insurance has been approved as to form, correctness and
adequacy by the Corporation Counsel, to insure the City against any
loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit or
from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his agents, servants or
employees in connection with the said obstruction or with any work
related thereto.
Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective period
of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall
carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will
give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of any modification or
cancellation of any such insurance.
B.
Whenever a permit is issued by the Commissioner for a street
obstruction related to the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or
reconstruction of a building, the permissible area of the street, highway
or sidewalk to be obstructed, encumbered or occupied shall be
determined and specified therein by the Commissioner, but in no event
shall such obstruction exceed 1/3 the width of the street.
A.
The permittee shall keep clear and unobstructed at all times and shall
in no way interfere with prompt access to or adequate operation of all
B.
§ 227-42 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-46
1:634
§ 227-47. Safeguarding pedestrian and other traffic.
§ 227-48. Loading and unloading across sidewalks.
No permit for street obstruction shall be required for the loading or
unloading across a sidewalk area of goods, wares or merchandise which
are in the process of being transferred to or from trucks or other vehicles
standing at the curbline; provided, however, that such loading or unloading
shall be conducted in the most prompt manner possible, and provided
further that the Commissioner, at his discretion, may require that such
loading and unloading take place during certain specified hours.
§ 227-49. Damage resulting from obstructions.
Any damage resulting from the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of
a public street, highway or sidewalk area or from the storage of materials
or operation of construction equipment or machinery shall be repaired by
the permittee to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, when so ordered.
manholes, catch basins, hydrants, valves or fire alarm boxes that may
be situated in or near the area obstructed or occupied, in accordance
with the permit.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall also keep
clear and unobstructed at all times the sidewalk area and gutter in or
near the area occupied under the permit and shall remove promptly
therefrom any dirt or rubbish.
C.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall erect and
maintain suitable protective barricades and fences around the
obstruction or area occupied and shall at all times provide a safe,
adequate and unobstructed passageway not less than four feet in clear
width for the use of pedestrians.
A.
When materials are to be moved over the sidewalks by means of
derrick, crane, hoist or chute, the permittee shall provide a safe and
adequate sidewalk shed conforming to the requirements of the Building
Code of the City, or when so ordered by the Commissioner, shall provide
a safe, adequate and unobstructed temporary sidewalk around the
obstruction or area occupied.
B.
Temporary sidewalks, when so ordered, shall wherever practicable be
built to the same level as the existing sidewalk and in such a manner as
not to interfere with the free flow of water in the street or gutter.
C.
The permittee shall also make adequate provision for the safe passage
of vehicular traffic by day and by night. Where the free flow of traffic
is interfered with, the permittee shall designate competent persons to
direct and expedite traffic by means of lights or flares.
D.
§ 227-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-50
1:635
§ 227-50. Opening of newly paved streets.
No newly paved street shall be opened or dug up or the pavement thereof
otherwise cut, injured or defaced for any purpose whatever by any person
until after the expiration of three years from the date of the final completion
of the newly laid pavement in said street or avenue; provided, however, that
in case of emergency where the health of any person or the public at large
in the City may be endangered, a permit for the opening of the said street
may be granted by the Commissioner of Public Works. Said permit shall
be in writing and shall state the nature of the emergency necessitating the
issuance thereof and shall have endorsed thereon the approval of the Health
Commissioner, and provided further that a street opening permit may be
granted where new construction is involved.
§ 227-50 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-50
1:636
Part 2
Use And Maintenance
ARTICLE VIIIA
Sidewalk Cafes
[Added 6-26-1996, approved 6-26-1996]
§ 227-50.1. Permit required.
No person owning or operating a retail or other establishment shall utilize
any portion of the public walk, street or alley in front of or adjacent to the
store or building as a sidewalk cafe without first obtaining from the City
Clerk a permit to operate such a sidewalk cafe.
§ 227-50.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area located on a public walk
directly in front of a restaurant where readily removable tables, chairs,
railings and planters may be placed for the serving of food or beverages.
§ 227-50.3. Conditions for issuance of permit.
Authority. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant permits to
operate a sidewalk cafe under his hand, to be sealed with the Corporate
Seal, to such persons approved for said permit.
A.
Application. An application to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk and shall contain the name and address
of the applicant if an individual and the names and addresses of the
principal officers if a partnership or corporation. The application shall
also include a description of the location of the sidewalk cafe, numbers
and location of tables and chairs to be utilized, the hours of operation
and such other information as may be required by the City Clerk. Said
application must be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety, the
Commissioner of Public Works and the Commissioner of Buildings.
B.
Insurance. Each applicant shall file with the City Clerk evidence in
the form of a certificate of insurance that a policy of public liability
and property damage insurance is in full force and effect, including
contingent liability of the City of Mount Vernon for the acts or omissions
of the applicant, his agents, servants or employees in connection with
the operation of a sidewalk cafe, including accidental death with a
combined single limit of $1,000,000 bodily injury and property damage,
per occurrence, including products liability. The City of Mount Vernon
shall be named as additional insured, and said certificate shall be
approved as to form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation
Counsel. Such insurance shall remain in force throughout the effective
period of the permit and shall contain an agreement by the insurance
C.
§ 227-50.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-50.3
1:637
§ 227-50.4. Standards.
company issuing the policy or policies that it or they will not be
modified or cancelled without 10 days' prior written notice to the City
of Mount Vernon.
Indemnity. Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall file
with the City Clerk, on a form provided by the City Clerk, an agreement
to indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers and employees
against any loss or liability or damage and defend any claim, including
expenses and costs for bodily injury and for property damage, sustained
by any person as a result of the applicant's operation of a sidewalk cafe
on public property.
D.
Site plan. Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall file a
site plan with the City Clerk indicating the design and location of any
temporary structures such as barriers, tables, chairs, awnings, planters
and other equipment as well as lighting and electrical outlet locations.
The plan shall include the front elevation of the proposed sidewalk cafe.
Information concerning the capacity of the existing restaurant, capacity
of proposed outdoor dining and a statement of the months, days and
hours of operation shall be included.
E.
Fee. The fee for such permit shall be determined by the quantity of
tables and chairs on the application and site plan. The fee for each
table shall be $60, and the fee for each chair shall be $10. [Amended
3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
F.
Sidewalk cafes may only be located on public walks in business districts
in the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
There shall be a minimum of four feet of clear sidewalk, excluding the
area occupied by the sidewalk cafe, free of all obstructions in order to
allow adequate pedestrian movement. Cafes within less than 20 feet of
the extended building line at corner locations shall only be permitted
when it is determined that the use will not create a hazard or create
a sight distance obstruction for motor vehicle traffic or unduly impede
pedestrian traffic.
B.
Sidewalk cafes may only be located directly in front of the restaurant
with which they are associated and shall be placed at the building
line. Any sidewalk barrier shall be readily removable, constructed to
discourage its use as a seat or bench and shall be of a height which
shall permit police patrols to view the interior of the cafe. No umbrellas
shall be permitted at sidewalk cafes.
C.
Sidewalk cafes shall not interfere with any public service facility, such
as a mailbox or telephone. When the sidewalk cafe is not in use,
all furnishings and equipment shall be removed from public property.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall determine when a hazardous
condition exists in a public right-of-way.
D.
§ 227-50.3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-50.5
1:638
§ 227-50.5. Operating restrictions.
§ 227-50.6. Inspection.
The Commissioner of Public Safety, the Building Commissioner, the Fire
Commissioner and the Commissioner of Public Works shall make or cause to
be made sufficient inspection to ensure the compliance with the provisions
of this article and other applicable provisions of the City ordinance by the
permit holder.
§ 227-50.7. Revocation of permit.
The permit may be revoked by the City Clerk due to failure of the permit
holder to comply with the provisions of this article or for other sufficient
cause upon 10 days' written notice and the opportunity for a hearing.
§ 227-50.8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-9-2005; approved
2-10-2005]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense or be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding 15 days. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
Sidewalk cafes may only operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. from May 1 through October 31 of each year.
A.
No alcoholic beverages are to be served or consumed at sidewalk cafes.
Sound-amplification equipment utilized in violation of Chapter 178 of
the Code of the City of Mount Vernon shall be prohibited.
B.
Food may only be sold from a sidewalk cafe to patrons seated at the
sidewalk cafe. Patrons at sidewalk cafes must pay for purchases inside
the restaurant with which the cafe is associated.
C.
Sidewalk cafes and the public property on which they are located shall
be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any substance that
may damage the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.
D.
Operators of sidewalk cafes shall at all times comply with all federal,
state and local laws, rules and regulations. Such compliance shall
include, but is not limited to, §§ 227-52 and 227-53 of the Code of the
City of Mount Vernon relating to the sale of goods on sidewalks and
sidewalk displays.
E.
§ 227-50.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-50.8
1:639

ARTICLE IX
Uses Requiring Permits; Prohibited Uses; Sidewalk Maintenance
§ 227-51. Moving of buildings; power shovels and cranes.
No person shall use, move or remove, or cause or permit to be used,
moved or removed, or aid or assist in using, moving or removing, any
building, structure or crane used in connection with the construction, repair
or demolition of buildings or other structures within the building line,
or shovels using steam or other motive power into, along or across any
street, without a written permit from the Commissioner of Public Works,
which permit shall specify the route to be taken and such other reasonable
conditions as he may deem necessary. No permit, however, shall be issued
unless a proper bond is filed in such amount as is deemed adequate by
the Corporation Counsel to secure the City against loss or damage incident
thereto.
§ 227-52. Sale of goods on sidewalks.
No person or persons, owner or occupant, whether the same be an
individual, a firm, a company, a partnership, a corporation or any officer,
agent, servant or employee thereof, a lessee, sublessee or tenant, or an
owner having a legal or equitable title, or a mortgagee in possession of any
building or structure, shall hereafter sell or deliver any food, drinks, ice
cream, candy, tobacco goods, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or
description from inside thereof across any stand or counter located on the
building line thereof to any person or persons on the sidewalk abutting the
same.
§ 227-53. Sidewalk displays. [Amended 5-25-1983, approved
5-26-1983]
Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a
retail establishment to vend, sell, dispose or offer to vend, sell, dispose
or display any goods, wares or merchandise on any public walk, street
or alley, in front of or adjacent to the store or building. [Amended
8-10-1983, approved 8-11-1983]
A.
Exception; application required. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of this section, the sale of fruit and vegetables or plants
and flowers on sidewalks directly abutting premises for which the
primary use is the sale of fruit, vegetables, plants or flowers may be
permitted upon application therefor to the City Clerk. The application
for a license to vend, sell, dispose or display fruits and vegetables or
plants and flowers shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. The
application shall contain the name of the applicant if an individual, the
names of partners if a copartnership, or the names of the principal
officers if a corporation, church, club or charitable institution, and
shall include the location of the place or places where such fruit and
vegetables or plants and flowers are to be displayed and sold. Said
B.
§ 227-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-53
1:641
application must be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety,
the Commissioner of Public Works and the Commissioner of Buildings.
[Amended 8-10-1983, approved 8-11-1983; 9-14-2005, approved
9-15-2005]
Insurance required. The applicant shall file with the application for
the permit a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount
of not less than $1,000,000, and property damage insurance in the
amount of not less than $25,000 for any one accident and $50,000
in the aggregate, with the City of Mount Vernon listed as additional
insured, said certificate to be approved as to form, correctness and
adequacy by the Corporation Counsel to insure the City against any
loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit or
from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his agents, servants or
employees in connection with said display or with any work related
thereto. Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective
period of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and
shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company
will give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of any modification
or cancellation of any such insurance. [Amended 9-14-2005,
approved 9-15-2005]
C.
Permit fees; expiration of permit. The permit fee to be charged for
such application is $360. Each permit shall expire on the 30th day of
September next after issue, unless sooner revoked by the City Clerk.
No permit shall be valid for more than one year, and the permit shall
contain a stated expiration date. Any new permits will be prorated at
the fee of $30 per month. Renewals will not be prorated. [Amended
9-14-2005, approved 9-15-2005]
D.
Regulation. [Amended 9-14-2005, approved 9-15-2005]
No street, alley or driveway shall be blocked by any merchandise
offered for sale or displayed hereunder. The sidewalk area in front
of the store or building must be a minimum of seven feet from
the building line to the curbline, and the stand or display may not
extend more than 36 inches from the building line. There must be
a minimum of six feet of sidewalk between the sidewalk display
and the curb that is clear of any physical encumbrances, including
meters, signs, poles, trees, tree wells, benches, fire hydrants, etc.
(1)
Display areas shall appear to be structurally sound and constructed
from wood, metal or other similar material and shall be finished
in a manner that is aesthetically compatible with the surrounding
building facades and must be approved upon inspection. The use
of milk cartons, crates, tables or other similar material to maintain
display areas shall be prohibited. Merchandise shall be securely
and adequately placed so that it will not endanger passersby or
fall or extend into any street, sidewalk or alley. No merchandise
shall be placed directly on the sidewalk or anywhere except on
the approved display area. Such sales shall not be operated in any
(2)
E.
§ 227-53 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-53
1:642
§ 227-54. Christmas tree sales. [Added 11-14-1962, approved
11-15-1962; amended 9-14-2005, approved 9-15-2005]
No merchant conducting business from a street level store shall hereafter
display for sale or sell Christmas trees on the sidewalk abutting such
merchant's place of business except for those businesses for which the
primary use is the sale of plants or flowers and which have obtained a
sidewalk display permit in accordance with § 227-53 of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon. These sales shall only take place between the 24th day of
November and until the close of business on the 24th day of December.
§ 227-55. Driving vehicles over sidewalks.
manner which would cause a nuisance or create a fire hazard. No
stand or display will be allowed in front of the store or building
after such establishment is closed. No permit may be transferred,
leased or assigned. Each display must be operated by the owner
or tenant of the building in front of which the stand or display is
located.
The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety, the Building
Commissioner, the Fire Commissioner and the Commissioner of Public
Works shall make or cause to be made sufficient inspection to ensure
the compliance with the provisions of this section and other applicable
provisions of the City ordinance by the permit holder.
F.
Revocation. The permit may be revoked by the City Clerk due to failure
of the permit holder to comply with the provisions of this section or for
other sufficient cause upon 10 days' written notice and the opportunity
for a hearing.
G.
Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section shall be subject to a fine of no more than $500 for each offense
and/or 15 days' imprisonment. A second offense within the same permit
term shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 for each
offense. All subsequent offenses within the same permit term shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended 9-14-2005,
approved 9-15-2005]
H.
No person shall at any time drive any vehicle, whether operated by
gasoline, electricity or steam, upon or over any sidewalk or flag walk
without first obtaining a permit in writing from the Commissioner of
Public Works. This section shall not apply to any driving upon any
sidewalk or flag walk which forms part of any authorized driveway
leading from any street to the abutting property.
A.
The physical presence of any motor vehicle on any lot or parcel of land
abutting a public street, which lot or parcel of land has no driveway
leading from any adjoining property or no authorized curb cut abutting
B.
§ 227-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-55
1:643
§ 227-56. Sidewalk maintenance; removal of snow and ice.
[Amended 2-13-1958, approved 2-14-1958; amended 1-13-1982,
approved 1-14-1982]
Every owner or lessee of any premises abutting on any street shall keep
the contiguous sidewalks free from dirt, filth, weeds or other obstructions
or encumbrances and shall also maintain the contiguous sidewalk in good
condition, free from any defects or other dangerous conditions, and perform
all repairs necessary thereto. Said owner or lessee shall have the further
duty of causing the entire area of such sidewalks in front of such premises
to be cleared of snow and ice within 12 hours after such snowfall has ceased
or ice has formed. Whenever any ice forms upon such sidewalk, it shall be
the duty of such owner or lessee to place thereon sufficient sifted ashes,
sand or salt to prevent persons from slipping until such ice shall be wholly
removed.
§ 227-57. Commercial activities involving vehicles. [Added
1-22-1964, approved 1-23-1964]
No person shall, in connection with a commercial enterprise owned or
operated by him or by which he is employed, wash, service or repair any
motor vehicle, commercial or otherwise, on any public street or sidewalk,
nor transfer any articles on any street from one motor vehicle to another.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit emergency repairs to
disabled motor vehicles.
§ 227-58. Maintenance and repair of vehicles. [Added 10-28-1970,
approved 10-29-1970]
No person shall lubricate, change oil or repair any motor vehicle parked
upon any public street or highway except to make such repairs as may be
necessitated by an emergency.
said parcel or lot of land, shall be presumptive evidence that the said
motor vehicle was driven thereon by the owner of said vehicle under his
direction or by his consent in violation of Subsection A of this section.
Any person violating this section shall be punishable in accordance with
Article II of Chapter 1 of the Code. [Added 7-11-1962, approved
7-12-1962]
§ 227-55 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58
1:644
ARTICLE IXA
Customer-Owned or -Leased Currency- or Credit-Operated
Telephones and Public Telephones
[Added 10-9-1991, approved 10-10-1991]
§ 227-58.1. Intent and purpose.
The City Council of the City of Mount Vernon finds and declares that:
§ 227-58.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
COCOT — Any customer-owned or -leased currency- or credit-operated
telephone as regulated by the Public Service Commission pursuant to the
New York State Public Service Law and applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder and, only for the purposes of this article, any public currency- or
credit-operated telephone owned by the local exchange company (presently
known as "New York Telephone").
LICENSEE — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a COCOT
in a public right-of-way.
MONTHLY GROSS USAGE — The sum total of all charges paid by or billed
to customers for use of a COCOT during a calendar month.
PARKWAY — That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street
and, where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway
and property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" shall also include any area
within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any areas dedicated to public use for public
street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways,
parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
The uncontrolled placement of customer-owned or -leased currency- or
credit-operated telephones (COCOT) and public telephones in public
rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and
welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians,
persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings and persons
performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency services.
A.
Said telephones so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to
persons using public rights-of-way or improperly maintained or illegally
operated in violation of the New York State Public Service Law
promulgated by the New York State Public Service Commission located
therein constitute public nuisances.
B.
The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are
in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the
public health, morals and general welfare of persons in the City of
Mount Vernon in their use of public rights-of-way.
C.
§ 227-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.2
1:645
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
§ 227-58.3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street or sidewalk or in any other public
right-of-way or in any place requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy
any public right-of-way in the City of Mount Vernon any COCOT without first
having obtained a permit from the City specifying the exact location of such
COCOT. One permit may be issued to include any number of COCOTs and
shall be signed by the applicant and countersigned by both the City Clerk
and Commissioner of the Department of Public Works and bear the imprint
of the Official Seal of the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 227-58.4. Application for permit.
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the City Clerk
upon such form as shall be provided by him and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant and the proposed specific location of said COCOT
and shall be signed by the applicant. The application shall be referred by
the City Clerk to the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works of the
City to determine if the specified locations comply with the requirements of
§ 227-58.7. A fee of $100, plus $25 for each COCOT for which a permit is
sought, shall accompany the application.
§ 227-58.5. Conditions for permit.
As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee
thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers,
directors and employees against any loss or liability or damage,
including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for
property damage sustained by any person as the result of the
installation, use or maintenance of a COCOT within the City.
A.
The applicant shall file with the application for the permit a certificate
of public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000 and
property damage insurance in the amount of not less than $25,000 for
any one accident and $50,000 in the aggregate, with the City of Mount
Vernon listed as additional insured, said certificate to be approved as to
form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation Counsel to insure
the City against any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of
the permit or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his agents,
servants or employees in connection with said COCOT or with any work
related thereto. Such insurance must remain in force throughout the
effective period of the permit as well as any authorized extensions
thereof and shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance
company will give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of any
modification or cancellation of any such insurance.
B.
§ 227-58.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58.5
1:646
§ 227-58.6. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any COCOT which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
right-of-way or which requires the user to stand or otherwise occupy any
public right-of-way shall comply with the following standards:
Such permits shall be valid for one year and shall be renewable
pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to in
§ 227-58.4 and upon payment of a fee of $100.
C.
Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and
must be displayed on the COCOT at all times.
D.
The licensee shall pay to the City monthly commissions for the use of
the public right-of-way as described in § 227-58.11.
E.
The licensee shall install, operate and maintain its COCOTs in
conformance with all applicable requirements of the New York State
Public Service Law and all applicable regulations promulgated by the
New York State Public Service Commission.
F.
No renewal permit may be granted if any required compliance or other
reports or financial statements have not been filed with the City or
if the payment of any monthly commissions are overdue or for any
COCOT if the New York State Public Service Commission has ordered
the discontinuance of service of a licensee's COCOT at that location.
G.
No COCOT shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the use of the COCOT itself.
A.
Each COCOT shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit
a person using the COCOT to secure an immediate refund in the event
that the call paid for by the user is unable to be completed. The coinreturn
mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
B.
Each COCOT shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the COCOT, a notice setting forth:
(1) The identity and address of the COCOT licensee;
A statement that calls can be made at no charge to the 911
emergency number, the operator and, where applicable, to local
directory assistance;
(2)
Specific dialing and coin deposit/return information, including
instructions for accessing a local exchange telephone company
operator and directory assistance;
(3)
The rates charged for local calls, including the initial charge for a
local call and the rates charged for additional time periods;
(4)
C.
§ 227-58.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.6
1:647
§ 227-58.7. Location and placements of COCOTs.
Any COCOT which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public
right-of-way or which requires the user to stand in or otherwise occupy
any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the
provisions of this section, as follows:
The identity of the interexchange company carrying calls from
the COCOT and instructions for obtaining access to the other
interexchange companies;
(5)
Where applicable, a notice that additional charges are imposed
by the COCOT licensee for the use of the telephone or telephone
equipment for the placing of a call;
(6)
A toll-free number which the caller can use to obtain information on
the rates, surcharges, terms or conditions applicable to calls placed
from the COCOT; and
(7)
The toll-free number to call for resolution by the COCOT of a billing
or service complaint and the toll-free number of the Public Service
Commission to call for assistance in resolving a complaint.
(8)
Each COCOT shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each COCOT shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2)
It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3)
The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, are unbroken and
reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration.
(4)
The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5)
(6) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
D.
No COCOT shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or over
any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or
in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street or which requires the user to stand in or otherwise occupy any
part of the roadway of any public street.
A.
A maximum of two COCOTs may be placed next to each other and only
by the same licensee.
B.
C. No COCOT shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
§ 227-58.6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58.7
1:648
§ 227-58.8. Permits and licenses.
A COCOT licensee shall obtain at its own expense all permits and licenses
required by law, rule, regulation or ordinance and maintain the same in full
force and effect for as long as required.
§ 227-58.9. Construction, fire and safety codes.
§ 227-58.10. Conditions on use of streets and public ways.
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(3)
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
Within three feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking
a designated bus stop.
(5)
(6) Within three feet of the outer end of any bus bench.
At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
(7)
Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(8)
Within 150 feet of any other COCOT, except when two units are
installed by the same licensee next to each other.
(9)
(10)On any handicap access ramp.
A COCOT licensee shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove,
replace or restore the COCOT in strict compliance with all current
technical codes adopted by the City, the state or the United States.
A.
The codes referred to in Subsection A above specifically include but are
not limited to building construction, fire and safety and zoning codes.89
B.
During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance and repair
of the COCOT, the COCOT licensee shall use materials of good and
durable quality, and all such work shall be performed in a safe,
thorough and reliable manner.
A.
All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) and
other property and facilities of a COCOT licensee shall be so located,
constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel
upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the City.
B.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 227-58.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.10
1:649
§ 227-58.11. Commissions.
In the event that a COCOT creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or
an unreasonable interference with property, then, at its own expense,
such COCOT licensee shall voluntarily or upon the request of the City
remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition
from the subject property.
C.
A COCOT licensee shall not place equipment where it will interfere with
the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures;
or with water hydrants or mains; or with wastewater pump stations;
or any other service or facility that benefits the City or its residents'
health, safety or welfare.
D.
A COCOT licensee, at either its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect rights-of-way and easements and support or
temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public
way any property of such COCOT licensee when necessitated by reason
of the following:
(1) Traffic conditions;
(2) Public safety;
(3) A street closing;
(4) Street construction or resurfacing;
(5) Change or establishment of street grade;
Installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, storm drains, pump
stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or
(6)
Any improvement, construction or repair related to the City or its
residents' health, safety or welfare.
(7)
E.
It shall be the responsibility of a COCOT licensee, acting alone or
in conjunction with another person, to locate and mark or otherwise
visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground
cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents
or independent contractors of a COCOT licensee install cable in the
marked-off area.
F.
A COCOT licensee granted a permit to install or operate a COCOT
after the date this article becomes effective shall pay to the City for
the continued privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements
and public ways and other facilities of the City in the operation of the
COCOT and for supervision thereof by the City during the term of the
permit a sum based upon the monthly gross usage of the COCOT as
follows:
(1) One hundred fifty dollars or less: no fee due.
A.
§ 227-58.10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58.11
1:650
§ 227-58.12. Furnishing of reports.
(2) One hundred fifty dollars to $500: 7% of the monthly usage.
(3) Over $500: 9% of the monthly usage.
A COCOT licensee shall file with the City Clerk, within 45 days after the
expiration of each month, a detailed financial and revenue statement
clearly showing the gross monthly usage of each COCOT during the
preceding month and certified by a certified public accountant or
officer of a COCOT licensee attesting to the accuracy, completeness and
veracity of the usage figures. Such statement shall be in the form and
format approved by the Comptroller of the City.
B.
Payment of the monthly commission shall be rendered to the City at the
time the financial statement is filed.
C.
In the event that payment is not made within 30 days after the date
specified in this section, then such COCOT licensee may be declared
in violation of this article, and the license granted hereunder may
be revoked, terminated or canceled in the manner prescribed by this
article.
D.
The right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid as
commissions shall always be accorded to the City.
E.
No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of or an
accord or satisfaction of any claim that the City might have for further
or additional sums payable under the terms of this article or for any
other performance or obligation of a COCOT licensee.
F.
Payments of compensation made by a COCOT licensee to the City,
pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be considered in addition
to and exclusive of any and all authorized taxes, business license fees,
other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect or
subsequently adopted.
G.
At any time the Federal Communications Commission or New York
State Public Service Commission or another federal or state agency
requires or requests the submission of reports, data or other
information by a COCOT operator, then such COCOT licensee shall at
the same time, without a separate or specific request, submit those
reports, data or other information to the City Clerk. However, unless
specifically authorized by the state, a COCOT licensee shall not be
required to submit state or federal tax returns or any information
exempted under federal or state privacy laws.
A.
With respect to any enforcement proceedings brought by the New
York State Public Service Commission pursuant to its regulations, the
licensee shall promptly file with the City Clerk any citations issued
against the licensee regarding any COCOT located in the City as well
B.
§ 227-58.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.12
1:651
§ 227-58.13. Books and records.
§ 227-58.14. Annual compliance statement required.
as a copy of notification that the citation is being contested and any
subsequent determination of said Commission.
With respect to reports required by this article, it is noted that a COCOT
licensee shall timely submit any required report, including but not
limited to the following:
An annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this
article.
(1)
A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this
article.
(2)
Any other reports or information required by any other section of
this article, or by the City Council, which are necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.
(3)
C.
A COCOT licensee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts
and records of the business and operations under and in connection
with its operation in the City.
A.
The Comptroller of the City shall have the right to review, either by
mail or at the COCOT licensee's local office, all records pertaining to
a COCOT licensee's operations on seven working days written notice.
Such review, unless mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered, should
occur within the COCOT licensee's normal business hours.
B.
The Comptroller shall have the right to hire, at the City's expense, an
independent certified public accountant or other business or financial
expert to review the books and records of a COCOT licensee. If after a
financial audit it is determined that the COCOT licensee has underpaid
amounts owed by more than 2%, then the City may require the COCOT
licensee to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit.
C.
A false entry into the books and/or records of a COCOT licensee, made
by a COCOT licensee, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute
a material violation of this article.
D.
A COCOT licensee, at its local office, shall keep complete and accurate
books and records of the key aspects of the COCOT licensee's operation
for at least the preceding three years in such a manner that all matters
pertaining to the City can be easily produced and/or verified at the
City's request. Also, the COCOT licensee shall keep, at its local office,
any other applicable records and information that may be required by
any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the COCOT
licensee.
E.
§ 227-58.12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58.14
1:652
§ 227-58.15. Penalties for offenses.
Within 30 days from the date that this article becomes effective, the
City Council shall approve a COCOT licensee's compliance statement in
an effort to determine whether the COCOT licensee is complying with
the various provisions and/or requirements of this article. The form or
content of the compliance statement may be amended from time to
time.
A.
Prior to December 1 of each calendar year, the City Clerk shall furnish
to each COCOT licensee a compliance statement.
B.
Prior to December 31 of each calendar year, each COCOT licensee
shall file with the City Clerk a completed and executed, by the COCOT
licensee or an officer thereof, compliance statement.
C.
There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual
compliance statement. However, if the COCOT licensee supplies
incomplete information which requires independent verification by the
City or its consultant, then the COCOT licensee may be required to
reimburse the City for all costs associated with the independent
verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline or
the provision of false information within said statement may subject an
affected COCOT licensee to any and all penalties and fines listed in this
article.
D.
Upon a determination by the Commissioner of Public Works that a
COCOT has been installed, used or maintained in violation of this
article, an order to correct the offending condition will be issued.
Such order shall be telephoned to said licensee and confirmed by
mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The order shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest
actions necessary to correct the condition and inform the COCOT
licensee of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending
condition within five days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order
within three days after its receipt shall result in the offending COCOT
being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If
the offending COCOT is not properly identified as to owner under
provisions of § 227-58.6C hereof, it shall be removed immediately and
processed as unclaimed property.
A.
Upon a determination by the City Clerk that a licensee is operating in
violation of this article in that a COCOT licensee has failed to file any
report required by § 227-58.12 or has failed to pay any commissions
required by § 227-58.11 or has failed to allow an audit of the licensee's
books and records as required by § 227-58.13 or has made a false entry
into its books and/or records pursuant to § 227-58.13D, an order to
correct the violation will be issued. Such order shall be telephoned to
said licensee and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the
B.
§ 227-58.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.15
1:653
§ 227-58.16. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order
or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal and shall
be advised of his right to appeal to the City Council. An appeal must be
perfected within three days after receipt of notice of any protested decision
or action by filing with the office of the City Clerk a letter of appeal briefly
stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date
no more than 10 days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant
shall be given at least five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing.
The City Council shall give the appellant and any other interested party
a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the
determination of the Commissioner of Public Works or the City Clerk should
not be upheld. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall
make a final and conclusive decision. This decision shall be immediately
appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 227-58.17. City Clerk's designated representative.
"City Clerk," as used in this article, shall include his/her designated
representative.
§ 227-58.18. Abandonment.
In the event that a COCOT remains inoperable for a period of 30 continuous
days or in the event that the New York State Public Service Commission
orders the discontinuance of service of any COCOT, the same shall be
deemed abandoned and may be treated in the manner as provided in
§ 227-58.15 for COCOTs in violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 227-58.19. Existing units.
section of this article violated, suggest actions necessary to correct the
violation and inform the COCOT licensee of the right to appeal. Failure
to properly correct the violation within five days (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or
to appeal the order within three days after its receipt shall result in
the licensee's COCOTs being summarily removed and processed as
unclaimed property. If the licensee's COCOT is not properly identified
as to the owner under the provisions of § 227-58.6C hereof, it shall be
removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property.
An impound fee, which shall be measured by the City's cost and
expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each COCOT
summarily removed. The Commissioner of Public Works shall cause
inspections to be made of corrected conditions ordered under
Subsection A hereof or of a COCOT reinstalled after removal under this
section. The COCOT licensee shall be charged an inspection fee of $25
for each COCOT so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all
other fees and charges required under this article.
C.
§ 227-58.15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-58.19
1:654
§ 227-58.20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this article.
§ 227-58.21. Effective date.
This article shall take effect October 31, 1991.
Any licensee who erected, placed, maintained or operated a COCOT
on any public street or sidewalk or in any public right-of-way or in
any place requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy any public
right-of-way with the prior permission of the City Council shall have
30 days from the effective date of this article to apply for a permit
to maintain those units in the present locations, notwithstanding the
location requirements of § 227-58.7. Such existing COCOTs for which
the City Council had granted a previous license shall be exempt from
the location requirements provided in § 227-58.7 only if a valid permit
is applied for within 30 days of the effective date of this article, which
permit is timely renewed and not revoked pursuant to the terms of
this article. The application fee for such a permit shall be the same
as provided for a renewal permit pursuant to § 227-58.5C. All prior
ordinances or resolutions of the City Council granting permission to
any licensee to erect, place, maintain or operate a COCOT on any
public street or sidewalk or any public right-of-way or in any place
requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy the public right-of-way
are hereby revoked effective 30 days after the effective date of this
article.
A.
Any licensee who erected, placed, maintained or operated a COCOT
on any public street or sidewalk or in any public right-of-way or in
any place requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy any public
right-of-way without the prior permission of the City Council shall have
30 days after the effective date of this article to apply for the permit
required by § 227-58.3. In the event that any licensee fails to apply
for said permit within such time period or a licensee's application for
a permit is denied, the COCOT shall be deemed abandoned and may
be treated in the manner as provided in § 227-58.15 for COCOTs in
violation of the provisions of this article.
B.
§ 227-58.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-58.21
1:655

Part 3
Street Cleaning
ARTICLE X
Temporary Cleaning Areas
§ 227-59. Definitions.
The definitions contained in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, so far as applicable, shall govern Part 3 of this chapter.
§ 227-60. Designation of temporary cleaning areas.
§ 227-61. Posting of area.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause appropriate signs or devices
to be posted or placed in the area 24 hours prior to the commencement of
such street cleaning operations, serving notice thereby upon owners and
operators of vehicles of the temporary prohibition against parking in the
said area.
§ 227-62. Parking on one side of street.
The Commissioner of Public Safety may, in his discretion, limit the
prohibition against parking, as provided herein, to only one side of the
street or highway of the designated temporary cleaning area.
§ 227-63. Filing of designation.
A copy of the request by the Commissioner of Public Works to the
Commissioner of Public Safety, as hereinbefore provided, shall be filed by
the Commissioner of Public Works with the Clerk of the Court of Special
Sessions of the City of Mount Vernon, and upon such filing, the Court shall
take judicial notice of the contents thereof.
§ 227-64. Parking prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked in any temporary cleaning area during the
effective period of such designation as hereinbefore provided.
The Commissioner of Public Safety, as hereinafter provided, may
declare designated streets or highways of the City of Mount Vernon
to be temporary cleaning areas, and the parking of vehicles shall be
prohibited during the period when such streets or highways shall be
cleaned by the Department of Public Works.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Safety, upon request in writing by the
Commissioner of Public Works, may declare the streets and highways
set forth in such request to be temporary cleaning areas.
B.
§ 227-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-64.1
1:657
§ 227-64.1. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles; penalties for
offenses. [Added 12-14-201690]
§ 227-65. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-10-1972, approved
5-11-1972]
Any person violating any of the provisions of Part 3 of this chapter may, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with penalties as fixed by the City
Judge of the City of Mount Vernon, provided that such penalties are within
the limits established as penalties for such offense or infraction.
§ 227-66. Enforcement. [Added 6-22-1960, approved 6-23-1960]
The provision of this section prohibits on-street parking from 2:00 a.m.
until 7:00 a.m. on the following City's commercial area streets stated
below:
Gramatan Avenue and Lincoln Avenue South to Fourth Avenue and
East Fourth Street.
a)
North Seventh Avenue and Roosevelt Square south to Wilson Place
to East Second Street.
b)
South Third Avenue and East Second Street south to East Sidney
Avenue.
c)
d) Stevens Avenue and Roosevelt Square east to Gramatan Avenue.
e) Fiske Place from Gramatan Avenue to Third Avenue.
South Sixth Avenue and East Second Street north to East First
Street.
f)
East First Street and South Fulton Avenue west to South
Fourteenth Avenue.
g)
East Third Street and South Fulton Avenue west to South Seventh
Avenue.
h)
East Sandford Boulevard and Garden Avenue west to South
Eleventh Avenue.
i)
A.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works, together with
the Department of Public Safety, to enforce the provisions contained in
§ 227-64.
A.
The Department of Public Works shall have the power, through
authorized employees designated by the Mayor, to issue summonses
and file informations concerning any violation of any such provisions.
B.
90.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted this date was vetoed by the Mayor but said veto was
overridden by vote of the Council on 12-28-2016.
§ 227-64.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 227-66
1:658
Part 4
Intersections
ARTICLE XI
View at Intersections
§ 227-67. Obstructions prohibited.
No person in possession of property as either owner or tenant thereof,
except as otherwise provided in and by Chapter 157, Article I, and Chapter
263 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon, shall erect, construct, install,
plant, grow or maintain on any property located at the intersection of
avenues, streets or alleys, any fence, post, hedge, shrubbery or trees that
exceed four feet in height above the nearest ledge of such intersecting
avenue, street or alley, or any tree of which any branch shall be lower at any
point than seven feet above the said level of such avenue, street or alley,
to the end that persons driving vehicles upon either of such intersecting
avenues, streets or alleys shall have an unobstructed view across the corner
part of said premises of at least 20 feet measured from the intersecting
corner of said avenues, streets or alleys in either direction.
§ 227-68. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-9-2005; approved
2-10-2005]
Any person violating any of the provisions of Part 4 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the following punishment:
A. For the first offense, a fine of not more than $200.
For the second offense within one year, a fine of not less than $200 nor
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not less than five nor more than
15 days.
B.
The third or any subsequent offense within one year may be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 150
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C.
§ 227-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-68
1:659
Chapter 230
SURFACING AND PAVING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 226. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 227.
§ 230-1. New or original pavement for streets.
§ 230-2. New or original curbs.
For new or original curbing on all streets and public places of the City,
portland cement concrete shall be used.
§ 230-3. New or original sidewalks.
For new or original sidewalks at all places in the City, portland cement
concrete shall be used.
§ 230-4. Repaving or repairing streets, public places and parking
areas.
One or more of the following kinds of materials shall be used in repaving
and in repairing all streets, public places and parking areas:
For new or original paving of designated main streets or thoroughfares
and streets in designated industrial areas, reinforced portland cement
concrete pavement shall be used.
A.
For new or original pavement on designated primary residential streets
and culs-de-sac, asphaltic concrete wearing surface on bottom course
bituminous macadam penetration method shall be used.
B.
For new or original pavement on designated secondary residential
streets, asphaltic concrete wearing surface on unreinforced portland
cement concrete base shall be used.
C.
For new or original pavement in parking areas or other public places,
one or more of the following types of pavement shall be used:
(1) Unreinforced portland cement concrete pavement.
Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on unreinforced portland
cement concrete base.
(2)
Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on bottom course bituminous
macadam penetration method.
(3)
D.
A. Reinforced portland cement concrete pavement.
§ 227-68 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 230-4
1:660
§ 230-5. Surfacing or resurfacing other than new or original
pavement.
One or more of the following kinds of materials shall be used in surfacing
and resurfacing streets, public places and parking areas other than new or
original pavement of such streets, places or areas:
§ 230-6. Designation by Council of materials to be used.
The City Council shall by ordinance designate both the type of material
that shall be used or the types of material which may be used and the
classification of the street or thoroughfare to be improved, which
designation shall be in accordance with § 75 of the Charter of the City of
Mount Vernon, New York.
§ 230-7. Construction standards.
All of the above work is to be performed in accordance with the tests
and standard construction specifications for like improvements with like
pavements, curbs, sidewalks and materials adopted by the State of New
York, Department of Public Works, on January 2, 1957, or as the same may
hereafter be amended.
Chapter 234
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exemption for persons 65 years of age or
over — See Charter § 246.
B. Unreinforced portland cement concrete pavement.
Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on reinforced portland cement
concrete base.
C.
Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on unreinforced portland cement
concrete base.
D.
Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on bottom course bituminous
macadam penetration method.
E.
F. Asphaltic concrete wearing surface on existing pavement.
A. Asphaltic concrete, Type 2A.
B. Bituminous surface treatment on existing pavements.
§ 230-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:661

ARTICLE I
Sales and Use Tax
[Adopted 2-9-1972 by L.L. No. 3-1972, approved 2-23-1972]
§ 234-1. Definitions.
When used in this article, the term "person" includes an individual,
partnership, society, association, joint-stock company, corporation,
estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any other person acting
in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court
or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
A.
When used in this article, for the purposes of the taxes imposed by
§ 234-2A, B, C and D and by § 234-4, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — A purchase by any person for any purpose
other than those excluded under the definition of "retail sale."
PURCHASER — A person who purchases property or to whom are
rendered services, the receipts from which are taxable under this
article.
RECEIPT — The amount of the sale price of any property and the
charge for any service taxable under this article, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including any amount for
which credit is allowed by the vendor to the purchaser, without any
deduction for expenses or early payment discounts, but excluding any
credit for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and
intended for resale and excluding the cost of transportation of tangible
personal property sold at retail where such cost is separately stated in
the written contract, if any, and on the bill rendered to the purchaser.
For special rules governing computation of "receipts," see § 234-5.
RETAIL SALE — A sale of tangible personal property to any person for
any purpose, other than for resale as such or as a physical component
part of tangible personal property or for use by that person in
performing the services subject to tax under § 234-2C(1), (2), (3) and
(5) where the property so sold becomes a physical component part
of the property upon which the services are performed or where the
property so sold is later actually transferred to the purchaser of the
service in conjunction with the performance of the service subject to
tax. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this definition, a sale
of any tangible personal property to a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman for use or consumption in erecting structures or buildings
or building on or otherwise adding to, altering, improving, maintaining,
servicing or repairing real property, property or land, as the terms
"real property," "property" and "land" are defined in the Real Property
Tax Law, is deemed to be a "retail sale" regardless of whether the
tangible personal property is to be resold as such before it is so used or
consumed. The term "retail sale" does not include:
B.
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-1
1:663
SALE, SELLING or PURCHASE — Any transfer of title or possession,
or both, exchange or barter, rental, lease or license to use or consume,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, or any agreement therefor, including the rendering
of any service taxable under this article for a consideration or any
agreement therefor.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Corporeal personal property of
any nature. However, except for the purposes of the tax imposed by
§ 234-2B, such term shall not include gas, electricity, refrigeration and
steam.
USE — The exercise of any right or power over tangible personal
property by the purchaser thereof, and includes but is not limited to
the receiving, storage or any keeping or retention for any length of
time, withdrawal from storage, any installation, any affixation to real or
personal property or any consumption of such property.
VENDOR — Includes:
The transfer of tangible personal property to a corporation, solely
in consideration for the issuance of its stock, pursuant to a merger
or consolidation effected under the law of New York or any other
jurisdiction.
(1)
The distribution of property by a corporation to its stockholders as
a liquidating dividend.
(2)
The distribution of property by a partnership to its partners in
whole or partial liquidation.
(3)
The transfer of property to a corporation upon its organization in
consideration for the issuance of its stock.
(4)
The contribution of property to a partnership in consideration for a
partnership interest therein.
(5)
A person making sales of tangible personal property or services,
the receipts from which are taxed by this article.
(1)
A person maintaining a place of business in the state and making
sales, whether at such place of business or elsewhere, to persons
within the City of tangible personal property or services, the use of
which is taxed by this article.
(2)
A person who solicits business either by employees, independent
contractors, agents or other representatives or by distribution of
catalogs or other advertising matter and by reason thereof makes
sales to persons within the City of tangible personal property or
services, the use of which is taxed by this article.
(3)
Any other person making sales to persons within the City of
tangible personal property or services, the use of which is taxed
(4)
§ 234-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-1
1:664
by this article, who may be authorized by the Tax Commission to
correct such tax.
The State of New York, any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public
corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
agreement or compact with another state or Canada) or political
subdivisions when such entity sells services or property of a kind
ordinarily sold by private persons.
(5)
Any salesman, representative, peddler or canvasser who is treated
by the State Tax Commission as a vendor pursuant to the provisions
of § 1101(b)(8)(ii) of the Tax Law.
(6)
When used in this article, for the purposes of the tax imposed under
§ 234-2E, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HOTEL — A building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept
open as such for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an
apartment hotel, a motel, boardinghouse or club, whether or not meals
are served.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room in a hotel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or
has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement,
or otherwise.
OPERATOR — Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a
hotel for at least 90 consecutive days shall be considered a "permanent
resident" with regard to the period of such occupancy.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise.
ROOM — Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel
which are available for or let out for any purpose other than a place of
assembly.
C.
When used in this article, for purposes of the tax imposed under
§ 234-2F, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACTIVE ANNUAL MEMBER — A member who is not a life member
but who enjoys full club privileges as distinguished from the privileges
enjoyed by a person holding a nonresident membership, an associate
membership or other partial or restricted membership.
ADMISSION CHARGE — The amount paid for admission, including any
service charge and any charge for entertainment or amusement or for
the use of facilities therefor.
AMUSEMENT CHARGE — Any admission charge, dues or charge of
roof garden, cabaret or other similar place.
D.
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-1
1:665
§ 234-2. Imposition of sales tax. [Amended 2-14-1973 by L.L. No.
3-1973, approved 3-2-1973; 6-12-1974 by L.L. No. 3-1974, approved
6-27-1974; 8-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984, approved 8-28-1984]
On or after December 1, 1984, there is hereby imposed and there shall be
paid a tax of 2 1/2% upon:
CHARGE OF A ROOF GARDEN, CABARET OR OTHER SIMILAR PLACE
— Any charge made for admission, refreshment, service or merchandise
at a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place.
DRAMATIC OR MUSICAL ARTS ADMISSION CHARGE — Any
admission charge paid for admission to a theater, opera house, concert
hall or other hall or place of assembly for a live dramatic, choreographic
or musical performance.
DUES — Any dues or membership fee, including any assessment,
irrespective of the purpose for which made, and any charges for social
or sports privileges or facilities. "Dues" of a life member shall be an
annual equivalent to the amount paid as "dues," within this definition,
by an active annual member, whether or not the life member paid for
his life membership prior to the imposition of the tax by this article.
INITIATION FEE — Any payment, contribution or loan required as
a condition precedent to membership, whether or not such payment,
contribution or loan is evidenced by a certificate of interest or
indebtedness or share of stock, and irrespective of the person or
organization to whom paid, contributed or loaned.
LESSOR — Any person who is the owner, licensee or lessee of any place
of amusement or roof garden, cabaret or other similar place which he
leases, subleases or grants a license to use to other persons who make
amusement charges or admission charges.
PATRON — Any person who pays an amusement charge or who is
otherwise required to pay the tax imposed under § 234-2F.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place where any facilities for
entertainment, amusement or sports are provided.
RECIPIENT — Any person who collects or receives or is under a duty to
collect an amusement charge.
ROOF GARDEN, CABARET or OTHER SIMILAR PLACE — Any roof
garden, cabaret or other similar place which furnishes a public
performance for profit.
SOCIAL OR ATHLETIC CLUB — Any club or organization of which a
material purpose or activity is social or athletic.
The receipts from every retail sale of tangible personal property, except
as otherwise provided in this article.
A.
The receipts from every sale, other than sales for resale, of gas,
electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration and
B.
§ 234-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-2
1:666
steam service of whatever nature, and from every sale, other than sales
for resale, of telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph
service of whatever nature except interstate and international
telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service.
The receipts from every sale, except for resale, of the following
services:
The furnishing of information by printed, mimeographed or
multigraphed matter or by duplicating written or printed matter in
any other manner, including the services of collecting, compiling
or analyzing information of any kind or nature and furnishing
reports thereof to other persons, but excluding the furnishing of
information which is personal or individual in nature and which is
not or may not be substantially incorporated in reports furnished
to other persons, and excluding the services of advertising or other
agents or of other persons acting in a representative capacity and
information services used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and
television broadcasters in the collection and dissemination of news.
(1)
Producing, fabricating, processing, printing or imprinting tangible
personal property, performed for a person who directly or
indirectly furnishes the tangible personal property, not purchased
by him for resale, upon which such services are performed.
(2)
Installing tangible personal property, or maintaining, servicing or
repairing tangible personal property not held for sale in the regular
course of business, whether or not the services are performed
directly or by means of coin-operated equipment or by any other
means, and whether or not any tangible personal property is
transferred in conjunction therewith, except such services
rendered by an individual who is engaged directly by a private
home owner or lessee in or about his residence and who is not
in a regular trade or business offering his services to the public,
and except any receipts from laundering, dry cleaning, tailoring,
weaving, pressing, shoe repairing and shoe shining, and except
for installing property which, when installed, will constitute an
additional or capital improvement to real property, property or
land, as the terms "real property," "property" and "land" are
defined in the Real Property Tax Law, and except such services
rendered with respect to commercial vessels primarily engaged in
interstate or foreign commerce and property used by or purchased
for the use of such vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies,
maintenance and repairs (other than with respect to articles
purchased for the original equipping of a new ship); provided,
however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall be
construed to exclude from tax under this subsection or under
Subsection B of this section any charge made by a person
furnishing service subject to tax under Subsection B of this section
for installing property at the premises of a purchaser of such a
taxable service for use in connection with such service.
(3)
C.
§ 234-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:667
Storing all tangible personal property not held for sale in the
regular course of business and the rental of safe-deposit boxes or
similar space.
(4)
Maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land,
as such terms are defined in the Real Property Tax Law, whether
the services are performed in or outside a building, as
distinguished from adding to or improving such real property,
property or land by a capital improvement, but excluding services
rendered by an individual who is not in a regular trade or business
offering his services to the public, and excluding interior cleaning
and maintenance services performed on a regular contractual basis
for a term of not less than 30 days, other than window cleaning,
rodent and pest control and trash removal from buildings.
NOTE: Wages, salaries and other compensation paid by an
employer to an employee for performing as an employee the
services described in Subsection C are not receipts subject to the
taxes imposed under such subsection.
(5)
Food and beverage sales.
The receipts from every sale of beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages or any other drink of any nature, or from every sale
of food and drink of any nature or of food alone, when sold in
or by restaurants, taverns or other establishments in this City or
by caterers, including in the amount of such receipts any cover,
minimum, entertainment or other charge made to patrons or
customers (except those receipts taxed pursuant to Subsection F of
this section):
In all instances where the sale is for consumption on the
premises where sold.
(a)
In those instances where the vendor or any person whose
services are arranged for by the vendor, after the delivery of
the food or drink by or on behalf of the vendor for consumption
off the premises of the vendor, serves or assists in serving,
cooks, heats or provides other services with respect to the food
or drink.
(b)
In those instances where the sale is for consumption off the
premises of the vendor, except where food (other than
sandwiches) or drink, or both, are sold in an unheated state
and are of a type commonly sold for consumption off the
premises and in the same form and condition, quantities and
packaging, in establishments which are food stores other than
those principally engaged in selling foods prepared and ready
to be eaten.
(c)
(1)
(2) The tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to:
D.
§ 234-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-2
1:668
Food or drink which is sold to an airline for consumption while
in flight.
(a)
Food or drink sold to a student of a nursery school,
kindergarten, elementary or secondary school at a restaurant
or cafeteria located on the premises of such a school, or food
or drink, other than beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages,
sold at a restaurant, tavern or other establishment located
on the premises of a college, university or a school (other
than a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary or secondary
school) to a student enrolled therein who purchases such food
or drink under a contractual arrangement whereby the student
does not pay cash at the time he is served, provided that the
school, college or university described in this subsection is
operated by an exempt organization described in Subdivision
(a) of § 1116 of the Tax Law, or is created, incorporated,
registered or licensed by the State Legislature or pursuant to
the Education Law or the regulations of the Commissioner of
Education, or is incorporated by the Regents of the University
of the State of New York or with their consent or the consent
of the Commissioner of Education as provided in § 216 of the
Education Law.
(b)
Food or drink sold through coin-operated vending machines at
$0.10 or less, provided that the vendor is primarily engaged
in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory to the
State Tax Commission.
(c)
The rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this City,
except that the tax shall not be imposed upon a permanent resident or
where the rent is not more than at the rate of $2 per day.
E.
Admission charges and club dues.
Any admission charge where such admission charge is in excess
of $0.10 to or for the use of any place of amusement in the City,
except charges for admission to racetracks, boxing, sparring or
wrestling matches or exhibitions, which charges are taxed under
the laws of this state, except taxes imposed by Article 28 of the
Tax Law of the State of New York, or dramatic or musical arts
performances or motion-picture theaters, and except charges to a
patron for admission to or use of facilities for sporting activities
in which such patron is to be a participant, such as bowling alleys
and swimming pools. For any person having the permanent use or
possession of a box or seat or a lease or a license, other than a
season ticket, for the use of a box or seat at a place of amusement,
the tax shall be upon the amount for which a similar box or seat is
sold for each performance or exhibition at which the box or seat is
used or reserved by the holder, licensee or lessee and shall be paid
by the holder, licensee or lessee.
(1)
F.
§ 234-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:669
§ 234-3. Transitional provisions. [Amended 6-12-1974 by L.L. No.
3-1974, approved 6-27-1974; 8-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984,
approved 8-28-1984]
The dues paid to any social or athletic club in this City if the dues
of an active annual member, exclusive of the initiation fee, are in
excess of $10 per year, and on the initiation fee alone, regardless
of the amount of dues, if such initiation fee is in excess of $10,
except that the tax shall not apply to a fraternal society, order
or association operating under the lodge system or any fraternal
association of students of a college or university. Where the tax on
dues applies to any such social or athletic club, the tax shall be paid
by all members thereof regardless of the amount of their dues and
shall be paid on all dues or initiation fees for a period commencing
on or after June 1, 1972. In the case of a life membership, the tax
shall be upon the annual amount paid by active annual members
as dues, whether or not the life member paid for or was admitted
to such membership prior to the imposition of the tax under this
article, and shall be paid annually by the person holding such
life membership at the time for payment of dues by active annual
members.
(2)
The amount paid as charges of a roof garden, cabaret or other
similar place in the state.
(3)
The taxes imposed under § 234-2A, C and D shall be paid upon all
sales made and services rendered on or after the effective date of
this article, although made on or rendered under a prior contract,
except as provided in § 234-12, and except that a delivery or transfer of
possession of tangible personal property made after said date pursuant
to an agreement for the sale of said property made before the date
four months earlier than the effective date of this article shall not be
subject to tax if such agreement for the sale of said property was made
in writing, if the particular item or items of property so sold or agreed
to be sold were segregated February 1, 1972, from any other similar
property in the possession of the vendor and identified as having been
appropriated to such sale or agreement of sale and if the purchaser,
before June 1, 1972, shall have paid to the vendor not less than 10% of
the sale price of said property.
A.
The tax imposed under § 234-2B shall be paid with respect to receipts
for property or services sold on or after June 1, 1972, although made
under a prior contract. Where property or service is sold on a monthly,
quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or service
are based on meter readings, the amount received on each bill for
such property or service for a month or other term shall be a receipt
subject to the tax, but such tax shall be applicable to all bills based on
meters read on or after June 1, 1972, only where more than 1/2 of the
number of days included in the month or other period billed are days
subsequent to May 31, 1972; provided, however, that where such bills
B.
§ 234-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-3
1:670
are for telephone or telegraph service, the tax shall apply to all receipts
on such bills dated on or after June 1, 1972, for which no previous bill
was rendered, except, however, charges for services furnished before
the date of the first of such bills.
The tax imposed under § 234-2E shall be paid upon any occupancy on
or after June 1, 1972, although such occupancy is pursuant to a prior
contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a weekly,
monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax imposed
under such Subsection E to the extent that it covers any period on and
after June 1, 1972, and such rent shall be apportioned on the basis of
the ratio of the number of days falling within said period to the total
number of days covered thereby.
C.
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the tax imposed under
§ 234-2F shall be applicable to any admission to or the use of facilities
of a place of amusement occurring on or after June 1, 1972, whether
or not the admission charge has been paid prior to such date, unless
the tickets were actually sold and delivered (other than resale) prior to
June 1, 1972, to a person attending the performance occurring on or
after such date.
D.
A refund or credit equal to the amount of the sales or compensating
use tax paid on the sale or use of tangible personal property under a
local law, ordinance or resolution imposed pursuant to the authority
of Chapter 873 of the Laws of 1934, as amended, shall be allowed
upon application to the Tax Commission, as provided for herein, where
such property has been used by the purchaser or user in performing
the services subject to the tax under § 234-2C(1), (2), (3) and (5) and
such property has become a physical component part of the property
upon which the services are performed or has been transferred to the
purchaser of the service in conjunction with the performance of the
service subject to tax, except that such refund or credit may not exceed
the combined state and local taxes, if any, paid pursuant to Article 28
of the Tax Law and under the tax imposed by this article on the sale or
use of the services in connection with which such property was used.
No interest shall be allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit
allowed pursuant to this subsection.
E.
With respect to the additional tax of 1% imposed effective September
1, 1974, the provisions of Subsections A through E of this section apply,
except that for the purposes of this subsection all references in said
Subsections A, B, C and D to June 1, 1972, shall be read as referring to
September 1, 1974; all references in said Subsection A to February 1,
1972, shall be read as referring to May 1, 1974; and all references to
May 31, 1972, in said Subsection B shall be read as referring to August
31, 1974. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt from
tax, at the rate in effect prior to September 1, 1974, any transactions
which may not be subject to the additional tax imposed effective on that
date.
F.
§ 234-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:671
§ 234-4. Imposition of compensating use tax. [Amended 6-12-1974
by L.L. No. 3-1974, approved 6-27-1974; 8-17-1984 by L.L. No.
6-1984, approved 8-28-1984]
With respect to the additional tax of 1% imposed effective December
1, 1984, the provisions of Subsection A through E of this section apply,
except that for the purposes of this section all references in said
Subsections A, B, C and D to June 1, 1972, shall be read as referring
to December 1, 1984; all references in said Subsection A to February 1,
1972, shall be read as referring to August 1, 1984; and all references
to May 31, 1972, in said Subsection B shall be read as, referring
to November 30, 1984. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
exempt from tax, at the rate in effect prior to December 1, 1984, any
transaction which may not be subject to the additional tax imposed
effective on that date.
G.
Except to the extent that property or services have already been or will
be subject to the sales tax under this article, there is hereby imposed
on every person a use tax for the use within this City on and after
December 1, 1984, except as otherwise exempted under this article:
(1) Of any tangible personal property purchased at retail.
Of any tangible personal property manufactured, processed or
assembled by the user, if items of the same kind of tangible
personal property are offered for sale by him in the regular course
of business.
(2)
(3) Of any of the services described in § 234-2C(1).
Of any tangible personal property, however acquired, where not
acquired for purposes of resale, upon which any of the services
described under § 234-2C(2) and have been performed.
(4)
A.
For purposes of Subsection A(1) of this section, the tax shall be at the
rate of 2 1/2% of the consideration given or contracted to be given for
such property or for the use of such property, but excluding any credit
for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and intended
for resale, plus the cost of transportation, except where such cost is
separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the bill rendered
to the purchaser. For the purpose of Subsection A(2) of this section,
the tax shall be at the rate of 2 1/2% of the price at which items of
the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale by
the user; and the mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from
storage of tangible personal property by the person who manufactured,
processed or assembled such property shall not be deemed a taxable
use by him. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of Subsection
A(2) of this section, there shall be no tax on any portion of such price
which represents the value added by the user to tangible personal
property which he fabricates and installs to the specifications of an
addition or capital improvements to real property, property or land,
B.
§ 234-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-4
1:672
§ 234-5. Computation and payment of tax.
as the terms "real property," "property" or "land" are defined in the
Real Property Tax Law, over and above the prevailing normal purchase
price prior to such fabrication of such tangible personal property which
a manufacturer, producer or assembler would charge an unrelated
contractor who similarly fabricated and installed such tangible personal
property to the specifications of an addition or capital improvement to
such real property, property or land. For purposes of Subsection A(3)
and (4) of this section, the tax shall be at the rate of 2 1/2% of the
consideration given or contracted to be given for the service, including
the consideration for any tangible personal property transferred in
conjunction with the performance of the service, plus the cost of
transportation of property so transferred and of the tangible personal
property upon which the service was performed, except where such
cost is separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the bill
rendered to the purchaser.
The retail sales tax imposed under § 234-2A and the compensating
use tax imposed under § 234-4, when computed in respect to tangible
personal property whenever manufactured, processed or assembled
and used by such manufacturer, producer or assembler in the regular
course of business within this City, shall be based on the price at which
items of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale
by him, except to the extent otherwise provided in § 234-4 hereof.
A.
Tangible personal property which has been purchased by a resident of
this City outside this City for use outside this City and subsequently
becomes subject to the compensating use tax imposed under this article
shall be taxed on the basis of the purchase price of such property;
provided, however, that:
Where a taxpayer affirmatively shows that the property was used
outside this City by him for more than six months prior to its use
within this City, such property shall be taxed on the basis of current
market value of the property at the time of its first use within
this City. The value of such property, for compensating use tax
purposes, may not exceed its cost.
(1)
The compensating use tax on such tangible personal property
brought into this City (other than for complete consumption or for
incorporation into real property located in this City) and used in
the performance of a contract or subcontract within this City by
a purchaser or user for a period of less than six months may be
based, at the option of the taxpayer, on the fair rental value of such
property for the period of use within this City.
(2)
B.
With respect to property leased or sold under a contract deferring
payments, the tax shall be payable at such times and in such amounts as
may be prescribed by the State Tax Commission as provided in § 1132
of the Tax Law.
C.
§ 234-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-5
1:673
§ 234-6. Exemptions from sales and use taxes.
If the State Tax Commission has prescribed or shall prescribe schedules
of the amount of tax to be collected upon each gallon of motor fuel and
diesel motor fuel sold at retail service stations and upon each pack of
cigarettes as provided in § 1111 of the Tax Law, the tax thereon shall be
collected as prescribed in such schedules.
D.
Receipts from the following shall be exempt from the tax on retail sales
imposed under § 234-2A and the compensating use tax imposed under
§ 234-4:
Food, food products, beverages, dietary foods and health
supplements sold for human consumption, but not including candy
and confectionery, fruit drinks which contain less than 70% of
natural fruit juice, soft drinks, sodas and beverages such as are
ordinarily dispensed at soda fountains or in connection therewith
(other than coffee, tea or cocoa) and beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages, all of which shall be subject to the retail sales and
compensating use taxes whether or not the item is sold in liquid
form. Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting food or drink
from the tax imposed under § 234-2D.
(1)
(2) Water, when delivered to the consumer through mains or pipes.
Drugs and medicines intended for use, internally or externally,
in the cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of illnesses or
diseases in human beings and products consumed by humans for
the preservation of health, but not including medical equipment
and supplies other than such drugs and medicines, or cosmetics
or toilet articles notwithstanding the presence of medicinal
ingredients therein.
(3)
Prosthetic aids, hearing aids or eyeglasses and artificial devices
designed for the use of a particular individual to correct or alleviate
physical incapacity.
(4)
(5) Newspapers and periodicals.
Tangible personal property, except property incorporated in a
building or structure, for the use or consumption directly and
exclusively in the production for sale of tangible personal property
by farming, including stock, dairy, poultry, fruit, furbearing animal
and truck farming. The term "farming" shall also include ranching,
operating nurseries, greenhouses or other similar structures used
primarily for the raising of agricultural, horticultural or
floricultural commodities, and operating orchards.
(6)
Tangible personal property sold by a mortician, undertaker or
funeral director. However, all tangible personal property sold to a
mortician, undertaker or funeral director for use in the conducting
of funerals shall not be deemed a sale for resale within the meaning
(7)
A.
§ 234-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-6
1:674
of "retail sale" in § 234-1B of this article and shall not be exempt
from the retail sales tax.
Commercial vessels primarily engaged in interstate or foreign
commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of such
vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs
(other than articles purchased for the original equipping of a new
ship).
(8)
(9) Fuel sold to an airline for use in its airplanes.
Tangible personal property purchased for use or consumption
directly and exclusively in research and development in the
experimental or laboratory sense. Such research and development
shall not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection
of materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys,
management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions
or research in connection with literary, historical or similar
projects.
(10)
The flags of the United States of America and the State of New
York.
(11)
Tangible personal property sold through coin-operated vending
machines at $0.10 or less, provided that the retailer is primarily
engaged in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory
to the State Tax Commission.
(12)
Motor vehicles, as such term is defined in § 125 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, sold by a husband or wife to his or her spouse, or by
a parent to his or her child, or by a child to his or her parent;
provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply if the vendor
is a dealer as defined in § 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
[Amended 2-14-1973 by L.L. No. 3-1973, approved 3-2-1973]
(13)
Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman for use in erecting a structure or building of an
organization described in § 234-7A or for use in adding to, altering
or improving real property, property or land of such an
organization, as the terms "real property," "property" and "land"
are defined in the Real Property Tax Law; provided, however, that
no exemption shall exist under this subsection unless such tangible
personal property is to become an integral component part of such
structure, building or real property and is to be resold to such
organization as tangible personal property before it has become a
part of such structure, building or real property.
(14)
Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman for use in maintaining, servicing or repairing real
property, property or land of an organization described in § 234-7A,
as the terms "real property," "property" and "land" are defined in
the Real Property Tax Law.
(15)
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-6
1:675
Tangible personal property sold by a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman to a person, other than an organization described in
§ 234-7A, for whom he is adding to or improving real property,
property or land by a capital improvement or for whom he is about
to do any of the foregoing, if such tangible personal property is to
become an integral component part of such structure, building or
real property; provided, however, that if such sale is made pursuant
to a contract irrevocably entered into before September 1, 1969,
no exemption shall exist under this subsection.
(16)
Services.
Telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service
used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and television
broadcasters in the collection or dissemination of news shall be
exempt from the tax imposed under § 234-2B if the charge for such
services is a toll charge or a charge for mileage services, including
the associated station terminal equipment.
(1)
Gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric,
refrigeration and steam services of whatever nature for use or
consumption directly and exclusively in research and development
in the experimental or laboratory sense shall be exempt from the
tax imposed under § 234-2B. Such research and development shall
not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of
materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys,
management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions
or research in connection with literary, historical or similar
projects.
(2)
B.
All sales of tangible personal property for use or consumption directly
and exclusively in the production of tangible personal property, gas,
electricity, refrigeration, or steam for sale by manufacturing,
processing, generating, assembling, refining, mining, extracting,
farming, agriculture, horticulture or floriculture, and all sales of
telephone central office equipment and station apparatus or
comparable telegraph equipment for use directly and exclusively in
receiving at destination or in initiating and switching telephone or
telegraph communications shall be exempt from the taxes imposed
under § 234-2A and B.
C.
Services otherwise taxable under § 234-2C(1), (2) or (3) herein shall
be exempt from tax under this article if the tangible personal property
upon which services were performed is delivered to the purchaser
outside the City for use outside the City.
D.
Telephone and telegraph service paid for by inserting coins in coinoperated
telephones where the charge is $0.10 or less shall be exempt
from the tax imposed under § 234-2B.
E.
Services rendered by a veterinarian licensed and registered as required
by the Education Law which constitute the practice of veterinary
F.
§ 234-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-6
1:676
§ 234-7. Exempt organizations.
medicine as defined in said law, including hospitalization for which no
separate boarding charge is made, shall not be subject to tax under
§ 234-2C(3), but the exemption allowed by this subsection shall not
apply to other services provided by a veterinarian to pets and other
animals, including but not limited to boarding, grooming and clipping.
Articles of tangible personal property designed for use in some manner
relating to domestic animals or poultry, when sold by such a
veterinarian, shall not be subject to tax under § 234-2A or under
§ 234-4. However, the sale of any such articles of tangible personal
property to a veterinarian shall not be deemed a sale for resale within
the meaning of "retail sale" in § 234-1B and shall not be exempt from
retail sales tax.
Services otherwise taxable under § 234-2C(3) shall be exempt from
tax if performed upon prosthetic aids, hearing aids or eyeglasses and
artificial devices designed for the use of a particular individual to
correct or alleviate physical incapacity.
G.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any sale or amusement
charge by or to any of the following or any use or occupancy by any
of the following shall not be subject to the sales and compensating use
taxes imposed under this article:
The State of New York or any of its agencies, instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created
pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada)
or political subdivisions where it is the purchaser, user or consumer
or where it is a vendor of services or property of a kind not
ordinarily sold by private persons.
(1)
The United States of America and any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation, where it
is the purchaser, user or consumer or where it sells services or
property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons.
(2)
The United Nations or any international organization of which the
United States of America is a member where it is the purchaser,
user or consumer or where it sells services or property of a kind
not ordinarily sold by private persons.
(3)
Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or
foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or
educational purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children
or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part
of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise
attempting to influence legislation and which does not participate
in or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of
(4)
A.
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-7
1:677
statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for
public office.
Nothing in this section shall exempt:
Retail sales of tangible personal property by any shop or store
operated by an organization described in Subsection A(4) of this
section.
(1)
Sales of food or drink in or by a restaurant, tavern or other
establishment operated by an organization described in Subsection
A(1) or (4) of this section, other than sales exempt under
§ 234-2D(2) from the taxes imposed hereunder, unless the
purchaser is an organization exempt under this section.
(2)
B.
Where any organization described in Subsection A(4) of this section
carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a
hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received
by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder.
C.
Exempt admission charges.
Except as provided in Subsection D(2) of this section, no
admissions all of the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the
benefit of the following organizations shall be subject to any of the
taxes imposed under § 234-2F:
(a) An organization described in Subsection A(4) of this section.
A society or organization conducted for the sole purpose of
maintaining symphony orchestras or operas and receiving
substantial support from voluntary contributions.
(b)
National guard organizations, posts or organizations of war
veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of any such posts or
organizations, if such posts, organizations, units or societies
are organized in this state and if no part of their net earnings
inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.
(c)
A police or fire department of a political subdivision of the
state, or a voluntary fire or ambulance company or exclusively
to a retirement, pension or disability fund for the sole benefit
of members of a police or fire department or to a fund for the
heirs of such members.
(d)
(1)
The exemption provided under Subsection D(1) of this section shall
not apply in the case of admissions to:
Any athletic game or exhibition unless the proceeds shall inure
exclusively to the benefit of elementary or secondary schools
or unless, in the case of an athletic game between two
elementary or secondary schools, the entire gross proceeds
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 234-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-7
1:678
§ 234-8. Deliveries outside City; deliveries within City of property
sold or serviced elsewhere.
from such game shall inure to the benefit of one or more
organizations described in Subsection A(4) of this section.
Carnivals, rodeos or circuses in which any professional
performer or operator participates for compensation.
(b)
Admission charges for admission to the following places or events
shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under § 234-2F:
Any admission to agricultural fairs if no part of the net
earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any stockholders or
members of the association conducting the same, provided
that the proceeds therefrom are used exclusively for the
improvement, maintenance and operation of such agricultural
fairs.
(a)
Any admission to a home or garden which is temporarily open
to the general public as a part of a program conducted by a
society or organization to permit the inspection of historical
homes and gardens, provided that no part of the net earnings
thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual.
(b)
Any admission to historic sites, houses and shrines, and
museums conducted in connection therewith, maintained and
operated by a society or organization devoted to the
preservation and maintenance of such historic sites, houses,
shrines and museums, provided that no part of the net
earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any private
stockholder or individual.
(c)
(3)
Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those
described in § 234-2B, including an agreement therefor, is made in this
City, but the property sold or the property upon which the services were
performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser elsewhere, such sale
shall not be subject to tax under this article. However, if delivery occurs
or will occur in a City, county or school district imposing a tax on the
sale or use of such property pursuant to the authority of Article 29 of
the Tax Law, the vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser,
as provided in § 1254 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, the
aggregate sales or compensating use taxes imposed by the City, if any,
county and school district in which delivery occurs or will occur, for
distribution by the State Tax Commission to such taxing jurisdiction or
jurisdictions.
A.
Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those
described in § 234-2B, including an agreement therefor, is made outside
this City, but the property sold or the property upon which the services
B.
§ 234-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-8
1:679
§ 234-9. Motor vehicle sales.
were performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser in this City,
such sale and use of such property or services shall be subject to tax
under this article, and the vendor shall be required to collect from the
purchaser, as provided in § 1254 of the Tax Law of the State of New
York, the sale or use tax imposed by this article, for distribution by the
State Tax Commission to this City.
For the purposes of this section, "delivery" shall be deemed to include
transfer of possession to the purchaser and the receiving of the
property by the purchaser.
C.
Where a sale of a motor vehicle, including an agreement therefor, is
made in this City to a nonresident thereof, such sale shall not be subject
to tax under this article despite the fact that such motor vehicle is
delivered to the purchaser within this City, provided that the purchaser
furnishes to the vendor, prior to taking delivery, proof satisfactory to
the Tax Commission that the purchaser:
(1) Is a nonresident of this City.
(2) Has no permanent place of abode within this City.
Is not engaged in carrying on in this City any employment, trade,
business or profession in which the motor vehicle will be used in
this City.
(3)
Such other proof as the Tax Commission may require to ensure
proper administration of the taxes imposed under § 234-2A.
However, if the purchaser resides in a City, county or school district
imposing a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, the vendor shall be
required to collect from the purchaser, as provided in § 1254 of the
Tax Law of the State of New York, the aggregate compensating use
taxes imposed by the City, if any, county and school district in which
the purchaser resides, for distribution by the State Tax Commission
to such taxing jurisdiction or jurisdictions.
(4)
A.
A vendor shall not be liable for failure to collect tax on such sale
of a motor vehicle, provided that the proof furnished to him by the
purchaser pursuant to Subsection A of this section shows that the
purchaser's residence is not in any City, county or school district which
imposes a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, and provided that
the vendor keeps such proof available for inspection by the State Tax
Commission, and further provided that such proof is not known by the
vendor, prior to making physical delivery of the motor vehicle, to be
false.
B.
For purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall include a
motor vehicle as defined in § 125 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and a trailer as defined in § 156 of such law.
C.
§ 234-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-10
1:680
§ 234-10. Territorial limits.
Any tax imposed under the authority of this article shall apply only within
the territorial limits of this City, except that any establishment located
partially within this City and partially within a town or towns and receiving
any services or utilities provided by this City shall be deemed to be wholly
within the City for the purposes of the taxes imposed by § 234-2B and E.
§ 234-11. Property uses exempt from compensating use tax.
The following uses of property shall not be subject to the compensating use
tax imposed under this article:
In respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this City prior
to June 1, 1972.
A.
In respect to the use of property purchased by the user while a
nonresident of this City, except in the case of tangible personal property
which the user, in the performance of a contract, incorporates into real
property located in the City. A person, while engaged in any manner in
carrying on in this City any employment, trade, business or profession,
shall not be deemed a nonresident with respect to the use in this City
of property in such employment, trade, business or profession.
B.
In respect to the use of property or services upon the sale of which the
purchaser would be expressly exempt from the taxes imposed under
§ 234-2A, B or C.
C.
In respect to the use of property which is converted into or becomes a
component part of a product produced for sale by the purchaser.
D.
In respect to the use of paper in the publication of newspapers and
periodicals.
E.
Payments to other jurisdictions.
In respect to the use of property or services to the extent that
a retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due and
paid thereon, without any right to a refund or credit thereof, to
any municipal corporation in this state or to any other state or
jurisdiction within any other state, but only when it is shown that
such other state or jurisdiction allows a corresponding exemption
with respect to the sale or use of tangible personal property or of
any of the services upon which such a sales or compensating use
tax was paid to this state and any of its municipal corporations,
except as provided in Subsection F(2) of this section.
(1)
To the extent that a compensating use tax imposed by this article
and the compensating use tax imposed by Article 28 of the Tax Law
are at a higher aggregate rate than the rate of tax imposed in any
other state or jurisdiction within any other state, the exemption
provided in Subsection F(1) of this section shall be inapplicable and
(2)
F.
§ 234-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-11
1:681
§ 234-12. Refunds or credits.
the taxes imposed by this article and by Article 28 shall apply to
the extent of the difference between such aggregate rate and the
rate paid in such other state or jurisdiction. Where a retail sales
tax or a compensating use tax was legally due and paid to any
municipal corporation in this state, without any right to a refund or
credit thereof, with respect to the sale or use of tangible personal
property or any of the services subject to sales or compensating
use tax, if the use of such property or services is then subject to
the compensating use tax imposed by this article and such tax is
at a higher rate than the rate of tax imposed by the first municipal
corporation, the tax imposed by this article shall also apply but only
to the extent of the difference in such rates.
For the purposes of this subsection, a payment to the State Tax
Commission of a tax imposed by a municipal corporation shall be
deemed a payment to such municipal corporation.
(3)
Taxes paid pursuant to § 234-2A or 234-4.
Subject to the conditions and limitations provided for herein, a
refund or credit shall be allowed for a tax paid pursuant to § 234-2A
or 234-4:
On the sale or use within this City of tangible personal property
if the purchaser or user, in the performance of a contract, later
incorporates that tangible personal property into real property
located outside this City.
(a)
On the sale or use of tangible personal property purchased
in bulk, or any portion thereof, which is stored and not used
by the purchaser or user within this City if that property is
subsequently reshipped by such purchaser or user to a point
outside this City for use outside this City.
(b)
On the sale to or use by a contractor or subcontractor of
tangible personal property if that property is used by him
solely in the performance of a preexisting lump sum or unit
price construction contract.
(c)
On the sale or use within this City of tangible personal
property, not purchased for resale, if the use of such property
in this City is restricted to fabricating such property (including
incorporating it into or assembling it with other tangible
personal property), processing, printing or imprinting such
property and such property is then shipped to a point outside
this City for use outside this City.
(d)
(1)
For the purposes of Subsection A(1)(c) above, the term "preexisting
lump sum or unit price construction contract" shall mean a contract
for the construction of improvements to real property under which
(2)
A.
§ 234-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-12
1:682
the amount payable to the contractor or subcontractor is fixed
without regard to the costs incurred by him in the performance
thereof, and which was irrevocably entered into prior to the date of
the enactment of this article or the enactment of a law increasing
the rate of tax imposed under this article or resulted from the
acceptance by a governmental agency of a bid accompanied by
a bond or other performance guaranty which was irrevocably
submitted prior to such date.
Where the tax on the sale or use of such tangible personal property
has been paid to the vendor, to qualify for such refund or credit
such tangible personal property must be incorporated into real
property as required in Subsection A(1)(a) above, reshipped as
required in Subsection A(1)(b) above or used in the manner
described in Subsection A(1)(c) or (d) above within three years
after the date such tax was payable to the State Tax Commission
by the vendor pursuant to § 1137 of the Tax Law. Where the tax
on the sale or use of such tangible personal property was paid
by the applicant for the credit or refund directly to the State Tax
Commission, to qualify for such refund or credit such tangible
personal property must be incorporated into real property as
required in Subsection A(1)(a) above, reshipped as required in
Subsection A(1)(b) above or used in the manner described in
Subsection A(1)(c) or (d) above within three years after the date
such tax was payable to the State Tax Commission by such
applicant pursuant to Article 28 of the Tax Law.
(3)
With respect to a sale or use described in Subsection A(1)(c) above,
the purchaser or user shall be entitled to a refund or credit of the
amount of the taxes imposed by this article if enacted later than the
date of such contract or bid, or of the amount reflecting an increase
in the rate of tax enacted later than said date, as the case may be,
but only to the extent that all such sales and use taxes paid on such
sale or use under the aggregate statewide and local taxes imposed
under Article 28 and by authority of Article 29 exceeded an amount
computed by applying against such sale or use the aggregate of
the rates of statewide and local sales and use taxes that were in
effect at the time such contract was entered into or such bid was
submitted.
(4)
A refund or credit equal to the amount of sales or compensating use
tax imposed by Article 28 of the Tax Law and under this article and
paid on the sale or use of tangible personal property shall be allowed
the purchaser where such property is later used by the purchaser in
performing a service subject to tax under § 234-2C(1), (2), (3) or (5)
or under § 234-4 and such property has become a physical component
part of the property upon which the service is performed or has been
transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction with the
performance of the service subject to tax or if a contractor,
subcontractor or repairman purchases tangible personal property and
B.
§ 234-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-12
1:683
§ 234-13. Administration and collection.
The taxes imposed by this article under the authority of Article 29 of the
Tax Law shall be administered and collected by the State Tax Commission
in the same manner as the taxes imposed under Article 28 of the Tax Law
are administered and collected by such Commission. All of the provisions of
said Article 28 relating to or applicable to the administration and collection
of the taxes imposed by that Article shall apply to the taxes imposed by this
article, including §§ 1101, 1106(e), 1111, 1118(b), 1119 and 1131 through
1147, together with any amendment thereto, with the same force and effect
as if those provisions had been incorporated in full into this article, except
as otherwise provided in § 1250 of the Tax Law.
§ 234-14. Disposition of revenues.
Net collections distributed to this City by the State Tax Commission
pursuant to § 1261 of the Tax Law of the State of New York shall be paid into
the treasury of the City, shall be credited to and deposited in the general
fund thereof and shall be available for any City purpose. Expenditures from
the proceeds of the taxes imposed by this article shall not be considered
as part of the cost of government within the meaning of any limitation on
expenditures contained in any general, special or local law applicable to
this City. As used in this section, "net collections" shall mean the moneys
collected from the taxes imposed pursuant to this article after deducting
therefrom expenses of administration and collection and amounts refunded
or to be refunded.
§ 234-15. Construction and enforcement.
This article shall be construed and enforced in conformity with Articles 28
and 29 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, pursuant to which the same
is enacted.
later makes a retail sale of such tangible personal property, the
acquisition of which would not have been a sale at retail to him but
for the second sentence of the definition of "retail sale" in § 234-1B. An
application for the refund or credit provided for herein must be filed
with the Tax Commission within the time provided by Subdivision (a) of
§ 1139 of the Tax Law. Such application shall be in such form as the Tax
Commission may prescribe. Where an application for credit has been
filed, the applicant may immediately take such credit on the return
which is due coincident with or immediately subsequent to the time that
he files his application for credit. However, the taking of the credit on
the return shall be deemed to be part of the application for credit. The
procedure for granting or denying such applications for refund or credit
and review of such determinations shall be as provided in Subdivision
(e) of § 1139 of the Tax Law.
§ 234-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-16
1:684
§ 234-16. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof shall for any
reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this
article but shall be confined in its operation to the provision thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered, and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 234-17. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on the first day of June 1972, except that
certificates of authority to collect tax may be issued by the State Tax
Commission prior to said date.
§ 234-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-17
1:685

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Air Pollution Control Devices
[Adopted 1-11-1967 by L.L. No. 1-1967, approved 1-25-1967]
§ 234-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR CONTAMINANT — A dust, fume, gas, mist, odor, smoke, vapor, pollen
or any combination thereof.
AIR CONTAMINATION SOURCE — Any source at, from or by reason of
which there is emitted into the atmosphere any air contaminant, regardless
of who the person may be who owns or operates the building, premises
or other property in, at or on which such source is located or the facility,
equipment or other property by which the emission is caused or from which
the emission comes. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this
term includes all types of commercial and industrial plants and works;
heating and power plants and stations, shops and stores; buildings and
other structures of all types, including single- and multiple-family
residences, apartment houses, office buildings, public buildings, hotels,
restaurants, schools, hospitals, churches and other institutional buildings,
garages, vending and service locations and stations; incinerators of all
types, indoor and outdoor; and refuse dumps and piles.
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES — Facilities which remove, reduce
or render less noxious air contaminants emitted from air contamination
sources from a point immediately preceding the point of such removal,
reduction or rendering to the point of discharge of air, meeting emission
standards as established by the Air Pollution Control Board, but excluding
such facilities installed for the primary purpose of salvaging materials
which are usable in the manufacturing process or are marketable and
excluding those facilities which rely for their efficacy on dilution, dispersion
or assimilation of air contaminants in the ambient air after emission.
§ 234-19. Exemption granted.
Air pollution control facilities, where constructed or reconstructed in order
to comply with the provisions of the Public Health Law and codes, rules,
regulations, permits or orders issued pursuant thereto, shall be exempt
from taxation and special ad valorem levies to the extent of any increase in
value thereof by reason of such construction or reconstruction.
§ 234-20. Certificate of compliance required.
Such air pollution control facilities shall not be entitled to any exemption
from taxation unless such facilities have been certified by the Commissioner
of Health or his designated representative, pursuant to § 1277-a of the
Public Health Law,91 as complying with applicable provisions of the Public
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-20
1:687
Health Law and codes, rules, regulations, permits or orders issued pursuant
thereto.
§ 234-21. Applicability.
Such exemption shall be applicable only to air pollution control facilities
which were constructed or reconstructed subsequent to September 1, 1966.
§ 234-22. Application for exemption required.
Such exemption from taxation shall be granted only upon an application by
the owner of such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment. The applicant shall furnish such information
as such Board shall require. The original of such application shall be filed
with the Department of Assessment and Taxation on or before the taxable
status date of the City of Mount Vernon. A copy of such application shall be
filed simultaneously with said State Board.
§ 234-23. Approval of application.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, he shall approve the application and such real
property shall be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies as
herein provided.
§ 234-24. Inclusion of exemption on assessment roll.
The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to the authority of
this article shall be entered by the Assessor on the portion of the assessment
roll provided for property exempt from taxation.
§ 234-25. When effective.
This article shall take effect 45 days after its adoption.
91.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by L.1972, c. 664, § 6, effective 9-1-1972.
§ 234-20 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-25
1:688
ARTICLE III
Real Property Tax Credits and Exemptions
[Adopted 6-9-1971 by L.L. No. 6-1971, approved 6-24-1971]
§ 234-26. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to encourage industrial and other business
enterprises to locate, expand and improve facilities in the City of Mount
Vernon and to provide job opportunities and job training for residents of
said City by granting real property tax credits and exemptions for periods
as specified herein.
§ 234-27. Exemptions and credits granted.
The Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation shall have the power and
be charged with the duty to carry out the purpose and intent of Article
4-A of the Commerce Law, § 485 of the Real Property Tax Law and the
other applicable laws of the State of New York, to grant eligible business
facility owners or operators, as defined by the aforesaid state laws, tax
exemption or tax credits from taxes and special ad valorem levies imposed
to the extent hereinafter set forth of any increase in the value of the
capital improvements commenced on or after July 1, 1971, consisting of
construction, reconstruction, erection or improvements of depreciable real
property, as certified in the certificate of eligibility issued by the New York
State Urban Job Incentive Board.
§ 234-28. Application for exemption.
§ 234-29. Amount and period of exemption.
An application for tax exemption as herein provided shall be filed with
the Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation prior to the appropriate
taxable status date on the prescribed form, together with a duly issued
New York State Job Incentive Board certificate of eligibility.
A.
Upon submission of the aforesaid application and proof, the
Commissioner of Assessment and Taxation, with or without a hearing,
shall consider the application for such exemption and, if found to be
in order, determine the assessed value of the exemption in accordance
with the certificate of eligibility and enter such value to the extent
herein authorized on the exempt portion of the assessment roll.
B.
The amount of such tax credit or exemption shall be 20%, and the
exemption so granted shall continue from year to year during the period
of years so approved, provided that the certificate of eligibility is not
revoked or modified and that it is renewed or extended by the State
Urban Job Incentive Board, but in no event shall such tax credit or
exemption extend beyond a maximum of 10 years for each such eligible
business facility.
A.
§ 234-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-29
1:689
§ 234-30. Effective date.
This article shall take effect the first day of September 1971.
Any exemption so granted shall commence with the assessment roll
prepared on the next following taxable status date of the City of Mount
Vernon.
B.
§ 234-29 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-30
1:690
ARTICLE IV
Tax Abatement for Rental Property Occupied by Senior Citizens
[Adopted 12-27-2006, approved 12-28-200692]
§ 234-31. Legislative findings and intent.
The City of Mount Vernon finds it is in the public interest to adopt legislation
in accordance with the enabling legislation enacted by the State Legislature
with respect to tax abatements of real property taxes for senior citizens
living in rent-regulated/rent-controlled properties.
§ 234-32. Definitions.
The terms "dwelling unit," "head of the household," "income," "income tax
year," "increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent" and "members of
the household," as used in this article, shall have the definitions ascribed to
them in Real Property Tax Law § 467-b, Subdivision 1, as follows:
DWELLING UNIT — That part of a dwelling in which a head of the
household resides and which is subject to either the Emergency Housing
Rent Control Law or to the Rent and Rehabilitation Law of the City of New
York enacted pursuant to the Local Emergency Housing Rent Control Law,
or to the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974.
HEAD OF THE HOUSEHOLD — A person who is 62 years of age or older
and is entitled to the possession or to the use or occupancy of a dwelling
unit.
INCOME — Income from all sources after deduction of all income and
social security taxes and includes social security and retirement benefits,
supplemental security income and additional state payments, public
assistance benefits, interest, dividends, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include gifts
or inheritances, payments made to individuals because of their status as
victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in P.L. 103-286, or increases in
benefits accorded pursuant to the Social Security Act or a public or private
pension paid to any member of the household, which increase, in any given
year, does not exceed the consumer price index (all items, United States
City average) for such year which take effect after the date of eligibility of
head of the household receiving benefits hereunder, whether received by
the head of the household or any other member of the household.
INCOME TAX YEAR — A twelve-month period for which the head of the
household filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM RENT OR LEGAL REGULATED RENT — Any
increase in the maximum rent or the legal regulated rent for the dwelling
unit in question pursuant to the applicable Rent Control Law or to the
Emergency Tenant Protection Act o f 1974, respectively, or such classes
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article IV, Tax Abatement for Rent-
Controlled Property, adopted 12-22-1976, approved 12-23-1976, as amended.
§ 234-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-32
1:691
of increase thereunder as may be specified in a local law, ordinance or
resolution enacted pursuant to this section,93 over such base period rent
as shall be provided therein or an exemption from the maximum rent or
legal regulated rent as specified in Paragraph c or d of Subdivision 3 of this
section.94
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD — The head of the household and any
person, other than a bona fide roomer, boarder or subtenant who is not
related to the head of the household, permanently residing in the dwelling
unit.
§ 234-33. Abatement of taxes.
All taxes of the City of Mount Vernon imposed on real property containing a
dwelling unit are hereby abated by an amount not in excess of that portion
of any increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent which causes such
maximum rent or legal regulated rent to exceed 1/3 of the combined income
of all members of the household.
§ 234-34. Exception; deduction. [Amended 5-13-2015, approved
5-15-2015]
The tax abatement provided under this article shall not be granted if
the combined income of all members of the household for the income
tax year immediately preceding the making of an application under this
article exceeds the amount listed in the schedule listed in Subsection B
below, provided that when the head of the household retires or becomes
disabled before the commencement of such year and the date of filing
the application, the income of such year may be adjusted by excluding
salary or earnings and projecting his or her retirement income over the
entire period of such year.
A.
Maximum allowable income pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 467-b.
Tax Abatement Table
Beginning Date Maximum Allowable Income
1-2-2007 $26,000
7-1-2007 $27,000
7-1-2008 $28,000
7-1-2009 $29,000
5-1-2015 $40,000
B.
Upon issuance of a tax abatement certificate as hereinafter provided,
the amount of increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent set
forth in said certificate shall be deducted from the legal maximum rent
C.
93.Editor's Note: See New York State Real Property Tax Law § 467-b.
94.Editor's Note: See New York State Real Property Tax Law § 467-b, Subdivision 3,
Paragraph c or d.
§ 234-32 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-34
1:692
§ 234-35. Application for certificate.
The head of the household must apply before January 29 of each year
to the Office of Rent Administration, Division of Housing and Community
Renewal, of the State of New York, for a tax abatement certificate on a
form prescribed by said office. A tax abatement certificate setting forth an
amount not in excess of the increase in maximum rent or legal regulated
rent for the taxable period shall be issued by said office to each head of
the household who is found to be eligible under this article. Copies of such
certificate shall be issued to the owner of the real property containing the
dwelling unit of the head of the household and to the City Clerk of the City
of Mount Vernon.
§ 234-36. Eligibility date.
Eligibility shall be determined as of the date of receipt in the Office of Rent
Administration of a properly completed form.
§ 234-37. Portion of taxes deducted or remitted.
§ 234-38. Overcharges.
Where a tax abatement certificate has been issued to a head of the
household as authorized by this article and the landlord collects the
increase in the maximum rent or legal regulated rent for a dwelling unit
occupied by such head of the household, the amount of such abatement
shall be deemed a rent overcharge under the applicable rent control or rent
regulation law.
or legal regulated rent chargeable for the dwelling unit of a head of the
household.
The portion of the increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent
for the taxable period set forth in a tax abatement certificate shall be
deducted from the total taxes levied by the City of Mount Vernon on
real property containing the dwelling unit of a head of the household
to whom the certificate has been issued, effective the beginning of the
next fiscal year after the application has been filed, provided that the
application has been filed before the City's taxable status date.
A.
Upon the vacancy of a dwelling unit for which an abatement certificate
has been issued, the owner thereof shall remit a pro rata portion of
the tax abatement to the City, and any amount due by reason of such
vacancy shall be a lien upon the property on and after the date of such
vacancy.
B.
§ 234-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-38
1:693

ARTICLE V
Tax Foreclosures in Rem
[Adopted 10-13-1976 by L.L. No. 7-1976, approved 10-28-1976]
§ 234-39. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 783
of the Laws of 1974 entitled "An Act Authorizing the Common Council of
the City of Mount Vernon to Adopt by Local Law Provisions Relating to the
Commencement of a Foreclosure in Rem by the City of Mount Vernon Where
the Payment of Taxes, Assessments and Other Charges Are in Arrears for a
Period of Time in Excess of Two Years."
§ 234-40. Acceptance of state law.
The City of Mount Vernon hereby elects to proceed under the authority and
provisions of Chapter 783 of the Laws of 1974, a copy of which is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof.95
§ 234-41. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
95.Editor's Note: A copy of Chapter 783 of the Laws of 1974 is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 234-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-41
1:695

ARTICLE VI
Deeds Given in Foreclosure Suits
[Adopted 8-22-1962 by L.L. No. 8-1962, approved 9-5-1962;
amended in its entirety 5-5-1971 by L.L. No. 5-1971, approved
5-18-1971]
§ 234-42. Deed as presumptive evidence.
Every deed hereafter given by the City of Mount Vernon pursuant to Article
11, Titles 2 and 3, of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York
shall be presumptive evidence that the action and all proceedings taken
for the foreclosure of a tax lien by an action in rem and all proceedings
prior thereto from and including the assessment of the lands affected and all
notices required by law were regular and in accordance with all provisions
of law relating thereto. Such deed shall be conclusive after two years from
the date of the record of such deed unless at the time of the taking effect
of this article the two-year period since the record of the deed has expired
or less than six months of such period of two years remains unexpired, in
which case the presumption shall become conclusive six months after this
article takes effect. No action to set aside such deed shall be maintained
unless the action is commenced and a note of pendency of the action is
filed in the office of the proper County Clerk prior to the time that the
presumption becomes conclusive as aforesaid.
§ 234-43. When effective.
This article shall take effect 45 days after its adoption.
§ 234-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-43
1:697

ARTICLE VII
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 8-8-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984, approved 8-22-1984]
§ 234-44. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall mean and include:
AFFIXED — Includes attached or annexed by adhesion, stapled or
otherwise, or a notation by stamp, imprint or writing.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon.
COMPTROLLER — The Comptroller of the City of Mount Vernon.
CONSIDERATION — The price actually paid or required to be paid for the
real property or interest therein, without deduction for mortgages, liens or
encumbrances, whether or not expressed in the deed and whether paid or
required to be paid by money, property or any other thing of value. It shall
include the cancellation or discharge of an indebtedness or obligation.
DEED — Any document, instrument or writing (other than a will),
regardless of where made, executed or delivered, whereby any real
property or interest therein is created, vested, granted, bargained, sold,
transferred, assigned or otherwise conveyed.
GRANTEE — The person accepting the deed or who obtains any of the real
property which is the subject of the deed or any interest therein.
GRANTOR — The person making, executing or delivering the deed.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any
other person acting in an fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by a court or otherwise, any combination of individuals and any
other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or
more persons.
REAL PROPERTY OR INTEREST THEREIN — Every estate or right, legal
or equitable, present or future, vested or contingent, in lands, tenements
or hereditaments which are located in whole or in part within the City of
Mount Vernon. It shall not include a mortgage, a release of mortgage or a
leasehold for a stated term of years or part of a year. It shall not include
rights to sepulture.
§ 234-45. Imposition of tax. [Amended 8-13-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986, approved 8-26-1986]
A tax is hereby imposed on each deed at the time of delivery by a grantor
to a grantee when the consideration for the real property and any
improvement thereon, whether or not included in the same deed, exceeds
$100,000. The tax shall be at the rate of 1% of the consideration in excess
of $100,000. Where any real property is situated partly within and partly
without the boundaries of the City of Mount Vernon, the consideration
§ 234-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-45
1:699
subject to tax shall be such part of the total consideration attributable to
that portion of such real property situated within the City of Mount Vernon
or to the interest in such portion.
§ 234-46. Presumptions and burden of proof.
For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and to prevent
evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed that all deeds are
taxable. Where the net consideration includes property other than money,
it shall be presumed that the consideration is the value of the real property
or interest therein. Such presumptions shall prevail until the contrary is
established, and the burden of proving the contrary shall be on the taxpayer.
§ 234-47. Payment. [Amended 9-27-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000,
approved 10-16-200096]
The tax imposed hereunder shall be paid by the grantor to the City of Mount
Vernon within 30 days after the delivery of the deed by the grantor to the
grantee, but before the recording of such deed. The grantee shall also be
liable for the payment of such tax in the event that the grantor is exempt
from tax. Evidence of the payment of the tax shall be affixed to the deed.
The Comptroller may provide for the use of stamps as evidence of payment
and that they shall be affixed to the deed before it is recorded.
§ 234-48. Returns.
A joint return shall be filed by both the grantor and the grantee for each
deed whether or not a tax is due thereon. Such return shall be filed with
the Comptroller at the time of payment of any tax imposed hereunder
or, in the case of a deed not subject to tax, before the recording of
such deed. Filing shall be accomplished by delivering the return to the
Comptroller. The Comptroller shall prescribe the form of the return
and the information which it shall contain. The return shall be signed
under oath by both the grantor or his agent and the grantee or his
agent. Where either the grantor or grantee has failed to sign the return,
it shall be accepted as a return, but the party who has failed to sign
the return or file a separate return shall be subject to the penalties
applicable to a person who has failed to file a return and the period of
limitations for assessment of tax or of additional tax shall not apply to
such party.
A.
Returns shall be preserved for three years and thereafter until the
Comptroller permits them to be destroyed.
B.
The Comptroller may require amended returns to be filed within 20
days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
C.
96.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it take effect 1-1-2001 and that it shall not
apply to a deed delivered pursuant to a contract made prior to that effective date.
§ 234-45 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-48
1:700
§ 234-49. Exemptions.
If a return required by this article is not filed or if a return, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient on its face, the Comptroller shall take the
necessary steps to enforce the filing of such a return or of a corrected
return.
D.
Where a deed has more than one grantor or more than one grantee,
the return may be signed by any one of the grantors and by any one
of the grantees; provided, however, that those not signing shall not be
relieved of any liability for the tax imposed by this article.
E.
The following shall be exempt from the payment of the tax imposed by
this article and from filing a return:
The State of New York or any of its agencies, instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created
pursuant to agreement or compact with another state) or political
subdivisions.
(1)
The United States of America and any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as they are immune from taxation;
provided, however, that the exemption of such governmental
bodies or persons shall not relieve a grantee from liability for the
tax or from filing a return.
(2)
A.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any of the following
deeds:
A deed by or to the United Nations or other worldwide international
organizations of which the United States of America is a member.
(1)
A deed by or to any corporation or association, or trust or
community chest, fund or foundation organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes or for
the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net
earnings of which inures to the benefits of any private shareholder
or individual, and no substantial part of the activities of which
is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence
legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall
include an organization operated for the primary purpose of
carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all of its
profits are payable to one or more organizations described in this
subsection.
(2)
A deed to any governmental body or person exempt from payment
of the tax pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
(3)
A deed delivered pursuant to a contract made prior to the effective
date of this article.
(4)
B.
§ 234-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-49
1:701
§ 234-50. Determination of tax.
If a return required by this article is not filed or if a return, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be determined by
the Comptroller from such information as may be obtainable, including
the assessed valuation of the real property or interest therein. Notice of
such determination shall be given to the person liable for the tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix the tax, unless the person
against whom it is assessed, within 30 days after the giving of notice of
such determination, shall apply to the Comptroller for a hearing, unless
the Comptroller of his own motion shall redetermine the same. After such
hearing, the Comptroller shall give notice of his determination to the person
against whom the tax is assessed. The determination of the Comptroller
shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality of any other
reason whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within
four months after the giving of the notice of such determination. A
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be
instituted unless:
§ 234-51. Refunds.
A deed delivered by any governmental body or person exempt from
payment of the tax pursuant to Subsection A of this section as a
result of a sale at a public auction held in accordance with the
provisions of a contract made prior to the effective date of this
article.
(5)
A deed from a mere agent, dummy, straw man or conduit to his
principal or a deed from the principal to his agent, dummy, straw
man or conduit.
(6)
The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties and
interest thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the Comptroller
and there shall be filed with the Comptroller an undertaking, issued
by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state
and approved by the Superintendent of Insurance of this state as to
solvency and responsibility, in such amount and with such sureties
as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if
such proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will
pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of the
proceeding; or
A.
At the option of the applicant, such undertaking filed with the
Comptroller may be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes, penalties
and interest thereon stated in such determination, plus the costs and
charges which may accrue against it in the prosecution of the
proceeding, in which event the applicant shall not be required to
deposit such taxes, penalties and interest as a condition precedent to
the application.
B.
§ 234-49 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-51
1:702
§ 234-52. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided by §§ 234-50 and 234-51 of this article shall be
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this article; and no determination or proposed determination
of tax or determination on any application for refund shall be enjoined or
reviewed by an action for declaratory judgment, an action for money had
and received or by any action or proceeding other than a proceeding in a
nature of a certiorari proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules; provided, however, that a taxpayer may proceed by declaratory
In the manner provided in this section, the Comptroller shall refund
or credit, without interest, any tax, penalty or interest erroneously,
illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid if application to the
Comptroller for such refund shall be made within one year from the
payment thereof. Whenever a refund is made by the Comptroller, he
shall state his reason therefor in writing. Such application may be made
by the grantor, grantee or other person who has actually paid the tax.
The Comptroller may, in lieu of any refund require to be made, allow
credit therefor on payments due from the applicant.
A.
An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall
be deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest
complained of, and the Comptroller may receive evidence with respect
thereto. After making his determination, the Comptroller shall give
notice thereof to the applicant, who shall be entitled to review such
determination by a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules, provided that such proceeding is instituted
within four months after the giving of notice of such determination
and provided that a final determination of tax due was not previously
made. Such a proceeding shall not be instituted unless an undertaking
is filed with the Comptroller in such amount and with such sureties
as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if
such proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will
pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
proceeding.
B.
A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit, under
this section, of a tax, interest or penalty which has been determined to
be due pursuant to the provisions of § 234-50 of this article where he
has had a hearing or an opportunity for a hearing, as provided in said
section, or has failed to avail himself of the remedies therein provided.
No refund or credit shall be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid
after a determination by the Comptroller made pursuant to § 234-50 of
this article, unless it be found that such determination was erroneous,
illegal or unconstitutional or otherwise improper by the Comptroller
after a hearing, or on his own motion, or in a proceeding under Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, pursuant to the provisions of
said section, in which event, refund or credit without interest shall be
made of the tax, interest or penalty found to have been overpaid.
C.
§ 234-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-52
1:703
judgment if he institutes suit within 30 days after a deficiency assessment is
made and pays the amount of the deficiency assessment to the Comptroller
prior to the institution of such suit and posts a bond for costs as provided in
§ 234-50 of this article.
§ 234-53. Proceedings to recover tax.
Whenever any grantor or grantee shall fail to pay any tax, penalty or
interest imposed by this article as herein provided, the Corporation
Counsel shall, upon the request of the Comptroller, bring or cause to
be brought an action to enforce the payment of the same on behalf of
the City of Mount Vernon in any court of the State of New York or of
any other state or of the United States. If, however, the Comptroller, in
his discretion, believes that any such grantor or grantee subject to the
provisions of this article is about to cease business, leave the state or
remove or dissipate the assets out of which the tax or penalty might be
satisfied and that any such tax or penalty will not be paid when due, he
may declare such tax or penalty to be immediately due and payable and
may issue a warrant immediately.
A.
As an additional or alternate remedy, the Comptroller may issue a
warrant directed to the Sheriff of Westchester County commanding him
to levy upon and sell the real and personal property of the grantor,
grantee or other person liable for the tax which may be found within
the City for the payment of the amount thereof, with any penalty and
interest, and the cost of executing the warrant, and to return such
warrant to the Comptroller and to pay to him the money collected by
virtue thereof within 60 days after the receipt of such warrant. The
said Sheriff shall, within five days after the receipt of the warrant, file
with the Clerk of Westchester County a copy thereof, and thereupon
such Clerk shall enter in the judgment docket the name of the person
mentioned in the warrant and the amount of the tax, penalty and
interest for which the warrant is issued and the date when such copy
is filed. Thereupon, the amount of such warrant so docketed shall
become a lien upon the title to and the interest in real and personal
property of the person against whom the warrant is issued. The Sheriff
shall then proceed upon the warrant in the same manner, and with
like effect, as that provided by law in respect to executions issued
against property upon judgments of a court of record, and for services
in executing the warrant, he shall be entitled to the same fees, which he
may collect in the same manner. In the discretion of the Comptroller, a
warrant of like terms, force and effect may be issued and directed to an
officer or employee of the Department of Finance, and in the execution
thereof such officer or employee shall have all the powers conferred
by law upon sheriffs, but shall be entitled to no fee or compensation
in excess of the actual expenses paid in the performance of such duty.
If a warrant is returned not satisfied in fall, the Comptroller may,
from time to time, issue new warrants and shall also have the same
remedies to enforce the amount due thereunder as if the City had
B.
§ 234-52 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-53
1:704
§ 234-54. Powers and duties of Comptroller.
In addition to the powers granted to the Comptroller in this article, he is
hereby authorized and empowered to:
§ 234-55. Administration of oaths; subpoena power.
recovered judgment therefor and execution thereon had been returned
unsatisfied.
Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this article and the purposes thereof.
A.
Extend, for cause shown, the time for filing any return for a period
not exceeding 90 days and, for cause shown, to remit penalties but not
interest computed at the rate of 18% per annum; and to compromise
disputed claims in connection with the taxes hereby imposed.
B.
Request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New
York or the Treasury Department of the United States relative to any
person; and to afford returns, reports and other information to such Tax
Commission or such Treasury Department relative to any person, any
other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding.
C.
Delegate his functions hereunder to the City Auditor or any employee
or employees of the Department of Finance.
D.
Prescribe the methods for determining the consideration attributable
to that portion of real property located partly within and partly without
the City of Mount Vernon which is located within the City of Mount
Vernon or any interest therein.
E.
Require any grantor or grantee to keep such records and for such
length of time as may be required for the proper administration of this
article and to furnish such records to the Comptroller upon request.
F.
Assess, determine, revise and adjust the taxes imposed under this
article.
G.
The Comptroller or his employees or agents duly designated and
authorized by him shall have power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of
their powers and duties under this article. The Comptroller shall have
power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers and documents to secure information
pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and of the
enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto and
to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of
the state or unable to attend before him or excused from attendance.
A.
A Justice of the Supreme Court, either in court or at chambers, shall
have power summarily to enforce, by proper proceedings, the
B.
§ 234-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-55
1:705
§ 234-56. Penalties and interest.
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and
examination of books, papers and documents called for by the subpoena
of the Comptroller under this article.
Any person who shall refuse to testify or to produce books or records
or who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending before the
Comptroller under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
C.
The officers who serve the summons or subpoena of the Comptroller
and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be entitled to the
same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil cases in
courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such officers
shall be the Sheriff of Westchester County and his duly appointed
deputies or any officers or employees of the Department of Finance,
designated to serve such process.
D.
Any person failing to file a return or to pay any tax within the time
required by this article shall be subject to a penalty of 8% of the amount
of tax due, plus interest at the rate of 1 1/2% of such tax for each month
of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the Comptroller,
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any part
of such penalty, but not interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per year. Such
penalties and interest shall be paid and disposed of in the same manner
as other revenues from this article. Unpaid penalties and interest may
be enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article.
A.
Any grantor, grantee or officer of a corporation failing to file a return
required by this article or filing or causing to be filed or making
or causing to be made or giving or causing to be given any return,
certificate, affidavit, representation, information, testimony or
statement required or authorized by this article which is willfully false,
and any grantor, grantee or officer of a corporation failing to keep the
required by § 234-54F of this article, shall, in addition to the penalties
herein or elsewhere prescribed, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
B.
The certificate of the Comptroller to the effect that a tax has not
been paid or that information has not been supplied pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence thereof.
C.
Any person willfully simulating, altering, defacing, destroying or
removing any evidence of the filing of a return or the payment of a tax
provided for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishment
D.
§ 234-55 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-56
1:706
§ 234-57. Returns to be secret.
§ 234-58. Notices and limitations of time.
for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Comptroller or any officer
or employee of the Department of Finance to divulge or make known,
in any manner, any information contained in or relating to any return
provided for by this article. The officers charged with the custody of
such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence
of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court,
except on behalf of the Comptroller in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of this article or on behalf of any party to an action or
proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts
shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in
either of which events the Court may require the production of, and
may admit in evidence, so must of said returns or of the facts shown
thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a grantor
or grantee of a deed or to any subsequent owner of the real property
conveyed by such deed or to the duly authorized representative of any
of them of a certified copy of any return filed in connection with the
tax on such deed; nor to prohibit the delivery of such a certified copy
of such return or of any information contained in or relating thereto
to the United States of America or any department thereof, the State
of New York or any department thereof, the City of Mount Vernon or
any department thereof, provided that the same is required for official
business; nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns or items thereof.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one
year, or both, in the discretion of the court, and if the offender is an
officer or employee of the City, he shall be dismissed from office and
be incapable of holding any public office in this City for a period of five
years thereafter.
B.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article
may be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended
in a postpaid envelope addressed to such person at the address given
in the last return filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article,
in any application made by him or in any deed which is the subject of
the notice, or, if no return has been filed or application made or address
stated in the deed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The
mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the same by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which
A.
§ 234-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-58
1:707
§ 234-59. Construal and enforcement.
This article shall be construed and enforced in conformity with Subdivision
(b) of § 1205 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, as authorized by
Chapter 442 of the Laws of 1984.
§ 234-60. Severability.
If any provision or provisions of this article are held to be invalid,
ineffective, unconstitutional, in whole or in part, or inapplicable to any
person or situation, it is the purpose and intent of this article that such
determination shall not affect the validity, force and effect of any other
provisions thereof.
§ 234-61. Deposit of revenues.
All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article shall
be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited
in the general fund of the City.
§ 234-62. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on September 1, 1984.
is determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of
notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules or any other law
relative to limitations of time for the enforcement of a civil remedy
shall not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the City to levy,
appraise, assess, determine or enforce the collection of any tax or
penalty provided by this article. However, except in the case of a
willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no
assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more
than three years from the date of the filing of a return; provided,
however, that where no return has been filed as provided by law, the tax
may be assessed at any time.
B.
Where, before the expiration of the period prescribed herein for the
assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented in writing
that such period be extended, the amount of such additional tax due
may be determined at any time within such extended period. The period
so extended may be further extended by subsequent consents in writing
made before the expiration of the extended period.
C.
§ 234-58 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 234-62
1:708
ARTICLE VIII
Alternative Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-28-1984 by L.L. No. 7-1984, approved 12-11-1984]
§ 234-63. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide that no exemption from the real
property taxes shall be granted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-a
with respect to the taxes imposed by the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 234-64. Exemption not granted.
In accordance with the provisions of Subdivision 4 of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law, no exemption shall be granted pursuant to § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law for purposes of real property taxes levied for the City
of Mount Vernon.
§ 234-65. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 234-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-65
1:709
Chapter 237
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicab Commission — See Ch. 238. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 237-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words and phrases are defined as follows:
CITY LIMITS — Those boundary lines of the City of Mount Vernon appealing
on the Official Map of the City of Mount Vernon, a copy of which is on file in
the City Clerk's office.[Added 6-11-1980, approved 6-12-1980]
DEPUTY POLICE COMMISSIONER — The Deputy Police Commissioner of
Public Safety of the City of Mount Vernon.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted by the City to a person to drive
a licensed taxicab upon the streets of the City.
OPERATOR — Any person properly licensed under this chapter who owns,
controls or operates one or more taxicabs licensed in the City of Mount
Vernon.
PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any premises used for the purpose of operating
and/or dispatching, by any means, taxicabs for hire within the City of Mount
Vernon.
POLICE COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Public
Safety of the City of Mount Vernon.
RATE CARD — The card on which is printed the rates of the established
taxicab fares and taxicab license number.
TAXICAB — Any motor-driven vehicle, including but not limited to a vantype
vehicle, engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which
shall not transport more than six persons, including the driver.[Amended
10-12-1977, approved 10-13-1977]
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person properly licensed to drive a taxicab,
whether such person be the owner of such taxicab or employed by the
owner of such taxicab.
TAXICAB LICENSE — A license issued by the City of Mount Vernon
permitting the licensee to own, operate or control a taxicab in the City of
Mount Vernon.
TAXICAB STAND — Any designated area along the curb on a public highway
for the use of taxicabs offered for hire.
§ 234-65 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-1
1:710
ZONE — A geographic area located within the City of Mount Vernon
designated for the purpose of determining taxicab fares.[Added
6-11-1980, approved 6-12-1980]
§ 237-2. Issuance of licenses. [Amended 3-26-2003, approved
3-27-2003]
ZONE ONE — That area of the City located between and inclusive of
the south side of Fifth Street on the north and the City limit bordering
the City of New York, Bronx County, on the south. The northern border
of Zone One shall be and include the south side of Fifth Street running
westerly to the City limit bordering the City of New York, Bronx County,
and running easterly to the City limit bordering the Town of Pelham.
The southern border shall be and include the City limit bordering the
City of New York, Bronx County.
A.
ZONE TWO — That area of the City located between and inclusive of
the south side of Lincoln Avenue on the north and the north side of
Fifth Street on the south. The northern border of Zone Two shall be
and include the south side of Lincoln Avenue running westerly to the
City limit bordering the Town of Pelham and running westerly up to
and including the south side of Howard Street, running through North
MacQuesten Parkway to the City limit bordering the City of Yonkers.
The southern border of Zone Two shall be and include the north side of
Fifth Street running westerly to the City limit bordering the City of New
York, Bronx County, and running easterly up to and including the east
side of Hutchinson Avenue to the south side of the corner of East Third
Street and Hutchinson Avenue to the City limit bordering the Town of
Pelham.
B.
ZONE THREE — That area of the City located between and inclusive
of the City limit bordering the Village of Bronxville on the north and
the north side of Lincoln Avenue on the south. The northern border of
Zone Three shall be and include the City limit bordering the Village
of Bronxville. The southern border of Zone Three shall be and include
the north side of Lincoln Avenue running easterly to the City limit
bordering the Town of Pelham and running westerly up to and including
the north side of Howard Street, running through and including the
west side of North MacQuesten Parkway at the westerly corner of
Howard Street, running through to the City limit bordering the City of
Yonkers.
C.
The City Clerk is authorized, upon payment of the requisite fee as
hereinafter provided in this chapter, to issue drivers' licenses and
taxicab licenses, sealed with the corporate seal of the City and
countersigned by the Commissioner of Public Safety, to such applicants
as shall procure the approval in writing of the Commissioner of Public
Safety or his designee in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
A.
B. Taxicab licenses shall not be sold.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-2
1:711
§ 237-2.1. Taxicab driver's license required. [Added 1-27-1993,
approved 1-28-1993]
§ 237-2.2. Waiting list. [Added 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
All available unassigned taxicab licenses will be distributed according
to the Commissioner of Public Safety's waiting list as prescribed under
§ 237-2.2.
C.
Operators who have four or more valid taxicab licenses may transfer
all taxicab licenses to another operator, providing that such person
meets all the requirements under this chapter and the operator has no
outstanding fines and/or judgments against any taxi company owned by
the operator. [Amended 3-25-2009, approved 3-26-2009]
D.
Upon approval, a taxicab license must be validated within 10 days and
in service within 45 days.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab, licensed pursuant
to § 237-14 of this chapter, unless such person is at least 18 years of
age and has first obtained a taxicab driver's license pursuant to this
chapter.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any operator or licensee to permit any person
to operate a taxicab licensed pursuant to § 237-14 of this chapter,
unless such person is at least 18 years of age and has first obtained a
taxicab driver's license pursuant to this chapter. [Added 3-25-2009,
approved 3-26-2009]
B.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee shall maintain a
waiting list of all taxi license applicants under this section. The list
will be maintained in chronological order of applications as filed. All
applications shall be date-time stamped or otherwise endorsed with the
time of filing thereon, and the receipts for such applications shall be
furnished to the applicants.
A.
No applicant may have more than one application on the waiting list
maintained pursuant to this section.
B.
Where a taxicab owner or car for hire owner whose name appears on
the waiting list applied for the transfer of any other taxicab, issued
under this section, his application shall be removed from the waiting
list and cancelled.
C.
Where licenses become available for issue, such issuance of licenses
shall be made in chronological order from the waiting list to persons
qualified to be granted a license. Said applicant shall be notified by
certified mail and shall have 10 days to claim the assigned license.
D.
The Commissioner shall announce by publication, in the official
newspaper of the City or such other methods as he deems advisable, the
availability date for applications for taxi licenses. Said applications shall
E.
§ 237-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-2.2
1:712
§ 237-3. Application for driver's license.
§ 237-4. Driver's examination.
Each applicant for a driver's license may be required to undergo tests of his
driving ability and knowledge of the geography of the City of Mount Vernon.
not be acted upon until the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant
meets all requirements of this section.
Every applicant for a driver's license shall fulfill the following
requirements to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Public Safety
or his designee prior to the issuance of a license:
Be duly licensed as a chauffeur by the Motor Vehicle Department of
the State of New York.
(1)
Be 18 years of age or over. [Amended 3-10-1976, approved
3-11-1976]
(2)
Be of sound mind and body and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo,
heart disease or any other infirmity of mind or body which might
render the applicant incapable of safely operating such vehicle.
(3)
(4) Be able to read and write intelligibly the English language.
Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
(5)
Not have been convicted of a felony nor any crime involving
violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral
turpitude.
(6)
(7) Be of good character and reputation.
Complete, sign and file a sworn statement on such form or forms
as shall be required by the Commissioner of Public Safety, showing
compliance with the requirements hereinabove set forth and such
other information as shall be deemed necessary and reasonable by
the Commissioner of Public Safety in the interests of the public
safety, health and welfare.
(8)
A.
Every applicant shall furnish affidavits attesting to good character,
reputation and fitness of the applicant from two reputable citizens of
the City not related to the applicant by blood or marriage and who have
known the applicant personally and have observed his conduct for at
least one year prior to the date of the filing of said application, and
an additional affidavit attesting to good character and fitness of the
applicant executed by his employer. The provisions of this subsection
may be waived by the Commissioner of Public Safety in his discretion.
B.
§ 237-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-5
1:713
§ 237-5. Photographs of applicant required.
Every applicant shall file with his application three unmounted,
unretouched photographs of the applicant in such positions as the
Commissioner of Public Safety may direct. The photographs shall have
been taken within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. They
shall be of the size which permit being easily attached to the license when
issued. The photographs shall be so attached to the license as to prevent
removal and the substitution of another photograph without detection. The
license, with photographs attached, so long as the licensee is driving or in
charge of the taxicab, shall be conspicuously displayed in the taxicab as
hereinafter provided. If the application for a license is denied, two copies of
the photograph shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 237-6. Fingerprints. [Amended 7-11-1979, approved 7-12-1979;
4-13-1989, approved 4-13-1989]
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as the
Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall
have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant, together
with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice Services or
other appropriate agency for processing and investigation. No application
for a taxicab license shall be approved nor any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter until after the commanding officer of the Bureau
of Criminal Identification in the Department of Public Safety has reviewed
and examined the criminal history record information disseminated by the
Division of Criminal Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any
applicant who has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor
involving violence, dishonesty or deceit.
§ 237-7. Content and term of driver's license. [Amended 1-26-1977,
approved 1-27-1977]
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, the
Commissioner of Public Safety shall issue a certificate certifying that the
applicant is entitled to a driver's license. Upon presentation of the
certificate to the City Clerk, he shall issue a license containing the
photograph and signature of the licensee and spaces for recording any
arrest or serious complaint. Each license shall be sealed with the City Seal,
and such seal shall be so impressed so that part of same shall be impressed
upon the photograph. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which
they are issued and shall include the dates of issuance and expiration. Any
defacing, removing, altering or obliteration of an official entry made upon
such license shall be cause for revocation. The license shall be issued as
of May 1 of each year and shall be valid to and including April 30 next
succeeding, unless previously suspended or revoked. All licenses issued on
or after January 1, 1977, shall expire on April 30, 1977, and the fees for
§ 237-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-7
1:714
renewal of such licenses as of May 1, 1977, shall be prorated for the period
May 1, 1977, to April 30, 1978.
§ 237-8. Driver's license renewal.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety
may, by appropriate endorsement of a driver's license, certify to the City
Clerk that such driver is entitled to a renewal of his license. The application
for renewal shall be made not less than 30 days prior to its expiration on a
form to be provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety, containing such
data and photographs as he shall deem necessary and appropriate.
§ 237-9. Denial of driver's license.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of Public
Safety may disapprove an application for a driver's license if he determines
that:
§ 237-10. Suspension, revocation or refusal to renew driver's
license.
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact relating to his application; or
A.
The applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements and
qualifications provided in § 237-3 of this chapter.
B.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of
Public Safety may suspend or revoke a driver's license and may refuse
to approve an application for a renewal thereof for any of the following
reasons:
The conviction of the licensee of a felony or of any crime involving
violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral
turpitude.
(1)
The licensee has made a material false statement or concealed
a material fact in connection with the application for a driver's
license or renewal thereof.
(2)
(3) The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Any suspension shall be noted on the driver's license, together with
a statement of reasons therefor, and the driver shall surrender the
driver's license and badge to the Commissioner of Public Safety or the
Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety. The driver's license, badge and
a memorandum of the suspension shall be sent forthwith to the City
Clerk.
B.
Hearing; appeal; rehearing. [Amended 11-8-2000, approved
11-9-2000]
C.
§ 237-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-10
1:715
§ 237-11. Record of drivers' licenses.
The City Clerk and the Police Department shall maintain a complete record
of each driver's license and all renewals, suspensions and revocations
thereof, which record shall be filed with the original application for a
driver's license.
§ 237-12. Badge; fee. [Amended 5-8-1991, approved 5-9-1991;
3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
Every licensed driver shall be issued a metal badge of such form and
style as the City Clerk shall prescribe, with the license number thereon
in plain figures and containing the words "Licensed Cab, City of Mount
Vernon" beneath such number. Under penalty of revocation of the license,
the badge must be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside
of the driver's outer garment when such licensee is engaged in his
employment. Upon delivery of such badge, the licensee shall pay to the City
Clerk the sum of $10 therefor, which sum shall be returned to the licensee
upon its surrender to the City Clerk. No driver shall permit any other person
to wear the badge issued to that driver.
§ 237-13. Rules of conduct for drivers.
A driver licensee shall:
Hearing. Except where a refusal to approve an application for a
driver's license or a taxicab license or an application for a renewal
thereof, or where revocation or suspension of such license is based
solely on a judicial conviction or convictions, a licensee or applicant
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Such hearing shall be held
by the Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner
of Public Safety at such time and place as he shall prescribe. A
license, however, may be temporarily suspended, without notice,
pending any criminal proceeding, investigation or hearing. A
licensee or applicant entitled to a hearing shall be given due notice
thereof in writing and shall have the right to be represented by
counsel.
(1)
Appeal. Appeals, determinations of appeals and rehearings, under
this section, shall be governed by §§ 238-3 and 238-4 of this Code.
(2)
Any licensee with outstanding fines and/or judgments. [Added
3-25-2009, approved 3-26-2009]
D.
A. Be clean in dress.
B. Not be addicted to drugs or intoxicating liquors.
C. Not engage in any illegal or criminal act.
D. Not permit the taxicab to be used for an indecent or unlawful purpose.
§ 237-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-13
1:716
E. Be courteous to passengers and others.
Upon request made by a passenger, prospective passenger or police
officer, give his/her name and badge number and the name and address
of his/her employer, if any. [Amended 5-8-2002, approved 5-9-2002]
F.
Not use the identification card of another driver or permit anyone to
use his identification card.
G.
Not change, deface or conceal in any manner any entries on his
identification card or rate card.
H.
Not sit in any part of his vehicle except the driver's section and not
permit anyone who is not a passenger to sit in the vehicle except under
emergency conditions.
I.
Cooperate with law enforcement officers in the performance of their
duties and report immediately to the Police Department any person
attempting to use his vehicle in connection with a crime or escape from
the scene of a crime.
J.
Not blow any horn, shout or yell while waiting for employment at any
public stand.
K.
Not operate a taxicab while his taxicab driver's license is suspended or
revoked.
L.
Not operate a taxicab while his driver's license issued by the State of
New York is suspended or revoked.
M.
Be responsible for his identification card and immediately report its loss
to the Police Department and City Clerk.
N.
Report a change of address to the Police Department not later than 72
hours after moving, by mail or in person.
O.
Answer as directed all communications and summonses issued by the
Police Department. He shall answer all pertinent questions directed
to him at any hearing when his presence is requested. He shall bring
and present to the Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy
Commissioner of Public Safety his identification card, chauffeur's
license, badge and manifest. If owner or operator, he shall include the
rate card assigned to the vehicle involved.
P.
Immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment,
carefully search the taxicab for any property lost or left therein, and any
such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, must
immediately be taken to police headquarters and deposited with the
officer in charge.
Q.
Not permit additional passengers to enter the taxicab other than the
passenger or passengers originally engaging his taxicab without the
consent of such original passenger or passengers. Passengers shall be
R.
§ 237-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-13
1:717
§ 237-14. Taxicab license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay,
or cause or permit any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay, any
taxicab within the City unless the vehicle has been duly licensed for such
purpose pursuant to this chapter.
§ 237-15. Classifications of taxicab licenses; limitations.
transported to their destination in the order in which they engaged the
taxicab and by the most direct route.
Not refuse or cause or permit to be refused any orderly passenger at a
taxicab stand or place of business requesting service.
S.
Not park his vehicle at a place other than a designated taxicab stand or
place of business while awaiting employment.
T.
U. Not cruise about the City seeking passengers.
Maintain a daily manifest which shall include the following information:
[Amended 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
(1) The make, year and registration number of the vehicle.
(2) The name and badge number of driver.
(3) The time the vehicle commences operation.
A record of all trips made in chronological order, showing the
destination, the time dispatched and the time returned and the
amount of fare.
(4)
A statement of the licensee that vehicle is clean and in safe
operating condition.
(5)
In the event of an accident, the driver must report the time and
place of the accident on the manifest and record any other unusual
occurrence such as lost property, assistance to the police, etc.
(6)
At the close of each shift, such manifest shall be preserved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(7)
V.
Make seat belts available at the request of the passengers. [Added
3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
W.
No taxicab driver shall make, display or produce a copy of his taxicab
driver's license. [Added 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
X.
Upon the request of a passenger, the driver must activate the airconditioning
system of the taxicab for passenger comfort. [Added
8-13-2003, approved 8-14-2003]
Y.
§ 237-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-15
1:718
§ 237-16. Application for taxicab license.
Application for taxicab licenses shall be made by the owner on forms to be
furnished by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The completed application
shall contain:
There shall be one class of taxicab license issued: Class A license shall
be issued only for a motor vehicle registered as "taxicab" by the Motor
Vehicle Department, State of New York, pursuant to § 148-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law,97 and said vehicle bears a New York State
Safety and Emission Certificate sticker secured from the Department
of Motor Vehicles by an official inspection station and affixed to the
vehicle as prescribed by the Commissioner's regulations to evidence
satisfactory completion of the inspection of that vehicle in compliance
with Article V of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. The receipt of such
inspection must be retained and kept on file for review upon the request
of the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 3-25-1992, approved
3-26-199298; 8-13-2003, approved 8-14-2003]
A.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than a taxicab issued a Class
A license to operate from or park in a public taxicab stand.
B.
All licenses shall be issued as of the first day of May of each year and
shall expire on the 30th day of April next succeeding, unless sooner
revoked or suspended. All licenses issued on or after January 1, 1977,
shall expire on April 30, 1977, and the fees for renewal of such licenses
as of May 1, 1977, shall be prorated for the period May 1, 1977, to April
30, 1978. [Amended 1-26-1977, approved 1-27-1977]
C.
The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to apply to vehicles
registered as an "omnibus" by the Department of Motor Vehicles of
the State of New York pursuant to § 148-a of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York99 and used or intended for use or hire
exclusively for the purpose of transporting persons in weddings or
funerals. [Added 3-10-1971, approved 3-11-1971]
D.
The name, age and residence of the person, or equivalent particulars
describing the business entity, applying for the license and what, if any,
previous experience the applicant has had in such business.
A.
The name, age and residence of the person or persons to be in
immediate charge of the taxicab.
B.
The make of the motor vehicle, the year, engine and body serial
numbers, state registration number, length of time the vehicle has been
driven and the seating capacity according to its trade rating.
C.
97.Editor's Note: Said § 148-a was repealed by L. 1991, c. 165, § 47, eff. Oct. 1, 1991.
98.Editor's Note: This amendment also repealed former Subsections A(2) and C, regarding
Class B licenses, and redesignated former Subsection A(1) as Subsection A and former
Subsections D and E as Subsections C and D, respectively.
99.Editor's Note: Said § 148-a was repealed by L. 1991, c. 165, § 47, eff. Oct. 1, 1991.
§ 237-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-16
1:719
§ 237-17. Inspection of vehicles; fees. [Amended 4-23-1980,
approved 4-24-1980; 6-11-1980, approved 6-12-1980; 5-8-1991,
approved 5-9-1991; 1-24-2001, approved 1-25-2001; 3-13-2002,
approved 3-14-2002; 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
No taxicab license shall be issued, transferred nor validated until the
vehicle has been inspected and found to be completely safe and operable for
transporting passengers. All taxicabs shall be four-door passenger vehicles
with properly working seat belts available for each passengers.
Whether previously licensed to operate a taxicab in the City or
elsewhere and, if so, the particulars relating thereto.
D.
Whether any license to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked or
suspended and, if so, the particulars relating thereto.
E.
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken
under his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place
as the Commissioner shall designate. Fingerprinting shall be required
of the following: individual applicants, all members of partnerships
and officers of corporations. An additional fee as provided by the City
of Mount Vernon Code § 126-2.2 shall be charged for each set of
fingerprints and other such fees as required by the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services. The Commissioner of Public
Safety shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the
applicant, together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal
Justice Services or other appropriate agency for processing and
investigation. No application for a taxicab license shall be approved
nor any license issued under the provisions of this chapter until after
the commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in the
Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history record information disseminated by the Division of Criminal
Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has
been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit. [Added 4-13-1989, approved 4-13-1989;
3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
F.
Every applicant for a license shall file a clearance form issued by the
Mount Vernon Parking Ticket Collections Department, stating that the
vehicle has no outstanding parking summonses. [Added 3-13-2002,
approved 3-14-2002100]
G.
Such other or additional information as the Commissioner of Public
Safety may deem necessary and appropriate.
H.
100. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection G
as Subsection H.
§ 237-16 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-17
1:720
§ 237-18. Certificate for taxicab license.
If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of lawful construction and in
proper condition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and upon
approval of application, the Commissioner of Public Safety shall issue to
the applicant a certificate certifying that the applicant is entitled to the
appropriate taxicab license for such vehicle. Upon presentation, the City
Clerk shall issue a prescribed license containing the official license number
of the taxicab.
§ 237-19. Display of licenses and rate card. [Amended 3-13-2002,
approved 3-14-2002; 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
The taxicab license, the rate card and the driver's license must be displayed
at all times in the interior of the taxicab in a card frame of a sufficient size,
to be located on the Plexiglas partition, facing the rear seat passengers.
The frame shall be covered with glass or Plexiglas material and sufficiently
illuminated by an electric bulb at all times whenever the taxicab is in service
so that the licenses and rate card are clearly legible for the passengers in
the taxicab.
§ 237-20. Periodic inspections of vehicles. [Amended 8-13-2003,
approved 8-14-2003]
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall assign police officers who shall
inspect all taxicabs to assure that they are kept in condition of fitness for
proper and safe use. Appropriate endorsements shall be made upon the
license card showing the date of each inspection. Written reports of all
inspections shall be filed with the City Clerk and Department of Public
Safety. If the vehicle does not pass the inspection, the owner shall correct
All licenses under this chapter shall pay an inspection fee of $25 on May
1 of each year and an inspection fee of an additional $25 on November
1 of each year.
A.
Nothing in Subsection A of this section shall prevent the Commissioner
of Public Safety or his designee from inspecting such vehicles at such
times and places as he shall determine, and all such vehicles shall be
made readily available to him or his designee for such inspection upon
demand.
B.
Effective November 1, 2001, all taxicabs shall be equipped with an
operable distress light system and shall be inspected for such operable
distress light system in accord with this section and § 237-20 of this
chapter.
C.
Effective April 1, 2002, all taxicabs shall be equipped with a bulletresistant
partition existing between the taxicab driver and rear
passenger(s) and shall be inspected for such bullet-resistant partition
in accord with this section and § 237-20 of this chapter.
D.
§ 237-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-20
1:721
the condition within five days and present the vehicle for reinspection by
the Department of Public Safety.
§ 237-21. Denial of taxicab license.
The Commissioner of Public Safety may disapprove an application for a
taxicab license if, in his discretion, he determines that:
§ 237-22. Suspension or revocation of taxicab license.
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact in connection with his application;
A.
The applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or partner, or any other
person directly or indirectly interested in the application was the
former holder, or was an officer, director, stockholder or partner in a
corporation or partnership which was the former holder of a taxicab
license which had been revoked or suspended;
B.
The applicant or any officer, director, stockholder, partner, employee or
any other person directly or indirectly interested in the application has
been convicted of a felony or any crime involving violence, dishonesty,
deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral turpitude; or
C.
The applicant is not the true owner of the vehicle or the taxicab
business. [Amended 3-25-1992, approved 3-26-1992]
D.
For any reason which, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, may be deemed detrimental to the best interest of the general
public both in welfare and safety. [Amended 3-25-1992, approved
3-26-1992]
E.
A taxicab license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause,
after a hearing by the Commissioner of Public Safety, or designee, if
the vehicle shall have been knowingly used for any immoral or illegal
purpose, or for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
other law governing the operation or maintenance of motor vehicles,
or if the licensee was negligent in preventing same. In the event of the
suspension or revocation of the license, the license card shall be seized
by the Commissioner of Public Safety or designee. A licensee shall be
provided with written notice of such hearing, the reason therefor, and
shall have the right to be represented by counsel. The provisions for
review enumerated under § 237-10C of this chapter shall apply to this
section. [Amended 3-28-2012, approved 3-29-2012]
A.
Cancellation of license for nonuse. Failure of the owner of a taxicab
license to operate a licensed vehicle in the City of Mount Vernon
for at least 28 hours per week over the course of a seven-month
period per calendar year may result in license cancellation by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Periods of taxicab operation where the
paid trip either originates or terminates in the City of Mount Vernon
pursuant to this chapter shall be credited as operating time under
B.
§ 237-20 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-22
1:722
§ 237-23. Register of licensed taxicabs.
The City Clerk shall keep a register of the persons owning or operating
a taxicab licensed under this chapter, together with the license number,
the description of the vehicle and the date and complete record of each
inspection. These records shall be available for public inspection at all
reasonable times. The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy
Commissioner of Public Safety shall promptly file with the City Clerk
records of all applications, suspensions or revocation of licenses, all
inspections of taxicabs and all complaints against owners or drivers.
§ 237-24. Responsibilities of operators. [Amended 3-26-2003,
approved 3-27-2003]
this chapter. [Added 10-26-1988, approved 10-27-1988; amended
3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
Failure to produce manifest records. Failure of an operator to produce
the manifest records required under § 237-13V at any hearing provided
for hereunder shall be deemed sufficient proof of a charge of
inadequate use of the license, subject to rebuttal by other evidence
produced by the licensee at the hearing provided in this chapter.
[Added 3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
C.
Each vehicle shall be submitted for inspection as required by the
Commissioner of Public Safety or the Commissioner's designee.
A.
Every vehicle shall be clean, well painted and in good appearance
(interior and exterior).
B.
The baggage compartment of every vehicle shall be clean and capable
of holding passengers' baggage.
C.
Taxicab licensees shall make such repairs and alterations as required
to maintain proper standards for comfort and safety.
D.
Taxicab licensees shall replace taxicabs where it appears that the
vehicle or vehicles no longer meet the reasonable standards of safe
operation.
E.
Taxicab licensees shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be
recorded, at the beginning of each day, that after inspection the vehicle
is found to be in clean and in safe operating condition. This recording
must be signed by the licensee or, in his absence, an authorized agent.
F.
Taxicab licensees shall keep an accurate record of repairs made to each
vehicle, including the date, the length of time the vehicle was out of
service and the name and address of the company making the repairs.
G.
Every taxicab licensee shall record on the daily manifest the disabling
of a vehicle while in service. The entry shall include the date, time,
H.
§ 237-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-24
1:723
place and cause of disability and the time the vehicle was returned in
service.
No licensee shall permit a vehicle to be dispatched unless it is equipped
with the following items:
(1) Manifest.
(2) Rate card.
(3) Driver's identification card.
I.
Every taxicab licensee shall provide the drivers with a manifest and
shall require the following entries to be recorded thereon:
(1) The make, year and registration number of the vehicle.
(2) The name and badge number of driver.
(3) The time the vehicle commences operation.
A record of all trips made in chronological order, showing the
destination, the time dispatched and the time returned and the
amount of fare.
(4)
A statement of the licensee that vehicle is clean and in safe
operating condition.
(5)
When involved in an accident, the driver must report the time and
place of incident on the manifest and record any other incident
such as lost property, assistance to the police, etc.
(6)
J.
A taxicab licensee shall report immediately to the Police Department
any vehicle under his control that has been involved in an accident.
K.
All manifests shall be maintained daily and shall be available for
inspection by the Commissioner of Public Safety or his duly authorized
representative. Every driver shall maintain a daily record of all trips
made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination of
each trip and the amount of fare. Every taxicab licensee shall retain and
preserve all manifests in a safe place for a period of at least one year.
L.
A taxicab licensee shall be responsible, when a vehicle is on a taxi stand
or in the vicinity of a place of business, for having a driver available for
immediate dispatch of the taxicab.
M.
A taxicab licensee shall not transfer a rate card to another vehicle
unless the vehicle has been approved and inspected by the Police
Department and authorized by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
N.
An operator shall not sell a taxicab license. [Amended 3-26-2003,
approved 3-27-2003]
O.
§ 237-24 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-24
1:724
§ 237-25. Identification of taxicabs.
An applicant for a taxicab license shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner of Public Safety that he is qualified to assume such
duties and obligations.
P.
No posters or advertisements except as provided in this chapter shall
be permitted either in the interior or on the exterior of a taxicab.
Q.
No licensee, whether driver or taxicab, shall at any time fasten or
lock the doors of a taxicab or fail to maintain same so that it shall be
impossible for a passenger to open any door from the inside.
R.
No taxicab licensee shall permit a driver while awaiting employment to
cruise about the City seeking passengers.
S.
Taxicab licensees shall immediately notify the Police Department of
any violation of these rules by a driver and of any facts, conditions or
occurrences which will affect the status of his license or chauffeur's
license.
T.
A Taxi User's Bill of Rights. The interior of each taxicab shall display,
where it can be readily seen by the riding public and in a format
approved by the City Clerk, a copy of the Taxi User's Bill of Rights.
[Added 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002101]
U.
A taxicab licensee shall not issue orders to drivers which are in conflict
with the rules of this chapter.
V.
Each operator and taxicab company shall maintain a list of drivers
employed by the licensee. Such list should include the driver's name,
address, telephone number and call sign number. The list and any
quarterly updates shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Public
Safety. [Amended 3-26-2003, approved 3-7-2003]
W.
Upon terminating ownership of a previously licensed taxicab, the
licensee shall bring the vehicle to the Department of Public Safety
to cancel the taxicab inspection sticker. If the taxicab is junked, the
licensee must notify the Department of Public Safety in writing within
24 hours, stating the location of the junked vehicle. [Amended
8-13-2003, approved 8-14-2003]
X.
Class A taxicabs shall be painted yellow, except that the present owner
of any duly licensed Class A taxicab presently owned shall have until
March 1, 1970, to comply therewith. [Amended 4-23-1969, approved
4-24-1969]
A.
Every taxicab licensed as a Class A taxicab shall be identified by
lettering permanently painted or placed on the exterior of both front or
rear doors of the vehicle on the panels below the windows, stating the
B.
101. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection U
as Subsection V.
§ 237-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-25
1:725
§ 237-26. Duplicate and/or replacement licenses, badges or rate
cards; fees. [Amended 6-25-1980, approved 6-26-1980; 3-13-2002,
approved 3-14-2002; 11-13-2013, approved 11-14-2013]
No duplicate and/or replacement license, badge or rate card shall be issued
by the City Clerk unless written approval for issuance is given by the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee and the following fees are
paid to the City Clerk:
§ 237-27. Continuous daily operation by single driver restricted.
No taxicab licensee shall require or authorize a driver to operate a taxicab
for more than 12 hours in any continuous twenty-four-hour period.
§ 237-28. Cooperation with police.
Taxicab licensees shall cooperate with law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties and shall not conceal evidence of a crime or
violation and shall immediately report to the Department of Public Safety
any unlawful acts connected with licensed vehicles.
§ 237-29. Misconduct of taxicab licensees.
Official notice will be taken of any misconduct, deceit, fraud, subterfuge
or actions of a taxicab licensee which are against the best interests of the
public.
name of the taxicab licensee and the word "taxi," which lettering shall
be of a minimum height of four inches and a maximum height of six
inches. A Class A taxicab licensee operating as an individual owner may
substitute the words "owner-driver" in lieu of the name of the licensee.
Every Class A taxicab shall also have permanently affixed to the
forward position of the roof of the vehicle an electric fixture which shall
bear the legend "taxi" on the front and rear thereof and which fixture
shall be clearly lettered and shall be illuminated between sunset and
sunrise and at times when the vehicle's wipers are in use (i.e., rain or
snow). [Amended 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
C.
Every taxicab shall be further clearly identified by the taxicab license
number appearing on the rate card painted permanently on each rear
fender and on the back of the taxicab in numbers at least six inches
in height. [Added 6-11-1980, approved 6-12-1980; amended
2-25-1987, approved 2-26-1987]
D.
A. Driver's license duplicate or replacement: $15.
B. Taxicab license duplicate or replacement: $15.
C. Badge replacement: $30.
§ 237-25 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-30
1:726
§ 237-30. License fees. [Amended 1-26-1977, approved 1-27-1977;
10-11-1989, approved 10-12-1989; 5-8-1991, approved 5-9-1991;
3-25-1992, approved 3-26-1992; 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002;
3-26-2003, approved 3-27-2003]
§ 237-31. Designation of public taxicab stands.
The public taxicab stands heretofore established shall continue until
abolished or changed by the City Council. The Council may establish and
designate additional taxicab stands within the City upon recommendation of
the Commissioner. The Commissioner is hereby authorized to regulate the
number of such taxicabs permissible at such public taxicab stands and shall
provide a metal sign which shall be attached to a post or stanchion adjacent
to such stand and on which shall be indicated the maximum number of
vehicles permissible at the particular stand at the same time.
§ 237-32. Regulations for taxicab stands.
The fees for the following licenses and renewals shall be paid to the
City Clerk in the amounts listed below:
(1) For a driver's license: $40.
(2) For a renewal of a driver's license: $40.
(3) For a Class A taxicab license: $500.
(4) For a renewal of a Class A taxicab license: $500.
For a renewal of a taxicab license validated prior to May 1, 2003:
$125. [Amended 4-9-2003, approved 4-10-2003]
(5)
(6) Starting May 1, 2010, all taxicab license renewals will be $500.
A.
No renewal fees will be prorated. For first-time taxi driver licensees, no
license fee shall be prorated for a period of less than six months. All
new taxicab licenses will be prorated at $41.66 per month. [Amended
4-9-2003, approved 4-10-2003]
B.
The City Clerk shall impose a late application renewal fee upon each
taxi driver license renewal filed with the City Clerk on or after May 1
of each year in the amount of $1 per business day, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, up to a maximum late application renewal
fee of $10.
C.
Only taxicabs in such number as set forth on the sign may remain at
the stand while waiting for employment, in single file and parked in
accordance with all traffic regulations. No driver of a taxicab standing
at the head of such line shall refuse to carry any orderly person
requesting a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper rate of fare, but this
shall not prevent any person from selecting any taxicab he may desire
at the stand whether or not it is first in line. After a taxicab leaves the
line, the remaining taxicabs shall be moved up and any taxicab driver
A.
§ 237-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-32
1:727
§ 237-33. Temporary licenses in times of emergency. [Amended
3-25-1992, approved 3-26-1992]
Whenever the Commissioner of Public Safety shall declare and certify to
the City Clerk that a public emergency exists affecting transportation of
the public, the City Clerk may issue temporary drivers' and taxicab licenses
under the City's Seal and countersigned by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Such temporary licenses shall be issued upon such terms and
conditions as the Commissioner of Public Safety may prescribe, but in no
event shall such license be granted for a period in excess of 20 days, and
such licenses shall be renewed, if required by the emergency, only upon the
written recommendation of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for
such temporary license shall be $5.
§ 237-34. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee
to see that all laws and ordinances regulating taxicabs and taxicab drivers
are complied with in every respect. It shall be his duty to inspect the public
taxicab stands and all other places where taxicabs are permitted to stand.
He shall have the power to order away from the stands and from all other
places the driver of any taxicab who is not complying with this chapter or
if the driver is intoxicated or in any manner misbehaving or if the taxicab is
obstructing the street.
§ 237-35. Taxicab fares. [Amended 2-27-1974, approved 2-28-1974;
4-13-1977, approved 4-14-1977; 10-25-78, approved 10-26-1978;
11-1-1978, approved 11-2-1978; 10-10-1979, approved 10-15-1979;
6-11-1980, approved 6-12-1980; 7-23-1980, approved 7-24-1980;
10-26-1988, approved 10-27-1988; 10-23-1996, approved
10-24-1996; 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002; 8-13-2003, approved
8-14-2003; 6-11-2004; approved 6-11-2004; 3-23-2011, approved
3-25-2011]
The lawful sums to be collected for the hire of a taxicab shall be as follows:
seeking a space at the stand shall approach the same only from the rear
of the stand and shall stop as near as possible to the last taxicab at the
stand. No taxicab shall be permitted to block any crosswalk.
Each driver of the first two vehicles at the stand shall remain in the
driver's seat of his taxicab ready to be hired. No other driver shall be
more than six feet away from his taxicab.
B.
No driver shall make or permit anyone to make any repairs to his
taxicab while at a public stand, other than minor emergency repairs.
C.
For conveying a single passenger from any place within the City limits:
flat rate fee of $5 and flat rate fee of $1 for each additional passenger
traveling with such person.
A.
§ 237-32 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-35
1:728
For conveying a person 60 years of age or over as a single passenger
within the City limits: flat rate fee of $4, and $1 for each additional
passenger traveling with such person.
B.
Gas surcharges.
As determined by the lowest price of the regular grade on the
Westchester County gas price listing, the following gas surcharges
apply to the flat rate fee:
(a) Over $3 per gallon: an increase of $0.25;
(b) Over $4 per gallon: an increase of $0.50;
(c) Over $5 per gallon: an increase of $0.75;
(d) Over $6 per gallon: an increase of $1.
(1)
Any surcharge increase or decrease will take effect seven days
after the taxi industry has been notified of a change. Notification
must be posted in all taxicabs and in plain view of passengers.
(2)
C.
D. (Reserved)
For conveying a child to or from elementary school, inclusive of the
eighth grade: in accordance with the rates prescribed in Subsections A,
B and C above, less $0.50.
E.
For returning a passenger: the same rates as prescribed in Subsections
A, B, C, and E of this section.
F.
For waiting time: $0.25 per minute. Waiting time shall consist of the
time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger.
G.
H. For conveying a child under two years of age: no charge.
No charge shall be made for a passenger's suitcase, traveling bag,
valise, shopping bag or other articles carried in hand by a passenger,
except where there are four or more pieces of luggage or baggage to be
transported of such size as shall require utilization of the taxicab trunk,
an additional charge of $1 may be made for use thereof. No charge shall
be made for a passenger's grocery bags, whether carried in hand or
requiring the utilization of the taxicab trunk.
I.
For the use of a taxicab with the privilege of going place to place and
stopping as often as may be required within the City: $25 per hour.
J.
The driver of a taxicab transporting a passenger or passengers from a
point within the City to a point outside the City limits shall charge the
fares set forth above from the point of origin to the City limits and may
charge such additional fares as the driver acting for the owner and the
passenger may agree upon for the ride beyond the City limits.
K.
§ 237-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-35
1:729
§ 237-36. Transporting merchandise or property.
A driver or taxicab licensee shall not permit or cause to be transported any
package, merchandise or other property or thing when not accompanied by
a passenger.
§ 237-37. Rate cards. [Amended 10-25-1978, approved 10-26-1978]
Every licensed taxicab shall be issued a rate card by the City Clerk
containing the number of the taxicab license issued and such data relating
to the rates of fare as shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The rate card shall be placed and maintained in the same manner
as hereinbefore prescribed for license cards in this chapter. The rate card
shall specify that the driver may request payment in advance. The rate card
shall further specify that the driver is not required to change any currency
larger than a twenty-dollar bill.
§ 237-37.1. Rate card suspension or revocation. [Added 1-24-2001,
approved 1-25-2001]
§ 237-38. Existing licenses. [Amended 3-25-1992, approved
3-26-1992]
All licenses, driver and taxicab, heretofore issued are expressly continued
in effect until the expiration dates provided for therein. All existing taxicab
There shall be no additional charge for carrying a guide dog
accompanying a visually impaired person or a hearing handicapped
person or any other service animal used by a person with a disability.
Except for such guide dog or other service animal used by a person with
a disability, no animal need be transported in a licensed taxicab unless
the animal is securely enclosed in a kennel case. Where an animal
is carried in a kennel case, a charge is payable at the baggage rate
provided in Subsection 1 of this section.
L.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of
Public Safety may suspend or revoke the rate card of the taxicab to
which it has been issued after a hearing before the Commissioner of
Public Safety upon the decision and determination of the Commissioner
of Public Safety that the taxicab driver and/or owner of such rate card
has been found to have violated any of the sections of this chapter.
A.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be required to schedule such
hearing within 30 days after due notice to such taxicab driver and
owner of such rate card. The taxicab driver and owner of such rate card
shall be entitled to a hearing and shall be given due notice thereof in
writing and shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
B.
Appeals from decisions and/or determinations of the Commissioner of
Public Safety, as under this section, shall be governed by §§ 238-3 and
238-4 of this Code.
C.
§ 237-35 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 237-38
1:730
licenses shall be presented to the Commissioner of Public Safety for
reclassification within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 237-39. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 3-25-1992,
approved 3-26-1992]
§ 237-40. Additional regulations.
The Commissioner of Public Safety may make and promulgate such
additional rules and regulations and prescribe such forms as he shall deem
necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-41. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-26-2003, approved
3-27-2003]
The number and type of taxicab licenses in the City of Mount Vernon
shall be regulated by the Commissioner of Public Safety to the amount
not to exceed 150. The number and type of taxicab licenses may be
increase or reduced by the Commissioner of Public Safety, at his
discretion, when it is deemed necessary for the welfare, comfort and
convenience of the community. [Amended 3-26-2003, approved
3-27-2003]
A.
The number of licensed drivers shall not be in excess of three drivers
for each taxicab licensed in the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
The limitations of taxicab licenses and taxicab drivers' licenses shall
not apply to the number of taxicabs presently licensed and the number
of drivers presently licensed. The limitations will be adjusted to the
specified amounts over a period of time as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
C.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$100.
A.
Any operator who permits another to operate a taxicab unlawfully in
violation of § 237-2.1, and is found guilty of such, shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) For the first infraction: a fine of $500.
For the second infraction: a fine of $500 plus a mandatory hearing
by the Department of Public Safety.
(2)
For the third or subsequent infraction: a fine of $1,000 plus a
mandatory hearing by the Department of Public Safety subject to
possible suspension or revocation.
(3)
Any operator who has been found guilty of a violation and was
convicted may have the record of the conviction cleared, provided
the operator has not obtained any subsequent convictions.
(4)
B.
§ 237-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-41
1:731
§ 237-42. When effective.
Except as otherwise herein expressly provided, this chapter shall take effect
immediately.
Chapter 238
TAXICAB COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 237.
§ 238-1. Establishment.
A Taxicab Commission is hereby established pursuant to the authority of
Article 2-A, § 20, Subdivision 32, of the General City Law, as amended.
§ 238-2. Members. [Amended 8-13-1997, approved 8-14-1997;
2-10-1999, approved 2-11-1999; 9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999;
2-26-2003, approved 2-27-2003]
The Taxicab Commission shall consist of nine members. The ex officio
members of the Commission shall be the Police Commissioner or Deputy
Police Commissioner or his/her designee, the City Clerk and the City
Director of Weights and Measures for a permanent term. The Mayor shall
recommend two members of the Commission, of which one member of the
Commission shall be a representative of the taxi industry and one shall be
from the business community, for a term of two years. The City Council
shall appoint four members, one of which shall be a representative from
a consumer group, one from a community advocacy group, one shall be a
person who is physically challenged, and one shall be a duly licensed and
admitted attorney who shall chair the Commission, for a term of three years.
All such members shall serve without salary and at the pleasure of the City
Council.
§ 238-3. Duties and obligations. [Amended 8-13-1997, approved
8-14-1997; 2-10-1999, approved 2-11-1999; 9-8-1999, approved
9-9-1999]
The Taxicab Commission shall have the following duties and obligations:
If the operator is a holder of multiple licenses and permits another to
operate a taxicab unlawfully in violation of § 237-2.1, the penalties shall
be imposed consecutively.
C.
Any person who violates § 237-14 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000.
D.
§ 237-41 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 238-3
1:732
§ 238-4. Appellate review and procedure. [Added 8-13-1997,
approved 8-14-1997; 2-10-1999, approved 2-11-1999; 9-8-1999,
approved 9-9-1999]
To conduct research into the use of taxicabs within the City of Mount
Vernon utilizing the advice and participation of all citizens,
organizations and groups within the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
To review the provisions of Chapter 237 of the City Code, entitled
"Taxicabs," and to make recommendations to the City Council upon
subjects not limited to fare, zones, accommodations for seniors and the
disabled, cab stands, vehicle identification, vehicle inspection and the
numbers and type of taxicab licenses; and to regulate the number and
type of taxicab licenses issued pursuant to Chapter 237 of the Code of
the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
To conduct hearings to which the applicant or licensee may be entitled
and to regulate the number and type of taxicab licenses issued pursuant
to Chapter 237 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
C.
To keep accurate records of its meeting and actions and file an annual
report with the City Council on or before the 31st day of December of
each and every year.
D.
In addition to the foregoing, carry out any other duties, tasks or
responsibilities, consistent with the objectives of Article 2-A, § 20,
Subdivision 32, of the General City Law, assigned to it by resolution,
ordinance or local law of the City Council.
E.
Hear appeals of revocation, suspension and cancellation of a taxi
driver's license or taxicab license, except that the Commission shall not
hear appeals after a denial of an application or renewal application, or
where the revocation or suspension or cancellation of such license is
based solely on a judicial conviction(s).
F.
Consider a broad range of service, pricing and regulatory options,
including but not limited to imposing additional requirements to ensure
taxicab availability in areas of the City lying outside of the central
business district.
G.
The licensee shall file an appeal with the Taxi Commission within 10
business days after the date of decision or determination complained of
on a written form prescribed the Commissioner.
A.
The Commission shall schedule and hold a hearing within 30 days of
receipt of the appeal.
B.
Determination of appeal. The Commission shall in each case render a
decision within 30 days from the date of oral argument, which may
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or reverse the determination
appealed from.
C.
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:733
§ 238-5. Emblems or designs. [Added 8-13-1997, approved
8-14-1997; 2-10-1999, approved 2-11-1999; 9-8-1999, approved
9-9-1999]
The Commission shall have the power to grant any taxicab owner or
association of taxicab owners, upon proper application therefor, the
exclusive right to use one or more distinctive emblems or other identifying
designs to be displayed on the vehicles of such applicant.
Chapter 239
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 227. Zoning — See Ch. 267.
Rehearing. The Commission may grant a new hearing to a licensee
upon written request on a form prescribed by the Commission which
shall include a statement of the reason therefor filed with the
Commission when it shall appear that the ground is either newly
discovered evidence or fraud, or both.
D.
Appeals of the Commission's determination shall be pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E.
Such applications must include colored sketches of the proposed color
schemes of the emblem or designs, together with such other and
further information as the Commission may require. Such an emblem
may not be similar to an emblem granted to any association unless he
or she is a member of said association.
A.
The Commission may suspend a license and/or impose a reasonable
penalty on any owner who uses an emblem granted to another owner
or association, an emblem so similar as to lead to confusion in the mind
of the public or an emblem granted to any association unless he or she
is a member of said association.
B.
§ 238-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 238-5
1:734
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 239-1. Word usage; terms defined.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section,
unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the
singular number and words used in the singular number include the
plural number.
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFILIATED PERSON —
CABLE SERVICES — Cable services as defined in the Communications
Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1981, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further
amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable
services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in
the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall
mean cable services as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to
such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition
otherwise becoming inapplicable.
CITY — The City of Mount Vernon, New York.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Mount Vernon, New
York, and its designee or any successor thereto.
Each person who falls into one or more of the following categories:
Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest
in the applicant;
(a)
Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly,
a controlling interest;
(b)
Each officer, director, joint venture or joint venture partner, of
the applicant; and
(c)
Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by,
or under common control with, the applicant; provided that
(d)
(1)
"Affiliated person" shall in no event mean the City or any creditor of
the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is
not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling
interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership,
common management or common control with, the applicant.
(2)
B.
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-1
1:735
CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working control
in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working
control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative
control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in
the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a
controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert,
of more than 20%, of any person (which person or group of persons
is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by
more than one person or group of persons.
EQUIPMENT — The poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits,
subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are
used to provide telecommunications services.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by
the City in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, which
authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide
telecommunications services.
MAY — Is permissive.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City and his/her designee.
ORDINANCE — This ordinance and all modifications and amendments
thereto.
PERSON — Any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for
profit or not-for-profit, but shall not mean the City or the City School
District/Board of Education of the City of Mount Vernon.
REVOCABLE LICENSE — An initial authorization or renewal thereof,
issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance,
which authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically
identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only
in the limited circumstances set forth in § 239-2B and 239-2G of this
ordinance.
SHALL — Is mandatory, not merely directive.
STREETS — The surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any
and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways,
bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds, sidewalks or waters,
and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the City.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All transmissions, between or among
points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing
without change in the form or content of the information as sent and
received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Any person who:
Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets
used to provide telecommunications services regardless of whether
(1)
§ 239-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 239-1
1:736
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The offering of
telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes
of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless
of the facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not
include cable services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — The plant, equipment, real
property (including interests in real property), tangible and intangible
personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable,
wires, optical fibers, amplifier, antenna, and all other electronic
devices, equipment and facilities used to provide telecommunications
services.
such telecommunications services originate or terminate in the
City; or
Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate
in the City by means of:
Specifically identifiable equipment in the streets, which
equipment is owned by such person or made available to such
person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period
longer than 120 days; or
(a)
Equipment in the streets if the use of such equipment is
continuing and substantial, and the City has determined that
it is necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements
of this ordinance in order to preserve the application of this
ordinance on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis consistent with applicable law.
(b)
(2)
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-1
1:737

ARTICLE II
Granting Authority and Franchising Procedure
§ 239-2. Granting authority.
No person shall use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications
provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets
used to provide telecommunications, without a franchise or revocable
license granted by the City. A franchise or revocable license granted in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed
to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable services in the City,
and any person seeking to provide cable services in the City shall first
obtain a separate franchise in accordance with applicable law.
A.
Any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain
equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the
internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment
and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of
telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the City,
shall first obtain a revocable license in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance.
B.
The City Council may grant one or more franchises and revocable
licenses in accordance with this ordinance, provided that the City
Council reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by
amendment thereof.
C.
The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by
adoption of a separate ordinance by the City Council and shall be
on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate
ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the City
and the franchisee or licensee.
D.
Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The
City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use of the
streets by any means, as the City deems appropriate.
E.
F. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the City.
Conditions of grant.
A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority
to use and occupy specifically identified streets to provide
telecommunications services and shall be granted only if:
The use or occupation of such streets, together with all
revocable licenses previously granted to such person and
affiliated persons, shall not exceed 2,500 linear feet; or
(a)
(1)
G.
§ 239-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-2
1:739
§ 239-3. Compliance with rules: permits required.
§ 239-4. Submission of application.
The use or occupation of such streets does not involve the
offering or provision of telecommunications services to any
person within the City.
(b)
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause
a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with
the limits specified in Subsection G(1)(a) and/or (b), then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the use of
specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted
revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in
accordance with any such franchise that may be granted.
(2)
Subject to the provisions of this ordinance, the City may adopt rules,
policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of
this ordinance. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply
with such rules, policies and requirements.
A.
No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets used
to provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such
permits or other authorizations as may be required by the City. No
permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation
shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable
license pursuant to this ordinance or such other authorization as may
be required by applicable law.
B.
Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to
the Commissioner of Public Works with a copy also to be submitted to
the Corporation Counsel.
A.
An application shall contain the following information with respect to
the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information
with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the City
may deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable law:
The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
person the City may contact concerning the application;
(1)
A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be
provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities
and equipment;
(2)
A description of the proposed franchise area or, in the case of a
revocable license, the specifically identified streets and/or portions
thereof proposed to be used;
(3)
(4) A proposed construction schedule and sequence;
B.
§ 239-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 239-4
1:740
§ 239-5. Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable
license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other directives of the City and any federal, state or local
governmental authority having jurisdiction.
§ 239-6. (Reserved)
§ 239-7. Negotiation of agreement.
If an application is complete and otherwise complies with applicable law,
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the City,
including the provisions of this ordinance, the City shall enter into
negotiations with the applicant to determine whether such applicant and
the City are able to reach an agreement on the terms of the proposed
franchise or revocable license in accordance with §§ 239-10 and 239-11 of
this ordinance. The City may reject any application which is incomplete or
otherwise fails to comply with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other directives of the City and any federal, state or local
authority having jurisdiction.
§ 239-8. Factors for review of application.
A map showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system;
(5)
Insurance and bonding information of the applicant relative to the
proposed franchise or revocable license; and
(6)
Consistent with applicable law, all other information required by
the City necessary in managing its public rights-of-way.
(7)
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a
franchise or revocable license, the City Council may consider such
factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, provided such
factors are consistent with applicable law, including without limitation:
The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the
City, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications
services offered by the applicant to the City;
(1)
The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the City in
good condition throughout the term of the franchise or revocable
license;
(2)
Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the
grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact
of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use
of the streets or utilities at present and in the future;
(3)
A.
§ 239-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-8
1:741
§ 239-9. Procedure for consideration of and action on applications.
§ 239-10. Terms and conditions of franchise.
The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction
and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions,
limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise
or the revocable license;
(4)
The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise
or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest,
consistent with applicable law; and
(5)
Any other public interest factors or considerations that the City has
a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the City
for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public.
(6)
Consistent with applicable law, the City may develop and implement
policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient
capacity reasonably to accommodate existing and future uses in a
rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise
or revocable license, the City may consider an applicant's proposals
for addressing capacity needs and compliance with City policies and
requirements.
B.
The City Council may make such investigations and take or authorize
the taking of such other steps as the City Council deems necessary
or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and
revocable licenses and to determine whether a franchise or revocable
license should be granted to an applicant, and may require the
applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose.
In considering applications, the City Council may seek advice from
City officials, departments, agencies, boards, commissions or bodies,
from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine
appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one
or more reports to be submitted to the City Council, which may include
recommendations with respect to such applications.
A.
Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed
appropriate by the City Council, the City Council may grant or deny the
franchise or revocable license, and may specify the conditions under
which the franchise or revocable license is granted.
B.
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant
to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting
the franchise and/or in a separate written agreement. A franchise
granted pursuant to this ordinance shall not become effective until said
separate ordinance becomes effective and any separate agreement is
executed by both parties.
A.
§ 239-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 239-10
1:742
Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things,
shall address the following subjects:
(1) The term of the franchise;
The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be
offered;
(2)
The compensation to be paid to the City, which shall include the
payment of fees and/or the provision of facilities or services;
(3)
The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or
cancelled;
(4)
The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or
letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the
franchisee's obligations under the franchise;
(5)
The City's right to inspect the facilities and records of the
franchisee;
(6)
Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the
franchisee;
(7)
The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records, and the City's inspection rights with
respect thereto;
(8)
Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction
methods;
(9)
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all
applicable City, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and
policies;
(10)
The obligation of the franchisee to supply an engineering site
plan showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system, including any manholes or overhead
poles, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures, and the relationship of the system to all existing poles,
utilities, sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications systems, and
other improvements in the streets, all of which shall be subject to
approval by the appropriate City departments;
(11)
Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the
franchise without the prior written consent of the City;
(12)
Remedies available to the City to protect the City's interest in
the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and
conditions of the franchise;
(13)
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary
licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations,
rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction
(14)
B.
§ 239-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-10
1:743
§ 239-11. Terms and conditions of revocable license.
over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications
Commission;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property
of the City and the delivery of public services from damage or
interruption of operations resulting from the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related
to the franchise;
(15)
Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public
use of the streets of the City are disrupted in connection with the
construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and
(16)
Such other provisions as the City determines are necessary or
appropriate in furtherance of the public interest, consistent with
applicable law.
(17)
The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted
pursuant to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance
granting the revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement.
A revocable license granted pursuant to this ordinance shall not
become effective until the separate ordinance granting the license
becomes effective and any separate written agreement is executed by
both parties. Such separate ordinance and/or written agreement shall
address the same subjects listed in § 239-10 of this ordinance subject to
the following limitations:
The revocable license shall be for a term not to exceed 10 years
from the date that the ordinance granting the revocable license
becomes effective;
(1)
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the City for
cause or for the City's purposes; and
(2)
The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses
previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not
authorize the occupation and use of more than 2,500 linear feet
of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of
the streets does not involve the offering or provision of
telecommunications services to any person in the City.
(3)
A.
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits
specified in Subsection A(3) of this § 239-11, then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance, and the use of specifically
identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses
shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such
franchise that may be granted.
B.
§ 239-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 239-11
1:744
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 239-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of
this ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part,
by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 239-13. Delegation.
The City Council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to
revoke any such delegation or re-delegation, from time to time, any of
its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization
or official of the City. Any such delegation, re-delegation or revocation,
no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this
ordinance or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or
revocable license or franchisee or licensee.
§ 239-14. Application.
To the extent permitted by law, the City may determine to apply all or
certain, provisions of this ordinance to telecommunications providers and
franchises and other right-of-way authorizations existing on the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 239-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
§ 239-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-15
1:745
Chapter 240
THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 84.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 113.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
§ 239-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 239-15
1:746
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 43 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 240-1. License required; insurance; fees.
No person shall exhibit or cause to be exhibited to the public in any
hall, theater, garden, grounds, concert room or other place or room
any theatrical entertainment, representations, feats of horsemanship,
animals, artificial curiosity, circus, caravan, tragedy, comedy, opera,
ballet, play, farce, curiosities, tricks of legerdemain, vaudeville
performance, motion-picture show or any other show, performance or
other exhibition, where the same is given for charge, hire or price of
admission, without first obtaining a license therefor.
A.
The Mayor is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to issue such license
upon the following terms and conditions:
No such license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall
have first filed with the City Clerk, without cost to the City,
satisfactory evidence of the issuance of public liability insurance
covering the City in the amounts of not less than $100,000 for any
one person and not less than $300,000 for any one accident and
not less than $25,000 for property damage, such insurance to be
approved as to form, correctness and adequacy by the Corporation
Counsel. Such insurance shall secure the City against any loss,
injury or damage arising out of any acts, omissions or negligence
on the part of said applicant, his servants, agents or employees.
Such applicant shall comply with all the requirements of the laws of
the State of New York and ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon,
New York, particularly those laws, regulations and ordinances
relating to fire prevention and buildings in effect or adopted during
the term of such license. [Amended 5-22-1963, approved
5-23-1963]
(1)
Prior to the issuance of such license permitting such performance
or performances, such applicant shall pay to the City Clerk the
following fees therefor: [Amended 12-26-1968, approved
12-27-1968]
For any single performance, the fee shall be not less than $15
nor more than $62.50, at the discretion of the Mayor.
(a)
For any license granted for any number of performances in
excess of one, the fee shall be $62.50 for any period not longer
than six months and $125 for any period not more than one
year.
(b)
(2)
B.
This section shall not apply to any performance given in any church or
school.
C.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:747
§ 240-2. Exemptions.
Licenses for any entertainment given for which admission charges are
collected by or for the benefit of any church, school, veterans organization,
or benevolent, charitable or scientific society, fire company or firemen's or
policemen's benefit society or association, or for any local charity may be
required and be granted by the Mayor in his discretion, but without fee or
charge.
§ 240-3. Revocation of license.
If, in the judgment of the Mayor, there is cause for the revocation of
any such license so issued, he may in his discretion revoke the same
immediately or, by written communication to the licensee, fix the effective
date of the revocation. In the event of a revocation of a license issued
for more than one performance, the pro rata amount of the license fee
previously collected shall be returned to the licensee.
§ 240-2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 240-3
1:748
ARTICLE II
Theaters Admitting Children
[Adopted 4-13-1942 by L.L. No. 1-1942, approved 4-13-1942]
§ 240-4. License required.
No child under the age of 16 years shall be admitted to any theater
unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person unless such
theater is licensed pursuant to and complies with the provisions of this
article.
§ 240-5. Conditions of license; fee.
The Mayor may issue a license to any theater within the City of Mount
Vernon where motion pictures are shown, for the admission of
unaccompanied children between the ages of eight and 15 years, both
inclusive, upon the payment of a yearly fee of $10 in addition to the regular
theater license fee and upon its compliance with the conditions herein set
forth as follows:
Each owner, operator or manager of such licensed theater shall set
aside a separate section of seats on the main or orchestra floor of such
theater to be used exclusively for children unaccompanied by adults.
Adults shall in no event be admitted to such section while it is reserved
for children. The size of such section may be varied at different times,
and such section as set aside shall be clearly marked or designated.
A.
A seat in such section shall be provided for each unaccompanied child
admitted to such licensed theater, and such children shall not be
permitted to stand.
B.
Unaccompanied children shall not be admitted to any such licensed
theater during the time when their school classes are in session. No
unaccompanied children shall be admitted to such theater after 5:00
p.m., except that during July and August, such children may be
admitted during the entire day until 6:00 p.m.
C.
Each theater licensed under the provisions of this article shall provide
at least one matron who shall be in attendance at all times during
the time that unaccompanied children are present. Each such matron
shall be licensed by the Department of Public Health upon payment
of a license fee of $2, to be paid by the owner, operator or manager
of such theater, which Department shall furnish appropriate means of
identification which shall be worn conspicuously while such matron
is in attendance. Each applicant for a license as matron shall qualify
by such physical or other examinations as the Commissioner of Public
Health shall prescribe as relevant to the functions to be performed
by such matron, and shall file with the Police Department impressions
of the fingers of her right hand and left hand. Such impressions shall
be placed upon forms furnished by the Chief Inspector of the Police
Department, the impressions to be taken under his supervision or of
D.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:749
§ 240-6. Revocation of license.
The Mayor may at any time revoke any license issued pursuant to this
article, for violation of any of the terms or conditions of such license as
herein set forth, but such license shall not be revoked without notice and
the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing.
someone designated by him. No license shall be issued hereunder until
after the investigation and examination of the fingerprint impressions
and the receipt of a report of good character from the Police
Department.
Any section of seats set aside for children pursuant to this article shall
be nearest to the exits, and the obstruction of any accessible exit or any
aisle leading thereto is prohibited in accordance with the ordinances of
the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
E.
Any theater licensed for the admission of children unaccompanied by
a parent, guardian or other adult person shall provide such toilet
facilities as may be prescribed by the Building Code of the City of
Mount Vernon.
F.
§ 240-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 240-6
1:750
ARTICLE III
Sunday Movies
[Adopted 11-13-1957 as Ch. 22 of the General Ordinances, approved
11-15-1957]
§ 240-7. Time restriction.
Motion pictures are hereby permitted to be exhibited in such places as are
duly licensed therefor and under such conditions as hereinafter provided,
on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday, after 2:00 p.m.
§ 240-8. Permit.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the exhibition of
motion pictures on the first day of the week to any person holding a permit
for the exhibition of motion pictures during weekdays, upon the condition
that such person to whom such permit shall be given shall comply with the
provisions of this article.
§ 240-9. Approval of motion pictures required.
No motion picture shall be exhibited under the permit hereinbefore
provided for unless the same shall have previously been passed upon and
approved by the National Board of Review and such approval authenticated
by the endorsement on the title of said picture to the effect "Approved by
the National Board of Review," or shall have been duly licensed pursuant to
the Education Law of the State of New York, or except such other pictures
as may be approved by the local Board of Censors, to be authenticated by
the endorsement to the effect "Approved by Board of Censors."
§ 240-10. Board of Censors.
The Mayor is hereby authorized, by and with the consent and approval
of the City Council, to appoint a board consisting of two citizens and the
Commissioner of Public Safety, to be known as the "Board of Censors,"
whose duty it shall be and which is hereby authorized to view, pass upon and
establish the standard of any film proposed to be exhibited which has not
been previously approved as hereinbefore provided. Said Board of Censors
shall serve without compensation and during the pleasure of the Mayor, and
the act of a majority thereof shall constitute the act of said Board.
§ 240-11. Revocation of permit.
The permit hereinbefore provided for shall be revocable by the Mayor at his
pleasure.
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11
1:751
Chapter 243
TOW TRUCKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 256.
§ 240-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 240-11
1:752
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 243-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
AREA FOR IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES — Any City-owned property
or privately owned property in the City of Mount Vernon, whether enclosed
or not, which is used in whole or in part for the keeping or storing of
impounded motor vehicles as defined herein.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety
of the City of Mount Vernon.
CRIMINAL HISTORY INFORMATION — A record of pending criminal
charges, pending arrests, and criminal convictions, but shall not include
convictions which were vacated or reversed, convictions resolved in an
applicant's favor, youthful offender adjudications, and sealed
records.[Added 10-28-2015, approved 10-28-2015]
IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES — Motor vehicles which have been seized
or removed from a public highway without the knowledge or consent of the
owner or operator thereof and towed or taken to an area for impounded
motor vehicles without the consent of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in § 125 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, excluding trailers, semitrailers and tractors, and
trucks weighing over two tons, unladen.
OWNER —
PRIVATE PARKING LOT[Added 5-8-1996, approved 5-9-1996]: —
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — An open-air parking area that is used by the
general public, with the payment of rent or charges, and where service
station and motor fuel filling station facilities, if any, are clearly incidental
to the principal use for storage.[Added 5-8-1996, approved 5-9-1996]
Any person, firm, corporation or other venture owning, operating or
controlling the use of one or more tow trucks offered for hire upon the
streets of the City, or their agents, servants and/or employees operating
said tow trucks.
A.
Any person, firm, corporation or other venture who tows or causes to
be towed any motor vehicle into an area for impounded motor vehicles.
B.
An open-air parking area that is accessory to a residential or
nonresidential building and which is not used by the general public,
either with or without the payment of rent or charges; or
A.
An open-air parking area which is accessory to the principal use of the
premises or of adjacent or nearby premises and which is used by the
general public, with or without the payment of rent or charges.
B.
§ 243-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-1
1:753
SCHEDULE — The card, sign or poster on which is printed the charges for
towing vehicles and preparing vehicles for tow in the City and the storage
charges as established in this chapter.
TOW TRUCK — Any vehicle used in the business of pushing, pulling or
towing motor vehicles for hire, except a tow truck owned and operated by
any public authority or municipal, state or county government or owned
and operated by a public transit corporation or a corporation subject to the
provisions of the Transportation Corporation Law and/or the Public Service
Law of the State of New York, or vehicles used exclusively for towing
disabled motor vehicles which are owned, leased or operated by the owner
or lessee of the towing vehicle or by a person, firm or corporation which
is affiliated with the owner or lessee of the towing vehicle, and which such
vehicles have legibly inscribed on each side, in letters not less than three
inches high, the legend "Not for Public Hire."
TOW TRUCK DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted by the City to a
person to drive a licensed tow truck upon the streets of the City.
TOW TRUCK LICENSE — Permission granted by the City of Mount Vernon
to an owner to operate a tow truck for hire within the City.
§ 243-2. Additional regulations.
The Commissioner of Public Safety may make and promulgate such
additional rules and regulations and prescribe such forms as he shall deem
necessary to carry out the intent and provisions of this chapter, same to
become effective 10 days after filing same with the City Clerk. Such rules
and regulations shall include a prescribed procedure for the dispatch by the
Police Department of tow trucks to the scene of an accident and appropriate
records shall be kept for the public inspection of each such dispatch in a
book created specifically for said purpose.
§ 243-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to legalize,
validate or sanction the seizure and towing or taking of motor vehicles into
an area for impounded motor vehicles.
§ 243-4. Exemption.
A tow truck regularly kept during business hours outside the City of Mount
Vernon, which is called into the City of Mount Vernon by the owner or
operator of a disabled motor vehicle to assist the owner or operator by
towing said motor vehicle outside the City of Mount Vernon, is not required
to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 243-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect May 1, 1973.
§ 243-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-5
1:754
ARTICLE II
Tow Truck Licenses
§ 243-6. Issuance of tow truck license.
The City Clerk is authorized, upon payment of the requisite fees as
hereinafter provided for in this chapter, to issue a tow truck license for each
vehicle to be used as a tow truck, sealed with the Corporate Seal of the City
and countersigned by the Commissioner or his designee, to each operator
who shall procure the approval in writing of the Commissioner pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 243-7. Tow truck license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay,
or cause or permit any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay, any
tow truck within the City unless the vehicle has been duly licensed for such
purpose pursuant to this chapter.
§ 243-8. Types of tow truck licenses.
The City Clerk shall issue two types of tow truck licenses as follows:
Unrestricted license, Class I, to be issued to the owners of tow trucks
which are equipped with crane, winch or similar device designed to
raise a disabled vehicle or the front or rear end of a disabled vehicle or
the entire vehicle.
It shall be a condition to the issuance of each Class I license that
the applicant demonstrate ownership of or a lease for an enclosed
area within the City of Mount Vernon within which auto body repair
work can be done on at least three vehicles, which shall be based
upon 200 square feet per vehicle and shall have additional offstreet
storage facilities for at least three additional vehicles. The
number of Class I licenses shall be limited in accordance with the
above.
(1)
Each Class I licensee shall have within the premises in which repair
work is to be performed, as minimum equipment, a compressor,
welding equipment, grinder-buffer and a porta-power or similar
tool for straightening metal.
(2)
Each Class I licensee shall supply a certificate of occupancy from
the Building Department indicating that the premises may be used
as an auto body repair shop.
(3)
The owner or owners of any Class I licensed vehicle shall be
available to render towing services on a seven-day-a-week, twentyfour-
hour-a-day basis and shall suitably provide for the receipt of
telephone calls for aid and personnel to operate the tow truck as
required.
(4)
A.
§ 243-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-8
1:755
§ 243-9. Application for tow truck license.
Application for each tow truck license shall be made by the operator on
forms to be furnished by the Commissioner. The completed application shall
contain:
Restricted license, Class II, to be issued to the owner of any other tow
truck for public hire garaged and/or operated within the City of Mount
Vernon.
B.
The name, residence and business address of the person or persons
operating the tow truck business; if a partnership, its principal place
of business and the residence, name and address of each partner; if a
corporation, its principal place of business and the names, titles and
residence addresses of the officials and stockholders thereof.
A.
The year, make, motor and serial number and state registration number
of the vehicle to be licensed.
B.
The amount of public liability and property damage insurance covering
the vehicle to be licensed, the name of the insurance company, policy
number and expiration date or dates thereof. In no event shall the
liability insurance be less than $1,000,000 combined single limit,
covering injuries to persons and damages to property, and covering
each and every tow truck to be operated in the City, which policy shall
be endorsed to indemnify and save harmless the City of Mount Vernon
from any and all claims for personal injury or property damage arising
out of the issuance of the license to engage in said business. Each policy
required herein must contain an endorsement providing for 30 days'
notice to the City in the event of any material change or cancellation.
[Amended 4-22-1992, approved 4-23-1992]
C.
Every applicant for a tow truck license shall be subject to an
examination of criminal history information, including pending arrests
and convictions. Every applicant for a license shall file, together with
the application, fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be
placed upon cards provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and
shall be taken under his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and
at such a place as the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner
of Public Safety shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints
of the applicant, together with the required fees, to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services or other appropriate agency for processing
and investigation. No application for a tow truck license shall be
approved nor any license issued under the provisions of this chapter
until after commanding officer of the Criminal Identification Unit in the
Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history information disseminated by the Division of Criminal Justice
Services. No applicant for a booting license shall be denied by reason of
an applicant having been previously convicted of one or more criminal
offenses, unless (1) there is a direct relationship between the
applicant's criminal conviction and the license sought, or (2) the
D.
§ 243-8 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-9
1:756
§ 243-10. Tow truck license card.
Upon approval of the application by the Commissioner and upon
presentation of such approved application, the City Clerk shall issue a
license in the form of a card not less than three inches by six inches in size,
containing the official license number of the tow truck and a statement that
any complaint shall be made to the Commissioner. The card shall be signed
by the City Clerk and shall contain the number of the license plate assigned
to the vehicle by the Motor Vehicle Bureau of the State of New York, which
card shall also set forth the maximum fees hereinafter prescribed. A license
card shall vary in color each year. Any licensee who defaces, obliterates or
changes any official entry made upon the license shall have such license
revoked.
§ 243-11. Display of tow truck license card.
The tow truck license must be displayed at all times in a prominent position
in the interior of the driver's compartment of the tow truck, in an enclosed
frame of the appropriate size.
§ 243-12. Inspection of tow trucks.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall assign police officers who shall
inspect all tow trucks to assure that they are kept in a condition of
continued fitness for proper and safe use. Appropriate endorsements shall
be made upon the license card showing the date of each inspection. Written
reports of all inspections shall be filed with the City Clerk and the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 243-13. License fees. [Amended 4-25-1973, approved 4-26-1973]
issuance of the license would involve an unreasonable risk to property
or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general public.
[Added 7-11-1979, approved 7-12-1979; amended 4-13-1989,
approved 4-13-1989; 10-28-2015, approved 10-28-2015]
Such other or additional information as the Commissioner may deem
necessary and appropriate.
E.
The following annual fees shall be paid to the City Clerk no later than
May 1 for a license period commencing on said date and expiring on
the last day of April of each succeeding year: [Amended 10-12-1983,
approved 10-13-1983; 4-22-1992, approved 4-23-1992; 5-9-2012,
approved 5-10-2012]
(1) For each unrestricted Class I tow truck license, the sum of $150.
(2) For each restricted Class II tow truck license, the sum of $150.
A.
No license or license renewal fee shall be prorated for a period of less
than six months.
B.
§ 243-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-14
1:757
§ 243-14. Surrender of license.
Every tow truck operator desiring to surrender a license shall immediately
return such license to the City Clerk. No refund shall be made upon such
surrender.
§ 243-15. Assignment and transfer of licenses.
No tow truck license shall be assigned or transferred without the prior
written approval of the Commissioner. In addition thereto, such assignee
or transferee shall be required to establish compliance with all the
requirements imposed by this chapter upon an original application for such
license. The fee for approval shall be the same as for issuance of an original
license.
§ 243-16. Disapproval of tow truck licenses.
The Commissioner may disapprove an application for a tow truck license if,
in his discretion, he determines that:
§ 243-17. Suspension or revocation of tow truck license.
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact in connection with his application;
A.
The applicant or any officer, director, stockholder or partner or any
other person directly or indirectly interested in the application was the
former holder, or was an officer, director, stockholder or partner in a
corporation or partnership which was the former holder, of a tow truck
license which had been revoked or suspended;
B.
The applicant or any officer, director, stockholder, partner, employee or
any other person directly or indirectly interested in the application has
been convicted of a felony or any crime involving violence, dishonesty,
deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral turpitude; or
C.
The applicant is not the true owner of the tow truck or of the tow truck
business.
D.
A tow truck license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause,
after a hearing by the Commissioner, if the vehicle shall have been
knowingly used for any illegal purpose or for the violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or other law governing the operation
or maintenance of motor vehicles, or if the licensee was negligent in
preventing same. In the event of the suspension or revocation of the
license, the license card shall be seized by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. A licensee shall be provided with written notice of such hearing
and the reason therefor and shall have the right to be represented by
counsel.
A.
Hearing. Except where a refusal to approve an application for a tow
truck license or a tow truck driver's license or an application for a
B.
§ 243-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-17
1:758
§ 243-18. Register of licensed tow trucks.
The City Clerk shall keep a register of the persons owning or operating a
tow truck licensed under this chapter, together with the license number,
the description of the vehicle and the date and complete record of each
inspection. These records shall be available for public inspection at all
reasonable times. The Commissioner shall promptly file with the City Clerk
records of all applications, suspensions or revocation of licenses and all
complaints against owners or drivers and the action or determination by the
Commissioner.
renewal thereof, or where revocation or suspension of such license
is based solely on a judicial conviction or convictions, a licensee or
applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard. Such hearing shall be
held by the Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner
of Public Safety at such time and place as he shall prescribe. A license,
however, may be temporarily suspended without notice pending any
criminal proceeding, investigation or hearing. A licensee or applicant
entitled to a hearing shall be given due notice thereof in writing and
shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
§ 243-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-18
1:759

ARTICLE III
Driver's Licenses
§ 243-19. Tow truck driver's license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a tow truck or to assist in
connection with the towing operations thereof unless such person shall be
at least 18 years of age and shall have first obtained a tow truck driver's
license.
§ 243-20. Issuance of driver's license.
The City Clerk is authorized, upon payment of the requisite fee as
hereinafter provided in this chapter, to issue tow truck drivers' licenses,
sealed with the Corporate Seal of the City and countersigned by the
Commissioner of Public Safety, to such applicants as shall procure the
approval in writing of the Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 243-21. Qualifications for driver's license.
Every applicant for a tow truck driver's license shall fulfill the following
requirements to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Public Safety or his
designee prior to the issuance of a license:
Be duly licensed as a chauffeur by the Motor Vehicle Department of the
State of New York.
A.
B. Be 18 years of age or over.
Be of sound mind and body and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
disease or any other infirmity of mind or body which might render the
applicant incapable of safely operating such vehicle.
C.
D. Be able to read and write intelligibly the English language.
Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of intoxicating
liquor or drugs.
E.
Not have been convicted of a felony nor any crime involving violence,
dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral turpitude.
F.
G. Be of good character and reputation.
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as
the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety
shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant,
together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice
Services or other appropriate agency for processing and investigation.
No application for a tow truck license shall be approved nor any license
H.
§ 243-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-21
1:761
§ 243-22. Driver's license examination.
Each applicant for a tow truck driver's license may be required to undergo
tests of his driving ability, his ability to properly and safely employ the tow
truck's towing equipment and knowledge of the geography of the City of
Mount Vernon.
§ 243-23. Form and conditions of driver's license.
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, the
Commissioner of Public Safety shall issue a certificate certifying that the
applicant is entitled to a driver's license. Upon presentation of the
certificate to the City Clerk, he shall issue a license containing the signature
of the licensee and spaces for recording any arrest or serious complaint.
Each license shall be sealed with the City Seal. All licenses shall be
numbered in the order in which they are issued, with the date of issuance
and expiration. Any defacing, removing, altering or obliteration of an official
entry made upon such license shall be cause for revocation.
§ 243-24. Driver's license fees. [Amended 10-12-1983, approved
10-13-1983; 4-22-1992, approved 4-23-1992; 5-9-2012, approved
5-10-2012]
The following annual fees shall be paid to the City Clerk no later than May
1 for a license period commencing on said date and expiring on the last day
of April of each succeeding year:
§ 243-25. Driver's license renewal.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety
may, by appropriate endorsement of a driver's license, certify to the City
issued under the provisions of this chapter until after the commanding
officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in the Department of
Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal history record
information disseminated by the Division of Criminal Justice Services.
No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been convicted of
any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence, dishonesty or deceit.
[Added 7-11-1979, approved 7-12-1979; amended 4-13-1989,
approved 4-13-1989]
Complete, sign and file a sworn statement on such form or forms
as shall be required by the Commissioner of Public Safety, showing
compliance with the requirements hereinabove set forth and such other
information as shall be deemed necessary and reasonable by the
Commissioner of Public Safety in the interests of the public safety,
health and welfare. [Added 7-11-1979, approved 7-12-1979]
I.
A. For each tow truck driver's license, the sum of $50.
B. For a renewal of each tow truck driver's license, the sum of $50.
§ 243-21 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-25
1:762
Clerk that such driver is entitled to a renewal of his license. The application
for renewal shall be made not less than 30 days prior to its expiration on a
form to be provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety, containing such
data as he shall deem necessary and appropriate.
§ 243-26. Denial of driver's license.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of Public
Safety may disapprove an application for a tow truck driver's license if he
determines that:
§ 243-27. Suspension, revocation or refusal to renew driver's
license; hearing.
The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact relating to his application; or
A.
The applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements and
qualifications provided in § 243-21 of this chapter.
B.
The Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of
Public Safety may suspend or revoke a tow truck driver's license and
may refuse to approve an application for a renewal thereof for any of
the following reasons:
The conviction of the licensee of a felony or of any crime involving
violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral
turpitude.
(1)
The licensee has made a material false statement or concealed a
material fact in connection with the application for a tow truck
driver's license or renewal thereof.
(2)
(3) The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Any suspension shall be noted on the driver's license, together with
a statement of reasons therefor, and the driver shall surrender the
driver's license to the Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy
Commissioner of Public Safety. The driver's license and a memorandum
of the suspension shall be sent forthwith to the City Clerk.
B.
Hearing. Except where a refusal to approve an application for a tow
truck driver's license or an application for a renewal thereof, or where
revocation or suspension of such license is based solely on a judicial
conviction or convictions, a licensee or applicant shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Such hearing shall be held by the
Commissioner of Public Safety or the Deputy Commissioner of Public
Safety at such time and place as he shall prescribe. A license, however,
may be temporarily suspended without notice pending any criminal
proceeding, investigation or hearing. A licensee or applicant entitled to
a hearing shall be given due notice thereof in writing and shall have the
right to be represented by counsel.
C.
§ 243-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-28
1:763
§ 243-28. Rules of conduct for drivers.
A driver licensee shall:
A. Be clean in dress.
B. Not be addicted to drugs or intoxicating liquors.
C. Not engage in any illegal or criminal act.
D. Not permit the tow truck to be used for unlawful purposes.
Not use the license of another driver or permit anyone to use his
license.
E.
Cooperate with law enforcement officers in the performance of their
duties and report immediately to the Police Department any person
attempting to use his vehicle in connection with a crime or escape from
the scene of a crime.
F.
Not operate a tow truck while his tow truck driver's license is
suspended or revoked.
G.
Not operate a tow truck while his driver's license issued by the State of
New York is suspended or revoked.
H.
Be responsible for his license and immediately report its loss to the
Police Department and City Clerk.
I.
Answer as directed all communications and summonses issued by the
Police Department. He shall answer all pertinent questions directed to
him at any hearing when his presence is requested, and he shall bring
and present to the Commissioner of Public Safety his tow truck driver's
license, chauffeur's license and manifest.
J.
Maintain a daily manifest and record such entries as required on the
manifest provided. At the end of each, day such manifest shall be
preserved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
K.
§ 243-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-28
1:764
ARTICLE IV
Business Operations; Equipment
§ 243-29. Maximum fees for towing and storage.
§ 243-30. Solicitation of business.
No tow truck operator nor any agent, servant and/or employee of such
operator shall distribute any business card to members of the police force
for the purpose of soliciting business from the public.
§ 243-31. Authorization to tow disabled vehicle required.
A tow truck operator or an agent, servant and/or employee of such operator
shall not remove a vehicle involved in an accident or otherwise disabled
without an authorization on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, signed
by the owner of the vehicle or other person in charge thereof. Such
authorization shall be for the towing and storage of the vehicle only and
shall show the rates to be charged for towing and storing said vehicle. Such
signed authorization shall be retained by the licensed tow truck operator
for a period of one year and shall be exhibited upon the demand of the
Commissioner or his duly authorized representative. It shall be unlawful
for a tow truck operator or an agent, servant and/or employee of such
It shall be unlawful for any operator or the agent, servant and/or
employee of such operator to charge more than $65. [Amended
5-23-1973, approved 5-24-1973; 10-12-1983, approved
10-13-1983; 3-9-1988, approved 3-10-1988; 5-9-2012, approved
5-10-2012]
A.
Services to be included in maximum charges. The maximum charges for
towing hereinabove set forth shall include the normal services required
to prepare the disabled or impounded motor vehicle for such towing.
B.
Charges for additional services. In addition to the maximum towing
charges hereinabove set forth, the tow truck operator or the agent,
servant and/or employee of such operator is authorized to charge an
additional charge, not to exceed $25, for services necessarily rendered
by such operator or his agent, servant and/or employee to prepare a
disabled motor vehicle for towing. Such additional fee is to be limited
only to those instances where a disabled motor vehicle is in an
overturned condition or is in a ditch or where a flatbed truck is utilized.
[Amended 3-9-1988, approved 3-10-1988]
C.
Storage charges. It shall be unlawful to charge more than $5 for
storage of a disabled or impounded motor vehicle for each 24 hours or
part thereof of the first five days and $10 for each 24 hours thereafter.
No charge shall be made for storage for that period of time during
which the tow truck operator is making authorized repairs to a disabled
motor vehicle. [Amended 4-25-1973, approved 4-26-1973;
3-9-1988, approved 3-10-1988]
D.
§ 243-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-31
1:765
operator to use any other form than that prescribed by the Commissioner.
If the owner or other persons in charge of such disabled motor vehicle is
physically unable to give such authorization for the towing and/or storage of
said disabled vehicle, such vehicle shall not be towed away from the scene
of the accident or disablement except as permitted by law or upon the order
of a uniformed police officer.
§ 243-32. Towing bill.
A duplicate of the bill for towing and/or storage of a disabled or impounded
motor vehicle shall be retained by the towing car operator for a period of
one year. These bills shall be exhibited upon demand of the Commissioner
or his duly authorized representative. Upon payment of the bill given to
the owner of the disabled or impounded vehicle or his authorized
representative, the operator shall acknowledge receipt of payment of such
bill.
§ 243-33. Lights.
No tow truck shall display any light other than white or yellow so as to be
visible from a point in front of the vehicle at any time except when at an
actual scene of an accident or other emergency or while actually engaged
in towing a disabled vehicle.
§ 243-34. Radios. [Amended 4-25-1973, approved 4-26-1973]
The operator of a tow truck shall not have installed in said tow truck a radio
set capable of receiving signals or messages transmitted on the frequencies
allocated for police use, nor shall such operator or any agent, servant and/
or employee of such operator make use of such signals so transmitted in
connection with such operator's tow truck business.
§ 243-35. Estimates and repairs.
It shall be unlawful for a tow truck operator or an agent, servant and/or
employee of such operator to make repairs for a consideration on any motor
vehicle involved in any accident and removed by a tow truck without first
entering into a signed agreement with the owner or other person in charge
of said motor vehicle, setting forth the cost of repairs, and in those cases
where such agreement is made, no fee or charge shall be made for the
estimate of the cost of repairs. The form to be used for such agreement
shall be retained by the tow truck operator for a period of one year and
shall be exhibited upon demand of the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative. In any case where the owner or person in charge of a motor
vehicle involved in an accident is to be hospitalized, the agreement herein
provided for shall not be entered into with such injured party until the
expiration of at least 24 hours from the time of such accident unless the
injured party has, before the expiration of said time, been discharged from
the hospital. The authorization form to repair, required hereunder, must be
submitted to and approved by the Commissioner.
§ 243-31 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-36
1:766
§ 243-36. Cruising to solicit business prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any operator or an agent, servant and/or employee
of such operator to drive or cruise along any street or highway within the
City for the sole purpose of soliciting tow truck jobs. It shall be deemed to
be presumptive evidence of the violation of this chapter when any tow truck
arrives upon the scene of an accident without having first been summoned
thereto either by the owner or operator of the motor vehicle involved in said
accident or a member of the Police Department of the City of Mount Vernon.
§ 243-37. Refusal to render service.
It shall be unlawful for any tow truck operator or an agent, servant and/or
employee of such operator to refuse to tow a disabled motor vehicle if the
owner or person in charge of said motor vehicle is able and willing to pay
for such services, or to refuse to tow such disabled vehicle to a repair shop
designated by the owner or person in charge of said motor vehicle if such
designated repair shop is within the City of Mount Vernon, unless the tow
truck is otherwise engaged in service or is not in service.
§ 243-38. Identification on tow trucks.
Every tow truck shall be identified by lettering permanently painted or
placed on the exteriors of both doors of the vehicle, on the panels below
the windows, stating the name of the tow truck operator and the words
"tow truck," which lettering shall be of such height as prescribed by the
Commissioner on the application form.
§ 243-39. Manifests.
Every operator shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be recorded
all tow jobs made each day, showing time and place of origin, who ordered
the tow and the destination of each trip and amount of fee. All manifests
shall be completed and returned to the tow truck operator by his driver
upon the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall
be furnished to the driver by the tow truck operator and shall be in a form
approved by the Commissioner. Every tow truck operator shall retain and
preserve all manifests in a safe place for a period of at least one year, and
they shall be made available for inspection by the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative.
§ 243-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-39
1:767

ARTICLE V
Immobilization and Booting
§ 243-40. Towing and immobilization from private or public parking
lots. [Added 5-8-1996, approved 5-9-1996]
No person shall tow or cause to have towed an unauthorized motor vehicle
from a private or public parking lot, as heretofore defined, unless the
following requirements have been complied with:
A towing permit shall have been obtained for the premises from the
City Clerk and an annual fee of $100 paid to the City of Mount Vernon
for each lot covered by the permit. [Amended 10-8-2014, approved
10-9-2014]
A.
A sign of minimum dimensions of three feet by three feet shall be
conspicuously posted at each entrance and exit to the parking lot and
wherever else the Commissioner deems necessary. Each sign must
contain the following information:
A statement that any car parked without authorization on the
premises shall be towed at the owner's expense.
(1)
The towing fee to be charged, said fee not to exceed $50 for the
first offense and $100 for a second or subsequent offense, with the
maximum fine in each and every instance which may be imposed
not to exceed $250. [Amended 9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999]
(2)
The per-diem storage fee charged shall not exceed $10. [Amended
9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999]
(3)
(4) The permit number.
The name, address and telephone number of where the motor
vehicle can be claimed.
(5)
B.
Only a person licensed by the City of Mount Vernon pursuant to this
chapter may tow said vehicle from said premises.
C.
The charge for towing and storage shall not exceed the maximum
permitted charges as provided by this chapter.
D.
It shall be unlawful for a licensed tower to tow from a private or public
parking lot unless a permit has been issued to said premises.
E.
F. No permit issued hereunder shall be transferred to another premises.
The City of Mount Vernon and one-family and two-family residential
properties are exempt from this section.
G.
The owner of the vehicle is to be notified, in writing, by certified mail,
within five days of removal by the licensed tow operator. In the event
that the owner is not so notified, no additional per-diem charges shall
accrue after the fifth day.
H.
§ 243-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-40
1:769
Upon pickup, the licensed tow operator must notify the Police
Department radio room of the color, make, year and model of the auto
towed from the private property, as well as the date and time and
complete Form MV-31A at Mount Vernon Police Headquarters. The tow
operator must also maintain a running log of all vehicles picked up
pursuant to this section, listing the date and time of pickup, the color,
make, year and model number of the vehicle picked up and time of the
call to the Police Department and the name of the person receiving the
information.
I.
The licensed tow operator shall be required to maintain for a two-year
period all billing and towing records for vehicles towed from private
and public parking lots as defined in this chapter and shall be required
to make available for inspection all such records to the Commissioner
or the Commissioner's designee upon demand.
J.
Booting. [Added 9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999]
Where the operator of a booting service places a booting device
on an unattended motor vehicle parked without authorization on
a privately owned real property under the direction of the owner
or an individual acting on behalf of the owner of such property,
said operator shall immediately notify the Police Department. Said
operator shall only be entitled to charge the owner of such motor
vehicle the maximum fee of $45 for the placement and removal of
such booting device. [Amended 5-9-2012, approved 5-10-2012]
(1)
No person shall boot or cause to have booted an unauthorized
motor vehicle from a private or public parking lot, as heretofore
defined, unless the following requirements have been complied
with:
A sign with minimum dimensions of three feet by three feet
shall be conspicuously posted at each entrance and exit to the
parking lot and where else the Commissioner deems necessary.
Each sign must contain the following information:
A statement that any car parked without authorization on
the premises shall be booted at the owner's expense.
[1]
The booting fee to be charged, which shall not exceed $45.
[Amended 5-9-2012, approved 5-10-2012]
[2]
The name, address and telephone number of booting
company, and how the boot can be removed.
[3]
(a)
(2)
K.
Removal of signs. [Added 10-8-2014, approved 10-9-2014]
Any premises that allows their permit to expire shall be required to
remove all signs from such lot(s) within 30 days of expiration.
(1)
A fine of $50 per month shall be imposed for failure to timely
remove all signage as required.
(2)
L.
§ 243-40 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-41
1:770
§ 243-41. Booting/immobilization. [Added 9-8-1999, approved
9-9-1999]
§ 243-42. Application for booting license; bond; records; booting
receipt. [Added 9-8-1999, approved 9-9-1999]
It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation to engage
in booting of vehicles within the City of Mount Vernon without having
in force a license therefor as herein provided.
A.
No person shall boot or cause to have booted an unauthorized motor
vehicle from a private or public parking lot, unless the following
requirements have been complied with:
A sign of with minimum dimensions of three feet by three feet shall
be conspicuously posted at each entrance and exit to the parking
lot and wherever else the Commissioner deems necessary. Each
sign must contain the following information:
A statement that any car parked without authorization on the
premises shall be booted at the owner's expense.
(a)
The booting fee to be charged, which shall not exceed $45.
[Amended 9-11-2013, approved 9-12-2013]
(b)
The name, address and telephone number of the booting
company, and how the boot can be removed.
(c)
(1)
B.
Every applicant for a booting license shall be subject to an examination
of criminal history information, including pending arrests and
convictions. Every application for a booting license shall file, together
with the application, fingerprints of both hands. The Commissioner
of Public Safety shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints
of the applicant, together with the required fees, to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services or other appropriate agency for processing
and investigation. No application for a booting license shall be
approved until after the commanding officer of the Criminal
Identification Unit in the Department of Public Safety has reviewed and
examined the criminal history information disseminated by the Division
of Criminal Justice Services. No applicant for a booting license shall be
denied by reason of an applicant having been previously convicted of
one or more criminal offenses, unless (1) there is a direct relationship
between the applicant's criminal conviction and the license sought, or
(2) the issuance of the license would involve an unreasonable risk to
property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general
public. [Amended 10-28-2015, approved 10-28-2015]
A.
An applicant for a license to engage in booting shall list on his or
her application for such license the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of each officer, director, principal, stockholder owning more
than 10% of the outstanding stock, or of each partner.
B.
§ 243-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-42
1:771
If an applicant for a license conducts business under a trade name or
the applicant is a partnership, the application must be accompanied by
a copy of the trade name or partnership certificate duly certified by
the Clerk of the county in whose office said certificate is filed. If the
applicant is a corporation, a copy of the filing receipt or certificate of
incorporation filed with and stamped by the New York State Secretary
of State must be submitted.
C.
An applicant for a license shall furnish in the application the address
where the licensee does business and maintains the records it is
required to keep.
D.
Bond required. As a condition of the issuance of a license to engage
in booting, each applicant for such license shall furnish, to the City
Clerk, a surety bond in the sum of $5,000, payable to the City of Mount
Vernon.
E.
A licensee shall maintain the following complete, accurate and legible
records and receipts to substantiate that vehicles booted are in
compliance with the above section. Records shall include:
The time of first sighting, when the vehicle was first observed
on the property, the vehicle's license plate number, physical
description of driver, when the driver vehicle/driver was observed
parked beyond the time period allowed or when the driver left the
parking lot establishments.
(1)
The log shall be maintained and be available for inspection on
the property to which the entries pertaining to where the alleged
violation occurred and where the vehicle was booted; otherwise,
the log shall be kept and be available for inspection at the principal
place of business of the licensee.
(2)
F.
Each licensee shall issue to the person in charge of a booted vehicle
a receipt that contains the information required by the following
subsections in the form and manner described below and shall retain
an identical copy of each such receipt in its records:
The booting receipt shall be a printed form that includes such
captions and blank spaces as are appropriate to insert the
information to be furnished concerning the booting of a vehicle.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, the printed text shall be in
no less than ten-point type in a color that is sharply set off from the
background color of the document. The information to be inserted
on the form shall be legibly hand printed on the original page with
indelible ink that is sharply set off from the background color of the
document.
(1)
The original and all duplicate pages of each receipt form shall
contain the following information and text in the order listed below:
(2)
G.
§ 243-42 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-42
1:772
The words "BOOTING RECEIPT" at the top of the page in
twelve-point boldface type.
(a)
A receipt identification number, which shall be issued in
sequence, shall be nonduplicative and shall be imprinted on
the original page and all duplicate pages of each such receipt.
(b)
The name, business address, business telephone number and
license number of the licensee who booted or who authorized
or directed an employee to boot the vehicle.
(c)
The address of the property where the vehicle was booted and
a description of the location of the vehicle on such property.
(d)
The vehicle license plate number, the vehicle identification
number, the make and color of the vehicle.
(e)
The words "THE VEHICLE WAS BOOTED:" in twelve-point
boldface type followed by a full and accurate description of the
facts that substantiate the failure to comply with the parking
rules posted on the property pursuant to this chapter; if the
failure to comply involves parking longer than the time period
permitted pursuant to the posted parking rules, or the driver
has exited the parking facility, the description shall include the
exact time, accurate to the nearest minute, when the parked
vehicle was first observed and when it was observed to be
parked beyond the posted, specified time period or the driver
left the parking complex.
(f)
The date and the exact time, accurate to the nearest minute,
when the vehicle was booted.
(g)
The amount of the charge for removing the boot, followed by
the statement identifying the credit cards that may be used for
payment.
(h)
The amount paid for the booting charge, the method of
payment, the date and the time, accurate to the nearest
minute, when the booting charge was paid and when the boot
was removed from the vehicle.
(i)
The name, identification badge number and initials of the
employee who attached and/or who removed the boot, and
the name, identification badge number and signature of the
authorized individual who accepted payment for the booting
charge, unless and if such vehicle is booted and/or such
payment for the booting charge is accepted by the licensee
himself or herself, in which case such receipt shall indicate the
licensee's personal name and initials.
(j)
The words "IMPORTANT NOTICE TO OPERATOR OF BOOTED
VEHICLE:" followed by the statement set forth herein: "THE
(k)
§ 243-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-42
1:773
CHARGE FOR BOOTING AND/OR TOWING THE VEHICLE
CANNOT BE MORE THAN THE AMOUNT SHOWN ON THE
SIGNS POSTED ON THIS PROPERTY. A CAR CAN BE BOOTED
AND A CHARGE IMPOSED ONLY IF THE VEHICLE WAS
PARKED IN VIOLATION OF THE POSTED PARKING RULES.
A BOOTING LICENSEE MUST STATE IN THIS NOTICE THE
FACTS THAT SUBSTANTIATE HOW THE POSTED PARKING
RULES WERE VIOLATED. SEE THE BACK OF THIS FORM
FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR RIGHTS."
The name of the owner or lessee of the property on which
the vehicle was booted and the address and telephone number
where such owner can be reached during normal business
hours.
(l)
The name and address of the Department, which is to be
identified as the licensing agency, and the telephone number
where booting complaints can be filed with the Department.
(m)
The booting fee to be charged, which shall not exceed $45.
[Amended 9-11-2013, approved 9-12-2013]
(n)
§ 243-42 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 243-42
1:774
Chapter 246
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 186.
— See Ch.
Zoning — See Ch. 267.
§ 246-1. Parking restriction.
No person shall park any trailer or house car used for living or sleeping
quarters within the City except in a duly licensed automobile trailer camp.
§ 246-2. Location of trailer camps restricted.
Duly licensed automobile trailer camps shall be permitted only within an
industrial district as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mount
Vernon.102
§ 246-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER CAMP OR PARK — Any plot of ground where
accommodation is provided for one or more automobile trailers or house
cars used or arranged to be used for living or sleeping quarters.
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER OR HOUSE CAR — Any vehicle used or arranged
to be used for living or sleeping quarters, mounted on wheels and movable
or propelled either by its own power or drawn by another power-driven
vehicle.
UNIT — That portion of an automobile trailer camp set apart for the use of
an individual automobile trailer or house car.
§ 246-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate or conduct
within the City of Mount Vernon any automobile trailer camp unless duly
licensed so to do as hereinafter provided and except in strict compliance
with this chapter and all other provisions of law and ordinances applicable
thereto.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 243-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-5
1:775
§ 246-5. Application for automobile trailer camp license;
application fee.
An application for a license shall be made in triplicate to the City Clerk
upon forms to be furnished by him. Said application shall include or state
the name and address of the owner of the premises; the name and address
of the applicant and the nature and extent of his interest in the business
for which a license is desired; the location and plot plan of the automobile
trailer camp and the number of units to be provided for therein; three sets
of detailed plans and specifications of all buildings, structures, plumbing,
sewer and drainage systems and lighting; and any other information which
may be required by the City Clerk. Such application shall be accompanied
by a fee of $25, which shall cover the required investigation, and whether or
not a license is issued, such investigation fee shall be retained by the City.
§ 246-6. Required approvals.
The City Clerk shall refer such application, together with the plans and
specifications, to the Commissioner of Health, Fire Commissioner,
Commissioner of Public Safety and Commissioner of Public Works for their
approval, and no license shall be issued without their approval.
§ 246-7. Camp requirements.
§ 246-8. Issuance of license; fee; expiration and renewal; display.
No automobile trailer or house car shall be less than 20 feet from any
other trailer or house car.
A.
No automobile trailer camp shall be less than 150 feet from any
property line or from any other building.
B.
No automobile trailer camp shall be less than 200 feet from a public
school, playground, public library, church, hospital, orphanage or
children's institution housing children under 16 years of age.
C.
No unit which accommodates an automobile trailer or house car shall
be less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area, which area shall be clearly
defined by markers on each corner.
D.
If such application is approved as hereinbefore provided, the City Clerk
shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of a fee of $10 per
unit.
A.
Each license or renewal thereof shall expire on May 1 next following its
issuance and may be renewed for a period of one year from the date
of expiration, after application and payment of the fee required in this
section.
B.
Such license shall always be on display in the office of the automobile
trailer camp.
C.
§ 246-5 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 246-9
1:776
§ 246-9. Entrances and exits; driveways.
All entrances and exits from any automobile trailer camp shall be well
marked and so arranged as not to constitute a traffic hazard. All driveways
within such camp shall be hard surfaced, not less than 18 feet in width, well
marked in the daytime and lighted at night and so located that each unit in
the camp is readily accessible to a driveway.
§ 246-10. Sanitary facilities.
Every automobile trailer camp shall be provided with toilets, urinals,
washbasins, slop basins, showers, water faucets, etc., in accordance with
the following:
One toilet for each sex for every five units or fraction thereof shall be
provided.
A.
B. Each toilet room for men shall have, in addition, one urinal stall.
Each toilet room shall have at least one sink or lavatory for every three
toilets or fraction thereof.
C.
One shower for each sex for each five units or fraction thereof shall be
provided. Bathtubs are prohibited.
D.
Laundry tubs and slop sinks or basins with water supply shall be
provided to serve each five units or fraction thereof.
E.
All toilets, sinks, showers, urinals, etc., shall be placed in properly
constructed buildings located not more than one 150 feet from each
unit intended to be served thereby.
F.
Toilet buildings shall be well lighted at all times, day and night, well
ventilated with screened openings and constructed of such
moistureproof material as shall permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning,
scouring and washing.
G.
The floors shall be of a concrete or similar material, elevated not less
than four inches above grade, and shall slope to a floor drain located in
each room.
H.
The use of toilets located in the automobile trailers or house cars is
prohibited.
I.
All plumbing installation, except as herein provided, shall be made
in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the City of Mount Vernon.
All toilets, sinks, basins and urinals, showers and other fixtures
discharging waste matter shall be properly trapped and connected with
the public sewer in such a manner as may be approved by the Health
Commissioner and the Plumbing Inspector.
J.
Only City water supply or other supply approved by the Health
Department of the City of Mount Vernon shall be used at any
K.
§ 246-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-10
1:777
§ 246-11. Drainage.
An automobile trailer camp shall be located on a well-drained site of
adequate size, the land of which shall be free from heavy or dense growth
of brush or weeds. The land shall be properly graded so as to ensure rapid
drainage during and following rain and free from stagnant pools of water.
§ 246-12. Fire extinguishers.
There shall be maintained in each automobile trailer camp at least one
approved fire extinguisher for every five units or part thereof.
§ 246-13. Management of camp; responsibilities of licensee.
automobile trailer camp. If a private supply is used, arrangements must
be made for a weekly bacteriological analysis by a laboratory approved
by the Health Department of the City of Mount Vernon, at the expense
of the licensee, and report thereof filed with said Health Department
within 24 hours of completion of analysis. There shall be at least one
tap for drinking purposes for every three units, and such taps shall be
so arranged and located as to be easily accessible to the occupants of
said units.
Where toilet and bathing facilities are provided for both sexes in the
same building, a tight, soundproof wall shall be constructed between
the male and female sections.
L.
A covered metal flytight garbage pail and a covered metal rubbish
container of adequate size shall be provided for each two units or part
thereof.
M.
Each toilet building shall be distinctly marked "MEN" or "WOMEN" in
accordance with the sex for which it is provided.
N.
Every automobile trailer camp shall be under the management of the
licensee, who must be of good reputation and character and who shall
manage such camp from an office located on the premises. There
shall be maintained in such office a bound book containing a record
of the names of any persons accommodated at the camp, their home
addresses, the time of their arrival and departure and the license
number and make of their automobile or other vehicle. Such record
shall at all reasonable times be available for inspection by any police
officer.
A.
It shall be the duty of the licensee of any such camp:
(1) To provide for the collection of garbage and other waste material.
To prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles
of any kind.
(2)
B.
§ 246-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 246-13
1:778
§ 246-14. Fire prevention regulations.
Every automobile trailer camp and automobile trailer shall comply with the
following rules and regulations of the Fire Department:
To provide for the cleaning, painting, repairing and disinfecting of
all buildings.
(3)
To take such other measures as shall be deemed necessary by
the Health Department of the City of Mount Vernon, Fire
Commissioner, Bureau of Buildings and the Commissioner of Public
Safety to preserve the health, comfort and safety of all persons
accommodated in the camp and of the general public.
(4)
To prevent any animal from running at large within or outside the
camp.
(5)
To report to the Health Department all cases of communicable
diseases or suspected cases of communicable diseases affecting
any inmate of the camp.
(6)
To prevent the committing of any nuisance on the camp premises
and to report immediately to the proper authorities all acts of a
disorderly character committed by any person or persons inside the
camp, and to that end to maintain proper policing thereof.
(7)
A. Cooking with gasoline stoves is prohibited.
Rubber hose or other flexible tubing is prohibited for use of conveying
fuel gases to any heater or stove.
B.
Wood-burning or coal-burning stoves must be equipped with spark
arresters.
C.
Vent pipes of heating appliances passing through a roof or side wall of
trailers must have at least one inch of clearance and must be entirely
surrounded by terra-cotta, asbestos or other approved type of thimble.
D.
No trailer camp shall burn rubbish and trash unless an approved type
of incinerator is used and is located not less than 15 feet from any
building, structure or trailer house.
E.
F. Storage of Class I liquids [flash point below 100° F.] is prohibited.
Storage of combustible material, such as hay, rags or junk, which may
create a fire hazard, is prohibited.
G.
There shall be a connection to the City water main with a two-inch pipe
minimum, with one-half-inch hose and nozzle, so arranged that it will
reach all parts of the trailer camp. Hose must be kept on a reel or rack
to protect it from the weather.
H.
All trailers must be arranged or located so that they may be moved from
the trailer camp quickly in an emergency.
I.
§ 246-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-15
1:779
§ 246-15. Changes rendering trailers subject to Building Code.
The removal of the wheels or any similar transporting device from an
automobile trailer or house car or the permanent attachment of such trailer
or car to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal
thereof and any alteration to any such trailer or car shall be construed as
removing it from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into
a dwelling subject to the requirements of the Building Code of the City of
Mount Vernon.
§ 246-16. Revocation of license.
The City Clerk may, upon his own initiative or upon the recommendation of
the Commissioner of Health, Commissioner of Public Safety, Commissioner
of Public Works or Fire Commissioner of the City of Mount Vernon, revoke
or suspend the license granted under authority of this chapter for a failure
to comply with any provision of this chapter or any laws or regulations
relating to any such camp.
§ 246-17. Electrical standards.
All electrical installation and work shall be made in accordance with the
Electrical Code of the City.103
§ 246-18. Compliance with other regulations.
No license shall be granted for the construction of any automobile trailer
camp in violation of the Zoning Ordinance104 or other ordinances of the City
of Mount Vernon.
§ 246-19. Fences.
Every automobile trailer camp containing five or more units shall be
enclosed with a suitable fence.
§ 246-20. Penalties for offenses.
The owner, lessee, licensee, occupant of or person accommodated in any
such camp who commits any act in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall each be liable for any such violation and for the penalty
therefor. Each day such violation shall continue or be permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate violation.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Electrical Standards.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 246-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 246-20
1:780
Chapter 249
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 145.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 227.
§ 249-1. Legislative intent.
The City Council finds that the itinerant or transient retail merchant poses a
special problem to the consumer of such merchant's wares. Because of the
transitory nature of this type of retailing, the consumer is unable, in many
instances, to satisfy a just claim against the transient vendor for the sale of
shoddy or misrepresented merchandise. Since the consumer has no way of
distinguishing a retail merchant who will be amenable to process because
of his relative permanency from the transient retailer who is not to be found
when the consumer seeks redress, this chapter has been enacted for the
protection of the consumer.
§ 249-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — One conducted in a store, hotel, house, building,
structure, lot or vacant land for the sale at retail of goods, wares and
merchandise, excepting services, food products and Christmas trees, and
which is intended to be conducted for a temporary period of time. If the
place in which such business is conducted is rented or leased for a period
of six months or less, or if there be no written lease, or if the lease gives
the tenant an option to terminate his tenancy before the expiration of a
six-month period, such fact or facts shall be presumptive evidence that the
business carried on therein is a "transient business."
§ 249-3. Application to conduct business.
Every person desiring to conduct a transient retail business in the City shall
present to the City Clerk a verified petition or application stating his name
and permanent address, the place where and the time during which such
business is to be conducted, the name and legal address of the person in
immediate charge, the type of merchandise to be dealt in and the value of
the opening inventory.
§ 249-4. Permit required.
Before any person shall commence the conduct of a transient retail business
as herein defined, such person shall obtain from the City Clerk a permit for
§ 246-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-4
1:781
such business, which permit shall state the place where such business is to
be conducted, the type of merchandise to be offered for sale and the period
of time covered by the permit. No license shall be issued for a period less
than one month, and such license may be renewable monthly for a maximum
period of six months within any one year.
§ 249-5. Cash deposit.
Before such permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk
the sum of $500 in cash, which shall be used as a fund for the satisfaction
of any judgments recovered by a purchaser against the transient retailer as
vendor, to be used as such only in the event such judgment and execution
thereon is returned fully or partly unsatisfied. The said deposit of $500
or any portion thereof remaining shall be turned over to the licensee six
months after the licensee shall have notified the Clerk in writing of the
termination of its business, provided that no vendee's summons, complaint
or unsatisfied judgment has been filed with the licensee or with the City
Clerk.
§ 249-6. Designation of City Clerk as agent for service of process.
No permit shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant transient retailer
shall designate, by a duly notarized and acknowledged document, the City
Clerk of the City of Mount Vernon as an agent of the retailer for the purpose
only of receiving a summons or other process of a civil nature and for the
purpose of paying, from the fund aforementioned in § 249-5, any judgment
as therein specified. Upon receipt of a summons or complaint or other civil
process, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee of the receipt of such by
registered letter addressed to the licensee at the address listed by the
licensee for such purpose.
§ 249-7. Notice of rental.
The owner, lessor, lessee or agent of any building, warehouse, yard, office,
office space, store or show- or salesroom which shall be rented to an
itinerant retail merchant or transient retail vendor shall report that fact to
the City Clerk within 24 hours after such renting, together with the name
of such itinerant merchant or transient vendor who shall rent or lease such
space, giving the exact location of such space as is rented or leased and the
terms thereof.
§ 249-8. Monthly fee.
The fee for a license granted under this chapter shall be $25 per month,
which shall be paid to the City Clerk before any license or renewal thereof
shall be issued.
§ 249-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and shall be fined a sum of not less than $100 nor more than $200
§ 249-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 249-9
1:782
for such violation and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 30 days. Any violation which continues beyond a twoday
period shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation for each day it
continues beyond said period.
§ 249-10. Severability.
In the event any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and
effect.
Chapter 252
TREES
§ 252-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to plant or set out any shade tree in or upon any part of
any public street or City park without first obtaining from the Commissioner
of Public Works a written permit so to do and without complying in all
respects with the conditions set forth in this chapter and in such written
permit.
§ 252-2. Cutting and pruning.
It shall be unlawful, without the written permit of the Commissioner of
Public Works, to cut, break, injure or misuse any tree or shrub planted
or growing in any park or public street, or to remove any device set for
the protection of any tree, shrub or plant in any public highway or City
park. Any person desiring for any lawful purpose to cut, prune or trim
any tree in any public highway shall apply to the Commissioner of Public
Works, and if in the judgment of said Commissioner the desired cutting,
pruning or trimming shall appear necessary and the proposed method
and workmanship thereof be such as said Commissioner approves, the
Commissioner of Public Works shall thereupon issue a written permit for
such work.
§ 252-3. Destruction or removal.
It shall be unlawful to kill or remove, or cause, authorize or procure the
death or removal of, any tree planted or growing in any public street, or any
tree or shrub planted or growing in any City park or public place, without
first making application to the Commissioner of Public Works and obtaining
a written permit therefor.
§ 252-4. Permitted trees.
The following trees only may be used for street tree planting: red oak,
Oriental sycamore, European linden, maidenhair tree, Norway maple, pin
§ 249-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-4
1:783
oak and scarlet oak. The Commissioner of Public Works may from time to
time add to or eliminate from the above list, in his discretion.
§ 252-5. Injurious substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or procure any brine
water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak,
pour, flow or drip on or into the soil about the base of a tree in any public
highway or City park or onto a sidewalk, road or pavement therein at a point
whence such substance may in any manner whatever injure such tree.
§ 252-6. Planting and maintenance.
§ 252-7. Interference with Public Works employees.
It shall be unlawful to interfere or cause or authorize any interference
with the Commissioner of Public Works or any of his employees, agents
or servants while they are engaged in and about the planting, cultivating,
pruning, spraying or removing of any tree in any public street or City
park, or in the removing of any device attached to said tree as may be
necessary for the protection and care of any such tree in accordance with
the requirements set forth under this chapter.
It shall be unlawful, except with the written permit of the Commissioner
of Public Works, to place or maintain upon the ground in any public
street or City park any stone, cement or other material or substance
in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to
the roots of any tree in any such street or park. Unless otherwise
provided for in such written permit as above provided for, there must be
maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public
streets and City parks at least six square feet of open ground for a tree
of three inches in diameter, and for every two inches of increase of such
diameter, there must be an increase of at least one square foot of open
ground. However, no violation of this section shall be deemed to exist
until 30 days after a specific written notice shall have been served by
the Commissioner of Public Works.
A.
No permit for planting trees shall be given where the clear space
between the curb and sidewalk is less than two feet; neither shall a
permit be given where the soil is too poor to ensure the growth of the
tree, unless the applicant or owner agrees to excavate a suitable hole
of not less than 36 cubic feet and to replace the material removed with
suitable good loam.
B.
Trees shall be planted at least 30 feet apart except where special
permit is obtained from the Commissioner of Public Works.
C.
No tree shall be planted measuring less than two inches in diameter of
trunk one foot above ground. The trunk of each tree shall be without
branches not less than seven nor more than 9 1/2 feet from the ground.
D.
§ 252-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 252-8
1:784
§ 252-8. Placement of wires and poles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or authorize a wire or other
conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree in a
public street or City park in such manner as may injure or destroy such
tree, or to locate, place or maintain any pole or post in such manner as to
interfere with any tree or shrub growing upon any public street, park or
public place.
§ 252-9. Protective devices and precautions.
§ 252-10. Damage by animals.
It shall be unlawful to tie any animal to any tree in any public street or City
park or to allow such animal to injure any tree.
§ 252-11. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Commissioner of Public
Works to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced and obeyed.
§ 252-12. Compliance with permit required.
Any work done under any written permit issued by the Commissioner
of Public Works must be performed in strict compliance with the terms
thereof.
§ 252-13. Control of infested trees, shrubs and bushes. [Added
12-22-1965, approved 12-23-1965]
It shall be unlawful to attach or keep attached to any tree in any public
street or City park or to any guard or stake intended for the protection
of such tree, any rope, wire or sign or any other device which may
injure the tree in any manner or detract from the usefulness of the
guard or stake.
A.
In case of improvements to any premises in front of which there are
shade trees, the owner and contractor making such improvements
shall protect the trunks of said trees to the height of five feet with
boards before such work is commenced, all to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner of Public Works.
B.
It shall be unlawful to permit or allow to remain in the City of Mount
Vernon any tree, shrub or bush or part thereof which is infested with
fungi, caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots, parasites, larvae or grub
of lepidopterous insects or other creeping segmented animals which
cause destruction of or damage to trees, shrubs or bushes and spread
by passing to other trees, shrubs or bushes, thereby causing
destruction of or damage to property of others and becoming a public
nuisance.
A.
§ 252-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-13
1:785
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have full power and authority
to require the owner of any tree in violation of Subsection A hereof
to take down said tree and remove the same. Upon notification by the
Commissioner as provided in Subsection C hereof, it shall be the duty of
the owner of any such infested tree, shrub or bush in the City to destroy
all such fungi, caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots, parasites, larvae
or grub of lepidopterous insects or other creeping segmented animals
which infest any tree, shrub or bush or part thereof on such land or to
destroy the infested tree, shrub or bush or part thereof.
B.
Removal by City; lien for costs. [Amended 1-25-1967, approved
1-26-1967; 4-12-1967, approved 4-13-1967]
In case the owner of any such tree, shrub or bush shall fail to
remove the same within 15 days after written notice so to do has
been served upon him either personally or by delivering the same
at his last known place of residence, or, if he be a nonresident,
by mailing the same to him at his last known place of residence,
or, if the name of the owner or his place of residence cannot
be ascertained after due diligence, by posting the same in a
conspicuous place upon the premises where the tree, shrub or bush
is found, the Commissioner of Public Works shall have said tree,
shrub or bush removed and destroyed.
(1)
The Commissioner of Public Works shall, upon the completion of
the work of such removal and destruction, send to the owner of the
property upon which said work has been done whose name appears
on the last assessment roll, a bill for the value of the work done if
the Department of Public Works does such work. In the event that
the Department of Public Works hires a private concern to do such
work, a bill for the actual amount charged by the private concern
for the work shall be sent to such owner. Such bill shall be sent
by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, which
bill shall be paid by such owner to the Comptroller.
(2)
In the event such bill is not paid by the owner within 15 days
after receipt by the owner, the Commissioner of Public Works shall,
with respect to each separately owned parcel of property where
such work has been done, certify such expense to the City Council
of the City of Mount Vernon. Such amount shall thereupon be
chargeable and become a lien upon such parcel of property and
shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner, by the
same proceedings and under the same penalties as an assessment
for a public improvement. In all cases where the Commissioner of
Public Works certifies expenses to the City Council pursuant to the
foregoing provision of this section, he shall simultaneously transmit
to the Comptroller a duplicate original of such certification, and the
Comptroller shall upon receipt thereof forthwith docket the amount
of such expense in the tax rolls against the real property affected,
with a notation "Assessment pending pursuant to § 252-13C of
Chapter 252 of the Code of the City of Mount Vernon."
(3)
C.
§ 252-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 252-13
1:786
Chapter 256
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 92. Parking lots — See Ch. 183.
§ 252-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-13
1:787

ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
[Adopted 12-10-1958 as Ch. 100 of the General Ordinances,
approved 12-18-1958]
§ 256-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Traffic Code."
§ 256-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this article are not
defined herein but are defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York or any other state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any
such definition shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in
this article.
BLOCK — That portion of any street between intersections.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Safety of the City of Mount
Vernon.
LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb and duly designated as
reserved for exclusive use of commercial vehicles during the loading or
unloading of freight.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.[Added 11-22-1961,
approved 11-24-1961]
PARKING SPACE — That part of any street or of any municipal parking area
designated by ordinance or regulation as a place for the parking of vehicles.
STAND or STANDING — The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers.[Added 11-22-1961, approved
11-24-1961]
STOP or STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.[Added 11-22-1961, approved 11-24-1961]
§ 256-3. Scope.
This article shall apply to all persons, all vehicles and all highways in the
City and to all other persons, objects or areas in the City coming within its
provisions.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-4
1:789
§ 256-4. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail
to perform any act required by this article or by any regulation duly
promulgated or required by the terms or restrictions of any official traffic
sign or signal erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this
article or otherwise by law.
§ 256-5. Speed limits; penalties for offenses.
§ 256-6. U-turns.
§ 256-7. Right turns on red traffic signals. [Added 1-12-1977,
approved 1-13-1977]
No driver of any motor vehicle or motorcycle shall drive or operate such
vehicle upon any highway of the City at a rate of speed in excess of 30
miles per hour, except that where official signs are posted indicating a
lesser or greater speed, the speed shall not exceed the rate so posted.
[Amended 10-7-1964, approved 10-8-1964]
A.
The violation of the preceding Subsection A shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 30
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for a conviction of a
first offense; by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or
by imprisonment for not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for conviction of a second offense committed within a
period of 18 months; by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$500 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 180 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, for conviction of a third or subsequent offense
committed within a period of 18 months. [Amended 11-8-1961,
approved 11-9-1961]
B.
No driver shall make a U-turn at any intersection or upon any street or
portion thereof where official signs are posted declaring that such turns
are prohibited.
A.
No U-turn, where permitted, shall be made at a time or in such manner
as to interfere with the right-of-way of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B.
No driver shall make a right turn at an intersection upon a red signal
from the traffic device where official signs are posted declaring that
such turns are prohibited.
A.
No right turn upon a red signal from a traffic device, where permitted,
shall be made at a time or in such a manner as to interfere with the
right-of-way of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B.
The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized to cause to be
erected, from time to time, signs prohibiting right turns upon a red
traffic signal at those intersections throughout the City where, in his
discretion, such signs are required for the safety of schoolchildren and
C.
§ 256-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-7
1:790
§ 256-8. Fire drill lines.
No person shall drive through nor interfere with, hinder, obstruct or impede
in any way whatsoever any line of persons during a fire drill.
§ 256-8.1. Valid registration and license plates. [Added 6-26-1991,
approved 6-27-1991]
No person shall park a vehicle on a public highway or in a parking space
located within the City unless said vehicle bears:
§ 256-9. Parking prohibited in certain areas.
§ 256-10. Parking during snow emergencies; penalties for offenses.
[Added 11-22-1961, approved 11-24-1961; amended 12-14-1966,
approved 12-15-1966]
senior citizens or where such turns would create a traffic hazard. Such
signs may be erected pursuant to § 1111(d)2 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
A list, certified by the Commissioner of Public Safety, of all intersections
within the City where signs prohibiting a right turn on red traffic
signals have been erected, shall be filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk
of the City Court and the Corporation Counsel.
D.
A valid registration, properly affixed to and displayed upon said vehicle
pursuant to the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law; and
A.
Valid license plates, properly affixed to and displayed upon said vehicle
pursuant to the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any emergency access
area or cleaning area as defined by the Code of the City of Mount
Vernon.
A.
No person other than an operator of a duly licensed taxicab shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle in any area defined by the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon as a "taxicab stand."
B.
Whenever snow falls in the City of Mount Vernon during any period
of 24 hours or less to a depth of three inches or more, the same shall
be considered a public emergency in that such storm constitutes a
serious public hazard, impairing transportation of people, food and fuel
supplies, impairing medical care, fire, health and police protection and
other vital services and facilities of the City. Such emergency is hereby
declared to continue until snow removal operations have been declared
substantially completed by the Commissioner of Public Works.
A.
Parking restrictions in aid of snow removal. It shall be unlawful to delay,
hinder or obstruct any vehicle or equipment engaged in the operation
of snowplowing or snow removal on the streets of the City of Mount
B.
§ 256-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-10
1:791
§ 256-11. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles; penalties for
offenses. [Added 12-14-1966, approved 12-15-1966]
Vernon. It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park or to permit to remain
standing, stopped or parked any vehicle upon any street of the City of
Mount Vernon, New York, while such street is being cleared of snow.
Impounding unattended or illegally parked vehicles. Whenever during
such snowstorms or during floods, fires or other public emergencies a
vehicle is found on any street parked or unattended so as to constitute
obstruction to traffic or snow removal operations, fire-fighting
equipment and other emergency-fighting equipment or where stopping,
standing or parking is prohibited, such vehicle or vehicles may be
removed or conveyed by or under the direction of the Department of
Public Works or the Fire Department, by means of towing the same
or otherwise, to such place where such vehicle or vehicles shall not
obstruct traffic, snow removal operations or fire-fighting operations.
Such removal shall be at the risk of the owner of such vehicle.
C.
Penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation, or any officer,
member, agent, servant or employee of any firm, partnership or
corporation, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a traffic infraction as defined by the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(1)
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any
of the provisions of this section shall, for a first conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
for a second such conviction within 18 months thereafter, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by
imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18
months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2)
D.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 2-8-1967, approved 2-9-1967]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every type of motor vehicle, as defined in
the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, operated or driven upon
a public highway used for business purposes.[Amended 4-8-1998,
approved 4-9-1998]
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, except
adjacent to a business establishment where vehicles are waiting to load
A.
§ 256-10 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-11
1:792
§ 256-12. Towing, removal and impoundment of vehicles; penalties
for offenses. [Added 1-14-1970, approved 1-19-1970]
or unload merchandise or passengers in the course of normal business
operations where such business is located.
The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to
erect signs at each and every entrance to the City of Mount Vernon,
indicating no parking for all vehicles over the weight of 5,500 pounds
and commercial vehicles on any public highway in the City of Mount
Vernon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. When official
signs prohibiting parking are erected at the entrances to the City of
Mount Vernon as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle
over the weight of 5,500 pounds or a commercial vehicle upon any
street in the City of Mount Vernon in violation of such signs. [Amended
4-8-1998, approved 4-9-1998]
B.
The provisions of this section prohibiting parking of vehicles between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall not relieve any person from
the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting
the parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
C.
Penalties. [Amended 5-10-1972, approved 5-11-1972]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation, or any officer,
member, agent, servant or employee of any firm, partnership or
corporation, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a traffic infraction as defined by the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(1)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section may, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with penalties as fixed by
the City Judge of the City of Mount Vernon, provided that such
penalties are within the limits established as penalties for such
offense or infraction.
(2)
D.
The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized to cause to be
removed or to provide for the towing away or removal of vehicles, at
the risk of the owner, to a garage, automobile pound or other place of
storage within the City, as follows:
Any vehicle parked or abandoned on any street or part thereof
designated a snow emergency route when such street or part
thereof is closed to traffic or upon which parking of vehicles is
prohibited, restricted or limited by direction of the Mayor or
Commissioner of Public Safety during a snowstorm or in order to
remove snow from or plow such street or part thereof.
(1)
Any vehicle stopped or standing unattended on any street or
highway within the City so as to obstruct traffic.
(2)
A.
§ 256-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-12
1:793
During snowstorms, floods, fires or other emergency, any vehicle
abandoned on any street or highway of the City, illegally parked or
parked, stopped or standing contrary to the direction of a police
officer under Subdivision (a) or (b) of § 1602 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
(3)
Upon specific request of the owner or agent of the premises
affected, any vehicle parked or standing unattended on street or
highway within the City at the entrance to a driveway, public or
private, so as to obstruct or delay the ingress or egress of any
vehicle into or from such driveway. [Added 4-9-1975, approved
4-10-1975]
(4)
Any vehicle illegally parked or abandoned in a municipal parking
lot owned, leased or operated by the City of Mount Vernon and/
or the Mount Vernon Parking Authority. [Added 10-25-1978,
approved 10-26-1978]
(5)
Any vehicle, including trailers and semitrailers, found where
stopping, standing or parking is prohibited. [Added 3-10-1982,
approved 3-11-1982]
(6)
Any vehicle without a current, valid handicapped parking permit
as defined in § 256-27 of this chapter found stopping, standing or
parking in locations designated as handicapped parking spaces.
[Added 10-13-1982, approved 10-14-1982]
(7)
With respect to the parking areas and driveways of a hospital or
fire station or private condominium complex, parking area of a
shopping center and parking area and private streets or roadways
of a private apartment house complex, and upon the written
request of the owner, person in charge of the operation and control
of the area, or Fire Chief of the City, any vehicles: [Added
10-23-1985, approved 10-24-1985]
Parked or abandoned in any such area during snowstorms,
floods, fires or other public emergencies.
(a)
Found unattended in any such area where they constitute an
obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited.
(b)
(8)
Notice of removal and disposition. It shall be the duty of the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee to ascertain the identity
of the last registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him personally
or by registered or certified mail of the removal and disposition of such
vehicle and all the charges which must be paid by the owner to redeem
the same.
B.
Storage and charges; redemption. In addition to any other penalties
provided therefor: [Amended 4-23-1980, approved 4-24-1980;
3-10-1982, approved 3-11-1982; 3-9-1988, approved 3-10-1988]
C.
§ 256-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-12
1:794
§ 256-12.1. Authority to impound vehicles for delinquent parking
tickets. [Added 3-11-1987, approved 3-12-1987]
The owner or person in charge of a vehicle, excluding trailers and
semitrailers, which has been towed away or otherwise removed to
a garage, automobile pound or other place of storage may redeem
the same upon payment to the City towing contractor of a towing
or removal charge not to exceed $40, together with a charge for
storage, such storage charge not to exceed $5 per day for the
first five days and $10 per day for each day thereafter or fraction
thereof, and an additional charge of $25 for administrative costs
will be paid to the Department of Public Safety.
(1)
The owner or person in charge of a trailer or semitrailer which has
been towed away or otherwise removed to a garage, automobile
pound or other place of storage may redeem the same upon
payment to the City towing contractor of a towing or removal
charge not to exceed $100, together with a charge for storage,
such storage charge not to exceed $50 per day for the first five days
and $100 per day for each day thereafter or fraction thereof, and
an additional charge of $25 for administrative costs will be paid to
the Department of Public Safety.
(2)
Penalties. [Amended 5-10-1972, approved 5-11-1972]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation, or any officer,
member, agent, servant or employee of any firm, partnership or
corporation, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a traffic infraction as defined by the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(1)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section may, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with penalties as fixed by
the City Judge of the City of Mount Vernon, provided that such
penalties are within the limits established as penalties for such
offense or infraction.
(2)
D.
The Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby authorized to impound
any vehicle which has three or more outstanding or unpaid parking
violations issued against it and only such vehicle and which is found
operating or parked on any street within the City or any way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the public for purposes of
parking or vehicular traffic or on any property leased by or owned by
the City of Mount Vernon. [Amended 8-8-2012, approved 8-9-2012]
Any such vehicle may be towed away or removed, at the risk of
the owner, to a garage, automobile pound or other place of storage
within the City.
(1)
In addition to or in lieu of removal, any such vehicle may be
immobilized by use of a device or other mechanism which will
(2)
A.
§ 256-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-12.1
1:795
cause no damage to such vehicle unless moved when such device
or mechanism is in place. In any case involving immobilization
of a vehicle pursuant to this section, the Commissioner of Public
Safety shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous
manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual of the effect that
any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such
vehicle.
Notice of impoundment and disposition. It shall be the duty of the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee, within 48 hours, to
make every effort to ascertain the identity of the last registered owner
and to notify him personally or by registered or certified mail of the
immobilization, removal and disposition of such vehicle and all charges
which must be paid by the owner to redeem the same.
B.
Release of vehicle.
Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle impounded
pursuant to this section shall be allowed to repossess or secure the
release of said vehicle, the owner or his agent shall pay:
All sums legally due the City for parking violations issued and
outstanding against such vehicle.
(a)
All sums due for towing and storage pursuant to § 256-12C of
this article.
(b)
A fee of $25 for the application of the automobile restraining
device placed on such vehicle.
(c)
(1)
In lieu of payment, the owner or person in charge of such vehicle
may post a bond in an amount sufficient to provide security for the
payment of all fines and fees listed in this subsection.
(2)
No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or person in
charge of such vehicle has established his identity and right to
possession and has signed a proper receipt therefor. No such
vehicle shall be released to any person who does not have a valid
driver's license and an insurance identification card indicating
current insurance coverage for such vehicle.
(3)
C.
Penalty. If, after a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this section,
any person shall remove such vehicle without complying with
Subsection C or shall do any damage to the immobilization device, then
the owner of such vehicle and the person removing such vehicle or
doing such damage, in addition to any other fines or penalties provided
for under this section, shall be liable for any damage done to the
immobilization device or mechanism and shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $300. In the case of the registered owner, a rebuttable
presumption of guilt shall attach. Such presumption shall prevail until
the contrary is established, and the burden of proving the contrary shall
D.
§ 256-12.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-12.1
1:796
§ 256-12.2. Disposition of unclaimed towed vehicles. [Added
3-23-1994, approved 3-24-1994]
be placed on the registered owner.105 [Amended 8-8-2012, approved
8-9-2012]
Written notice.
If a vehicle, other than an abandoned vehicle as defined in the
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1224, Subdivision 1, remains unclaimed
for at least 15 days after being towed pursuant to the Traffic Code,
the Commissioner shall give written notice of removal to the last
registered owner and any lienholder of record of said unclaimed
towed vehicle, if such can be ascertained with reasonable
diligence, by certified and regular mail. Such notice shall state:
(a) The date of towing and the place of storage; and
That if the vehicle is not claimed within 15 days, it will be
sold at a public auction under the direction of the Comptroller
or the Comptroller's designee within 40 days from the date of
notice or otherwise placed in use by the Police Department as
the Commissioner may direct.
(b)
(1)
Notice of the auction shall be published in the official newspaper
of the City once at least five days prior to the auction. If the
Commissioner determines that a vehicle may be suitably used for
police purposes, he may direct that, in lieu of auction, the vehicle
be kept and used by the Police Department; however, no more than
two vehicles may be kept in any calendar year.
(2)
A.
Abandoned vehicles as herein defined in § 1224 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
that section.
B.
The proceeds from the sale of any vehicle sold as provided in this
section of the Code shall be applied first to the cost of sale; second,
against any towing charges; third, against any storage charges; and
fourth, to any and all unpaid outstanding summonses against the
vehicle and the registered owner thereof. In the event that the sale
proceeds exceed the above costs and charges, the excess shall be held
by the Comptroller, without interest, for the benefit of the owner for
a period not to exceed two years. Upon receipt of said funds, the
Comptroller shall notify the last registered owner and any lienholder of
record at the last address listed for said owner or lienholder with the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. If the proceeds remain
unclaimed after the two-year period, the proceeds shall be paid into the
general fund of the City.
C.
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding a post-impound hearing, was repealed
8-8-2012, approved 8-9-2012.
§ 256-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-13
1:797
§ 256-13. Bus stops.
§ 256-14. Loading zones.
No vehicle other than one duly licensed as a commercial vehicle shall be
parked or stopped in any area designated by official signs as a loading zone,
except in an emergency, at the direction of a police officer or in compliance
with the provisions contained in such official signs.
§ 256-15. Obstructing other vehicles.
No person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle in any street or at the
entrance to a driveway, public or private, so as to obstruct or delay the
lawful movement of any other vehicle which is lawfully parked or stopped
or the ingress or egress of any vehicle into or from such driveway.
§ 256-16. Presumptive evidence.
Proof of the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle contrary to the
provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence that the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered is the person who so parked, stopped
or left standing such vehicle contrary to such provisions.
§ 256-17. Parking meters and parking meter zones.
All buses shall stop only at duly designated bus stops for receiving
or discharging passengers except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
A.
When stopping at a bus stop, a bus shall be stopped as near the curbing
as possible, with the bus parallel to the curb.
B.
A bus entering a bus stop shall proceed, as far as is practicable, to the
far end of the bus stop before stopping.
C.
No vehicle other than a duly licensed bus shall be parked, stopped or
permitted to stand in any part of an area designated as a bus stop.
D.
General.
The phrase "parking meter zones" as used in this article shall mean
such areas or places on highways, streets and municipally owned
or leased off-street parking areas or parts thereof where, pursuant
to ordinance or duly promulgated regulations, parking meters are
installed, operated, maintained, policed and supervised, and where
the payment of a fee for the privilege of parking is fixed and
required.
(1)
All prior ordinances and regulations creating, designating or
changing parking meter zones, effective prior to the effective date
of this article, are hereby expressly confirmed, authorized and
continued in effect.
(2)
A.
§ 256-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-17
1:798
Any parking meter zone created, eliminated or changed after the
effective date of this article shall become effective in accordance
with the provisions of such ordinance or regulation. The City Clerk
shall file certified copies of such ordinance or regulation with the
Traffic Bureau of the Department of Public Safety and the Clerk of
the Court of Special Sessions.
(3)
Parking meter spaces.
No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking meter
space during the restricted or regulated time applicable to the
parking meter zone in which such meter is located so that any part
of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
upon the designated space, except that a vehicle of a size too
large to be parked within a single designated parking meter space
shall be permitted to occupy two adjoining parking meter spaces,
provided that coins shall have been deposited in the parking meter
for each space so occupied, as is required by ordinance for the
parking of other vehicles in such space.
(1)
No person shall park a second vehicle in a parking meter space
which is already occupied by another vehicle.
(2)
B.
Deposit of coins; time limits.
No person shall park his vehicle in any parking space alongside of
and next to which a parking meter has been installed during the
restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone
in which such meter is located unless a coin or coins of United
States currency of the appropriate denomination as provided by
ordinance establishing such parking meter zones shall have been
deposited therein, or shall have been previously deposited therein
for an unexpired interval of time, and said meter shall have been
placed in operation.
(1)
No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in
any such parking meter space during the restricted or regulated
time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter
is located while the parking meter for such space indicates by
signal that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. This
provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the necessary time
which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins
in such meters.
(2)
No person shall park a vehicle in any such parking meter space
for a consecutive period of time longer than that limited period
of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking
meter zone in which such meter is located irrespective of the
number or amount of the coins in such meters. Each hour beyond
the initial period lawfully permitted hereunder during which the
parked vehicle remains in the metered parking space shall
(3)
C.
§ 256-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-17
1:799
§ 256-18. Nonmetered off-street municipal parking areas.
constitute a separate violation of this section and shall be
punishable accordingly. [Added 4-8-1959106]
The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from
the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of any
ordinance or of the State Vehicle and Traffic Law prohibiting or
limiting stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified
places or at specified times.
(4)
Slugs. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking
meter any slug, button or any other device or substance as substitutes
for coins of United States currency.
D.
Tampering with meters. No person shall deface, injure, tamper with,
open or willfully break, destroy, interfere with or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter.
E.
All prior ordinances and regulations creating, designating and
regulating off-street parking areas or providing for the issuance of
permits are hereby expressly confirmed and continued in effect. Any
ordinance enacted after the effective date of this article which creates,
eliminates or varies the terms and conditions governing parking in such
area or areas shall become effective in accordance with the provisions
of such ordinance. The City Clerk shall file certified copies of such
ordinance or regulation with the Traffic Bureau of the Department of
Public Safety and the Clerk of the Court of Special Sessions.
A.
The privilege of parking vehicles in such areas is permitted, provided
that the owners of such vehicles exhibit an identification decal
displayed in the rear side window on the driver's side of the vehicle.
The identification decal shall be duly issued by the Parking Bureau of
the Department of Public Safety upon proper proof and identification
and payment of the applicable fee as provided by ordinance. [Amended
1-25-1995, approved 1-26-1995]
B.
No person shall at any time park any vehicle in such area without first
having obtained a City identification marker or sticker as provided in
Subsection B of this section.
C.
Proof of stopping, standing or parking in such area of a vehicle contrary
to the provisions of this section or of any other section of this article
or of any other applicable ordinance or regulation shall be deemed
presumptive evidence that the person in whose name such motor
vehicle is registered is the person who unlawfully so parked, stopped or
left standing such vehicle.
D.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance was returned by the Mayor without signature or comment
4-9-1959.
§ 256-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-19
1:800
§ 256-19. One-way streets.
All ordinances of the City Council designating particular streets as oneway
streets, effective prior to the effective date of this article, are hereby
expressly confirmed and continued in effect. Any ordinances of the City
Council enacted after the effective date of this article which create,
eliminate or vary an existing one-way street shall become effective in
accordance with the provisions of such ordinance. The City Clerk shall
file certified copies of such ordinances with the Traffic Bureau of the
Department of Public Safety and the Clerk of the Court of Special Sessions
of the City.
§ 256-20. Municipal Housing Authority property. [Added
11-24-1965, approved 11-26-1965]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with duly
adopted rules and regulations of the Mount Vernon Municipal Housing
Authority limiting the parking or standing of vehicles displayed on signs
installed on Mount Vernon Municipal Housing Authority property. Violations
of this section shall be punishable as provided in § 256-23 of this article.
Mount Vernon Housing Authority guards are hereby designated as special
policemen with power to enforce the rules and regulations of the Mount
Vernon Municipal Housing Authority relative to limiting the parking or
standing of vehicles and to issue summonses for violations thereof.
§ 256-21. Powers of Commissioner of Public Safety.
The Commissioner shall have the power to establish bus stops,
forbidden zones, loading zones and limited parking upon all the streets
and public places in the City and, from time to time, in his discretion,
to change and relocate such bus stops, forbidden zones, loading zones
and limited parking upon all the streets and public places in the City;
to install and maintain traffic signal lights and stop signs at any street
intersection in the City; in his discretion, to change the location or
intersection at which such traffic signal lights and stop signs may be
located, all to promote the safe regulation of traffic upon all streets and
public places in the City; and to make special regulations to safeguard
traffic in emergencies, during public celebrations or during unusual
events.
A.
The Commissioner shall cause to be erected appropriate signs for the
regulation of traffic and for the regulation of parking. All signs now
posted or erected by the Commissioner of Public Safety and all signs
hereafter posted or erected by the Commissioner of Public Safety shall
be considered as posted and erected under the authority granted by
this article. Any violation of the directions contained upon any sign
posted or erected pursuant to this article by the Commissioner of Public
Safety shall be prosecuted as a violation of this article.
B.
§ 256-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-21
1:801
§ 256-22. Traffic Violations Bureau.
The Commissioner shall not, however, have power to make or establish
one-way streets, nor shall be have the power to establish or regulate
metered parking zones, districts or areas.
C.
A copy, certified by the Commissioner, of any regulation, except special
regulations as hereinbefore provided, shall be filed with the City Clerk
and the Clerk of the Court of Special Sessions.
D.
The Judge of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby authorized and
directed to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in
the disposition of offenses and traffic infractions arising out of traffic
violations. The Bureau shall be under the supervision of such person or
persons and shall be open to the public at such hours as said Judge may
designate.
A.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is authorized to dispose of such traffic
offenses and infractions as directed by the Judge, by permitting a
person charged with an offense or infraction, within the limitations
herein stated, to answer within a specified time at the Bureau, either
in person or by written power of attorney, paying a prescribed fine
and, in writing, waiving a hearing in Court, pleading guilty to the
charge and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make
such plea and to pay such fine as prescribed by the Judge. Acceptance
of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be
deemed a complete disposition of such charge. If a person charged with
a traffic violation does not answer as hereinbefore prescribed within
the designated time, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered
against him forthwith and shall apply for a warrant to be issued for his
arrest and appearance before the Court. The Bureau shall not deprive a
person of his right to counsel or prevent him from exercising his right to
appear in Court to answer to, explain or defend any charge of violating
any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
B.
The Judge of the City Court of Mount Vernon shall designate the fines
to be paid for first, second and third traffic offenses or infractions
which may be satisfied at the Bureau as hereinbefore stated, provided
that such fines are within the limits established as penalties for such
offenses or infractions.
C.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all fines collected
and the disposition thereof. It shall also perform such other or
additional duties and keep such other or additional records as shall be
prescribed by the Court and/or the City Council of the City of Mount
Vernon.
D.
§ 256-21 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-23
1:802
§ 256-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1986, approved
3-13-1986]
Any person violating any provision of this article, except as otherwise
provided herein, or of any other ordinance, order, rule or regulation adopted
pursuant to this article or otherwise, shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the following punishment:
§ 256-24. Repealer.
Chapter 100 of the General Ordinances, known as the "Traffic Code,"
adopted by ordinance of the City Council on November 13, 1957, approved
by the Mayor on November 15, 1957, effective on January 1, 1958, and
which ordinance was previously known and designated as Chapter XXXIV
and entitled "Regulation of Street Traffic," effective September 1, 1937, and
as amended, is hereby repealed, except as otherwise expressly provided
in this article, and new Chapter 100 of the General Ordinances is hereby
enacted in its stead, to be known and cited as the "Traffic Code."107
§ 256-25. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately.
For the first conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A.
For a second such conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $150 or by imprisonment
for not more than 45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B.
Upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after the first
conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
C.
107. Editor's Note: Chapter 100 of the General Ordinances has become Article I, Traffic
Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 256-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-25
1:803

ARTICLE II
Physically Handicapped Drivers
[Adopted 7-11-1979 as Ch. 100-A of the General Ordinances,
approved 7-12-1979]
§ 256-26. Legislative intent.
Strict compliance with provisions for traffic regulations set forth elsewhere
in the Traffic Ordinance of the City of Mount Vernon108 creates hardships
requiring special treatment of physically handicapped persons as a class,
in the interest of humanity and the obligation of the City to provide for the
general welfare of the people.
§ 256-27. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
EMERGENCY PURPOSE — Includes but is not limited to any use of a motor
vehicle by the permit holder for the purposes of obtaining medical or dental
treatment or physical therapy.
HANDICAPPED PARKING PERMIT — A permit issued in accordance with
§ 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, containing the words "handicapped
parking permit," the International Access Symbol and the vehicle's license
plate number substantially in conformance with the sample annexed hereto
and made a part hereof.109 Applications for this permit may be obtained
from the office of the Commissioner of Public Safety.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON — A person who has a permanent
disability which affects his or her mobility to the extent that walking a
long distance is a hardship, such as paraplegia, quadriplegia, hemiplegia,
cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, osteogenesis
imperfecta, scoliosis, severe cardiac disease or other impairment causing
difficulty or insecurity in walking or requiring the use of braces, crutches
or artificial supports, or impairment caused by amputation, arthritis, spastic
condition or cardiac ills rendering the individual semiambulatory.
§ 256-28. Waiver of parking fees; locations of handicapped parking
spaces.
The locations to be used for handicapped parking will be designated
by a sign or placard. The Commissioner of Public Safety may, at his
discretion, designate locations for the purpose of handicapped parking
other than those specified hereafter, subject to the approval of the City
Council and the provisions of this article. Use of these spaces shall be
limited to emergency purposes as defined in § 256-27 of this article.
[Amended 6-23-1993, approved 6-24-1993]
A.
108. Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: The sample referred to is on file in the office of the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
§ 256-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-28
1:805
The locations to be designated as handicapped parking spaces are as
follows:
North Seventh Avenue, opposite Mount Vernon Hospital's main
entrance: the first meter (No. 1295) south of the driveway leading
to the third floor of the municipal parking lot.
(1)
Stevens Avenue, front of 105 Stevens Avenue: the first meter (No.
1233) east of driveway leading to 105 Stevens Avenue parking lot.
(2)
North side of Stevens Avenue in front of Five Stevens Avenue.
[Amended 6-12-1996, approved 6-13-1996]
(3)
South Fifth Avenue, opposite 122 South Fifth Avenue, east side of
street: the first meter (No. 0729) north of the driveway leading to
the Health Center parking lot.
(4)
Locust Street, Meter No. 0484, on the east side, in front of 694
Locust Street. [Amended 1-27-1982, approved 1-28-1982]
(5)
Gramatan Avenue, front of 175 Gramatan Avenue: the first meter
(No. 0301) south of the driveway leading to Municipal Parking Lot
No. 2.
(6)
Fourth Avenue, Meter No. 0036, on the east side, in front of 32
Fourth Avenue.110 [Amended 1-27-1982, approved 1-28-1982]
(7)
South Fifth Avenue: one space running 20 feet in length,
commencing 50 feet north of West Third Street on the westerly side
of South Fifth Avenue. [Added 3-11-1981, approved 3-12-1981]
(8)
South First Avenue, opposite 22 South First Avenue, east side
of street: Meter No. 0929. [Added 5-27-1981, approved
5-28-1981]
(9)
South Second Avenue, opposite 50 South Second Avenue, east side
of street, in front of "Children" entrance to Public Library: no
meter. [Added 5-27-1981, approved 5-28-1981]
(10)
Commencing at a point 118 feet from the northeast corner of
Gramatan Avenue and Oakley Avenue and continuing easterly for a
distance of 57 feet along the northerly curb. [Added 9-14-1983,
approved 9-15-1983]
(11)
Gramatan Avenue, opposite 552 Gramatan Avenue, starting from
a point 89 feet from the southeast corner of the intersection of
Gramatan Avenue and East Broad Street along the easterly curb
of Gramatan Avenue for a distance of 22 feet south. [Added
(12)
B.
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(8), which designated Roosevelt Square South, Meter
No. 1307, as a handicapped parking space and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 6-11-1991, approved 6-12-1991; former Subsection B(9) through
(14) was renumbered as Subsection B(8) through (13), respectively.
§ 256-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-28
1:806
§ 256-29. Spaces reserved in City parking facilities.
10-26-1983, approved 10-27-1983; amended 4-10-1985,
approved 4-11-1985]
South Sixth Avenue: two spaces in front of Doles Community
Center, 250 South Sixth Avenue. [Added 2-26-1986, approved
2-27-1986]
(13)
South Fourth Avenue, opposite 101 South Fourth Avenue, east
side of street: Meter No. 4097. [Added 8-14-1991, approved
8-15-1991]
(14)
60 South Third Avenue, west side of street: Meter No. S3038.
[Added 1-13-1993; approved 1-14-1993]
(15)
148 Fourth Avenue, west side of street, Meter No. S3038. [Added
4-15-1993, approved 4-15-1993]
(16)
East side of North Fifth Avenue just north of West Prospect Avenue.
[Added 4-28-1993, approved 4-29-1993]
(17)
North MacQueston Parkway, at West Grant Street, northeast
corner: Meter No. 30. [Added 12-27-1995, approved
12-28-1995]
(18)
The locations to be designated as combat wounded parking spaces are
as follows: [Added 12-14-2016, approved 12-23-2016]
(1) Mount Vernon City Hall (Stevens Avenue side entrance).
Mount Vernon Police Headquarters (North Fifth Avenue side,
northwest corner).
(2)
(3) Doles Center, South Sixth Avenue parking lot.
C.
The Mount Vernon Parking Authority is authorized to set aside 15
spaces for the use of vehicles displaying a current, valid handicapped
parking permit as defined in § 256-27 of this article. The space allocated
for handicapped parking must be clearly designated by sign or placard.
The period of use of these spaces must not exceed three hours.
[Amended 6-26-1985, approved 6-27-1985; 5-28-1986, approved
5-29-1986]
A.
The locations to be designated as handicapped parking spaces are
as follows: [Amended 6-26-1985, approved 6-27-1985; 5-28-1986,
approved 5-29-1986]
B.
§ 256-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-29
1:807
§ 256-30. Penalties for offenses.
The fraudulent procurement or use of any permit, sticker, stamp or other
identifying device issued pursuant to or identified in this article, or the
use of any handicapped parking permit in the City of Mount Vernon after
same has been canceled or while same is suspended, shall be a violation
punishable by a maximum fine of $150 or up to 15 days' imprisonment, or
both.
Number Location Spaces Allotted
1 (South Fifth Avenue) On South Fifth Avenue
between First Street and
Second Street
1
2 (178 Gramatan
Avenue)
On Gramatan Avenue
between North Third
Avenue and Gramatan
Avenue
2
3 (South Third
Avenue)
On South Third Avenue
between Second Street
and Third Street
1
5A (City Hall Parking
Lot)
Outer quadrangle behind
City Hall
1
6 (Roosevelt Square
Garage)
On Roosevelt Square
North between North
Sixth Avenue and North
Seventh Avenue
3
8 (North Third Avenue
Garage)
On East Sidney Avenue
between Gramatan Avenue
and North Third Avenue
2
16 (Fleetwood Parking
Plaza)
On Broad Street between
Fleetwood Avenue and
Gramatan Avenue
4
18 (Crary Avenue) On Crary Avenue near
corner of East Sidney
Avenue
1
Parking, stopping or standing in any location designated as a
handicapped parking space by any vehicle not displaying a current,
valid handicapped parking permit as defined in § 256-27 of this article
is prohibited and a violation of this subsection and shall be punishable
by a maximum fine of $50. [Added 10-13-1982, approved
10-14-1982]
C.
§ 256-29 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 256-31
1:808
§ 256-31. Severability.
In the event any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this article shall
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining
provisions shall not be affected thereby.
§ 256-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-31
1:809
Chapter 260
WINDOW CLEANING
§ 260-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of window
cleaning in the City without first having obtained therefor a license from the
City Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 260-2. License application and approval. [Amended 4-13-1989,
approved 4-13-1989]
All applications for licenses shall be made by the applicant on forms
to be provided by the City Clerk. Said applicant shall set forth the
name, business and residence addresses of the applicant; the names
and residence addresses of the officers or partners if the applicant is a
corporation or partnership. Said applicant shall furnish a photograph,
in triplicate form, one of which shall be filed with the Police
Department, of the applicant and/or any officers or partners. Any
changes in the residence addresses must be promptly reported to the
City Clerk.
A.
Every applicant for a license shall file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
his/her supervision by a senior police officer, and at such a place as
the Commissioner shall designate. The Commissioner of Public Safety
shall have the authority to submit the fingerprints of the applicant,
together with the required fees, to the Division of Criminal Justice
Services or other appropriate agency for processing and investigation.
No application for a window cleaning license shall be approved nor
any license issued under the provisions of this chapter until after the
commanding officer of the Bureau of Criminal Identification in the
Department of Public Safety has reviewed and examined the criminal
history record information disseminated by the Division of Criminal
Justice Services. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has
been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving violence,
dishonesty or deceit.
B.
In the case of a firm or corporation, each member of said firm and
each officer of said corporation shall be deemed an applicant, and the
provisions of this chapter relating to an applicant shall apply to and be
complied with by each and every member of said firm and each and
every officer of said corporation.
C.
In the event that any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of window cleaning causes the work to be performed by others
than the individuals themselves, each and every employee shall furnish
D.
§ 256-31 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 260-2
1:810
§ 260-3. License fee. [Amended 12-26-1968, approved 12-27-1968]
The City Clerk shall charge and receive a license fee of $15 from each
individual engaged in the business of window cleaning.
§ 260-4. Badges.
In addition to obtaining the above license and paying the fee therefor, each
person engaged in the work of window cleaning and duly licensed shall
obtain from the City Clerk a badge containing the words "Licensed Window
Cleaner," together with the year for which he shall be licensed, which badge
shall be at all times conspicuously worn and displayed by said person while
engaged in window cleaning, and which badge shall be surrendered to the
City Clerk in the event that said license shall be revoked or said person shall
cease to be engaged in the business of window cleaning.
§ 260-5. Insurance.
Before the issuance of a license by the City Clerk, he shall require
satisfactory proof that the applicant or his firm is insured against any and all
liability for any accident in the minimum amount of $50,000 for injury to or
death of one person and the sum of $100,000 for all liability arising from any
one accident. In addition, the City Clerk shall require proof that workmen's
compensation insurance coverage has been obtained in those cases where
it is required.
§ 260-6. Content of license.
Each license issued by the City Clerk shall contain the seal of the City
impressed upon at least a portion of the photograph of the licensee, and the
countersignature of the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 260-7. Emergency help.
Any licensed employer hereunder requiring additional temporary help for
an emergency job, upon the written approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety or the Chief Inspector of Police when authorized so to do by said
Commissioner in writing, may employ same for a period not exceeding five
days.
§ 260-8. Expiration of license.
Each license issued hereunder, except temporary licenses, shall expire at
12:00 midnight on December 31 next after the date of issuance thereof.
to the Commissioner of Public Safety the information hereinabove
required and obtain a license as herein provided.
§ 260-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:811
§ 260-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
The City Clerk shall immediately suspend or revoke any license issued
hereunder, as the case may be, upon receiving such direction of the
Commissioner of Public Safety so to do.
Chapter 263
WRECKERS, AUTO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157. Tow trucks — See Ch. 243
§ 263-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTO WRECKERS — Persons engaged in the business of collecting, storing,
processing or stripping wrecked automobiles or automobiles, whether or
not in running condition for the purpose of salvaging or selling the parts
thereof. The term "auto wrecker" shall also include auto and auto body
repair shops which purchase and store wrecked automobiles for the
purpose of salvaging and selling or using the parts thereof.
AUTO WRECKING — The business of collecting, storing, processing or
stripping wrecked automobiles or automobiles, whether or not in running
condition for the purpose of salvaging or selling the parts thereof.
AUTO WRECKING YARD — A parcel of land, whether or not enclosed by
a building, on which the business of auto wrecking as herein defined is
carried on, whether exclusively or not.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building, shop or yard in which
or where the person carries on the business of an auto wrecker.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
association or corporation and every officer, agent, employee or servant of
the foregoing in responsible charge of the premises hereinafter mentioned.
PREMISES — Includes a parcel of land, a yard, building, structure or
vehicle or any other property or part thereof.
§ 263-2. License required.
No person shall keep, maintain or operate an auto wrecking yard upon
any premises in the City of Mount Vernon or carry on the business of
auto wrecking, nor collect, store, process or strip automobiles within said
City, without first procuring from the Mayor a license therefor; provided,
however, that no licensed junk or scrap metal dealer shall be required to
obtain a further license under this chapter.
§ 260-9 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 263-3
1:812
§ 263-3. Issuance of license. [Amended 4-13-1989, approved
4-13-1989; 3-14-1990, approved 3-15-1990]
§ 263-4. Fee and bond. [Amended 10-11-1989, approved
10-12-1989; 3-13-2002, approved 3-14-2002]
Every person receiving such license shall pay therefor the sum of $150 for
each vehicle employed in such business and shall also give a bond to the
City in the penal sum of $5,000 and fingerprint fees as required by the
Division of Criminal Justice Services and § 126-2.2A of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon, conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances of
the City Council and regulations applicable to the keeping of junk shops,
junkyards, scrap metal dealers or waste material handling plants at any
time during the continuance of such license. No person shall be entitled to
receive or shall receive such license if such person, or, if a corporation or
a partnership, a member, stockholder or officer thereof, has been or shall
hereafter be convicted of larceny or knowingly receiving stolen property.
§ 263-5. Expiration of license.
Every license to keep an auto wrecking yard or to carry on business as an
auto wrecker shall continue in force until the 30th day of June next following
the granting thereof, unless sooner revoked by the Mayor or City Council,
and no longer.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to grant licenses under his/her hand,
to be sealed with the corporate seal and countersigned by the City
Clerk, to such persons as shall procure a recommendation by the
Police Commissioner to keep an auto wrecking yard or to carry out the
business of auto wrecking.
A.
All applications for licenses shall be made by the applicant on forms to
be provided by the City Clerk. Said applicant shall set forth the name,
business and residence addresses of the applicant and the names and
residence addresses of the officers or partners, if the applicant is a
corporation or partnership. Any changes in the residence address must
be promptly reported to the City Clerk.
B.
Every applicant for a license must file, together with the application,
fingerprints of both hands. The fingerprints shall be placed upon cards
provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be taken under
the Commissioner's supervision by a senior police officer designated
to do so, at such place as the Commissioner shall designate. The
Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the authority to submit the
fingerprints of the applicant, together with the required fees, to the
Division of Criminal Justice or other appropriate agency for processing
and investigation. No application for an auto wrecking license shall
be approved nor any license issued until after investigation and
examination of the fingerprints of the applicant. No license shall be
granted to any applicant who has been convicted of any felony or any
misdemeanor involving violence, dishonesty or deceit.
C.
§ 263-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-6
1:813
§ 263-6. Location of business limited by license.
Every license granted to an auto wrecker or auto wrecking yard shall
designate the place in which the person receiving the same is authorized to
carry on such business, and no person shall carry on such business at any
other place than the one designated in the license.
§ 263-7. City location required; exception.
§ 263-8. Required approvals.
No licenses or renewals thereof shall be granted by the Mayor unless the
applicant produces a certificate in writing, countersigned by the Building
Commissioner, Health Commissioner, Fire Commissioner and Public Safety
Commissioner approving the application.
§ 263-9. Compliance with zoning regulations required.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall authorize the carrying on of the
business of an auto wrecker in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Mount Vernon.111
§ 263-10. Record of purchases.
Every keeper of an auto wrecking yard or person conducting business as
an auto wrecker shall provide and keep a book in which shall be plainly
and legibly written at the time of every purchase a description of the article
purchased, the name and residence of the person or the name and business
address of the firm from whom purchased, and the day, hour and place
of such purchase. Such book shall be at all times open to the inspection
of the Mayor, City Councilmen, Police Commissioner or any police officer
or any person authorized in writing by either of them. Within 48 hours of
such purchase, he shall also notify the Police Department of such purchase,
giving a complete description of the automobile purchased, including year,
make, model, serial and engine numbers thereof.
No person shall be licensed as an auto wrecker or auto wrecking yard
or carry on the business of collecting, storing, processing or stripping
automobiles for the purpose of salvaging or selling the parts thereof
unless said person has an established place of business in the City.
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of foregoing Subsection A of this
section, no auto wrecker's license shall be required of non-City auto
wreckers, provided that their operations in the City are confined to
collection of wrecked automobiles from licensed auto wreckers in the
City.
B.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 267, Zoning.
§ 263-6 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 263-11
1:814
§ 263-11. Purchases from minors.
No licensee shall purchase any automobile or part thereof from any minor,
knowing or having reason to believe him or her to be such.
§ 263-12. Hours for purchasing.
No licensee shall purchase any wrecked automobiles from any person or
persons between the hour of sunset and the hour of 7:00 a.m.
§ 263-13. Retaining identification of purchases.
Every auto wrecker and auto wrecking yard shall, on purchasing any
wrecked automobile or automobile not in running condition, place and
keep each purchase in a distinct and separate pile in the usual place of
business of such auto wrecker without altering, defacing, stripping, burning
or taking apart any such article or removing, melting, cutting or destroying
any part thereof for a period of five days immediately succeeding such
purchase.
§ 263-14. Identification of vehicles used in business.
Every licensed keeper of an auto wrecking yard and every auto wrecker
shall have his or their names, place of business and the number
corresponding to the number of his or their license plainly and
conspicuously painted on every vehicle used in his or their business, in
letters and figures not less than two inches high. The name of such vehicle
shall correspond with the name on the license.
§ 263-15. Exhibition of articles.
Every auto wrecker and keeper of any auto wrecking yard, his agent,
servant or employee shall, on demand from the Mayor, a City Councilman,
City Judge, Chief of Police or any police officer or other person authorized
in writing by either of the above-named officers or City Judge to make such
demand, exhibit to the same any article or thing in his or their possession.
§ 263-16. Noise.
No auto wrecker or auto wrecking yard shall break iron or other metals on
Sunday or before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on other days of the week,
or otherwise at any time so conduct his business as to make unusual or
improper noises tending to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
§ 263-17. Storage.
No auto wrecker or auto wrecking yard shall store or accumulate any
wrecked automobiles or automobiles not in running condition except in a
house, shed, shop or other enclosed building, except that such auto wrecker
may temporarily accumulate such automobiles in a yard at his or their place
of business for a period not to exceed 60 days, provided said accumulated
§ 263-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-17
1:815
automobiles are at all times covered by a temporary shed or tarpaulin or
otherwise.
§ 263-18. Fencing.
§ 263-19. Burning.
The burning of any material or articles on premises occupied by auto
wreckers or by their servants, agents or employees is prohibited unless
such burning is done within an incinerator, oven or other receptacle
approved in writing as to construction, capacity, smoke and firesafety by the
Chief of the Fire Department, the Health Commissioner and the Building
Commissioner. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
modifying, amending or rescinding the provisions of any City ordinance
pertaining to the burning of fires in business and industrial districts of the
City of Mount Vernon.
§ 263-20. Sanitary facilities.
All auto wrecking yards shall have constructed and maintained on their
premises adequate sanitary facilities, including a sink with running water
and a water closet or lavatory, and said facilities shall be kept in good repair.
Such premises shall also be kept free at all times from rodents, rubbish,
vermin and debris.
Chapter 267
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157.
Signs — See Ch. 221.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 226.
If the open yard or open space in which the automobiles described in
Subsection B are accumulated is enclosed by a solid wood or metal
fence or a combination solid wooden and metal fence of uniform size,
height and material which sufficiently obscures such accumulated
articles from public view, such wrecker need not cover the same with a
temporary shed, tarpaulin or otherwise and there shall be no limitation
on the length of time such articles may be stored in such open yard.
A.
The Building Commissioner of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby
authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of the foregoing
Subsection A of this section and to regulate the construction, material,
location and height of the fences referred to in the foregoing
Subsection A, which said fences shall be no less than seven feet in
height and may not be constructed of used or secondhand materials.
B.
§ 263-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 263-20
1:816
ARTICLE I
Purposes
§ 267-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are the following:
To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance
with a well-balanced and comprehensive plan, which plan is embodied
in this chapter.
A.
To regulate and limit the height, bulk and location of buildings
hereafter erected, to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts
and other open spaces and to regulate the density of population in any
given area, and for said purposes, to divide the City into districts.
B.
To regulate each class of buildings uniformly throughout each district,
although the regulations in some districts differ from those in other
districts.
C.
To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote
the public health, safety and welfare, including, so far as conditions
permit, provision for adequate light, air, convenience of access and the
accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment and the access
to sunlight necessary therefor.
D.
To regulate, with reasonable regard to the character of buildings
erected in each district, the value of land and the use to which it may be
put, to the end that these regulations are designed to promote public
health, safety and welfare and the most desirable use for which the land
of each district may be adapted.
E.
To conserve the value of buildings and enhance the value of land
throughout the City.
F.
To regulate and restrict both the location of trades and industries
and the location of buildings designed for specific uses, and for said
purposes, to divide the City into districts and to prescribe for each
such district the trades and industries that shall be permitted, those
subjected to special regulation and the uses for which buildings may
not be erected or altered. Such regulations are designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and are made with reasonable
consideration, among other things, to the character of the district, its
peculiar suitability for particular uses, the conservation of property
values and the direction of building development, in accord with a wellconsidered
plan.
G.
To protect the character and social and economic stability and to
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the City and all of
its neighborhoods.
H.
§ 267-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-1
1:817
To bring about the gradual conformity of the use of land with the
Comprehensive Plan as set forth in this chapter and to minimize
conflicts among the uses of land.
I.
To promote the most beneficial relation between the use of land and
the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe
and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements appropriate
to the various uses of land throughout the City.
J.
To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision
of public facilities and services and for private enterprise in building
development, investment and other economic activity relating to uses
of land throughout the City.
K.
To limit development to that which will not exceed the capacity of
existing and programmed public facilities and services to safely and
adequately support it.
L.
To avoid hazardous conditions and excessive damage resulting from
stormwater runoff and flooding and to encourage the appropriate use
and sound management of natural resources throughout the City.
M.
To preserve the natural beauty and historic values of the City; to protect
the City against unsightly, obstructive and obnoxious land uses and
operations; to enhance the aesthetic aspect of the natural and manmade
elements of the City; and to ensure appropriate development with
regard to those elements.
N.
§ 267-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-1
1:818
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 267-2. Introduction.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
specifically defined. Where words and terms are not defined, they shall have
their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
§ 267-3. General construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the language of this chapter:
A. The specific shall control the general.
All words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tense.
B.
All words in the singular number include the plural number, and viceversa,
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
C.
Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter,
and vice-versa, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
D.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
F.
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected
by the conjunction "and," "or," "either . . . or" or "and/or," the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply.
(1)
"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply singly or in any combination.
(2)
"Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
(3)
"And/or" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly and in any combination.
(4)
G.
H. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
I. The words "lot," "plot" and "tract of land" shall one include the other.
J. The word "premises" shall include land and any buildings thereon.
§ 267-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-3
1:819
§ 267-4. Definitions.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use on the same lot therewith, except that where specifically
so provided, accessory off-street parking need not be located on the same
lot.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — A business establishment with any
one of the following: adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment
business or adult motion-picture show as defined in this chapter. This
definition shall not include adult massage establishments or adult hotels or
motels or sexual encounter establishments which are expressly prohibited
in Mount Vernon, and which are defined below.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANDISE — Any one of the following
items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact discs or other visual
representations; audio tapes, cassettes, records, compact discs or other
audio representations or any other similar material that are characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or instruments, devices or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual
activities.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT STORE — An establishment that has a
significant amount or more than 25% of its stock-in-trade or more than 20
square feet of public sales space devoted to the sale, distribution, rent or
for any form of consideration adult entertainment merchandise as defined
herein. Adult entertainment merchandise offered for sale, rent or other
consideration is not used, read, viewed or otherwise consumed on the
premises.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL — A hotel or motel or similar commercial
establishment which offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than 10 hours or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room
to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. These
establishments are prohibited in the City of Mount Vernon because they
may encourage unlawful activity to occur. (See New York State Penal Code,
Article 230). This definition shall not be interpreted to include conventional
The word "occupied" or "used" shall be considered to be followed by
the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used,"
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
K.
References made to officials and official bodies shall mean officials
and official bodies of the City of Mount Vernon, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
L.
M. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
N.
§ 267-3 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:820
hotels and motels, which are rented on an overnight basis, normally for a
twenty-four-hour period for the convenience of travelers.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — A nightclub, bar, restaurant
or any type of business establishment that features live performances or
any employees or subcontractees that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, whether or not the
live performances are considered incidental to the primary operations of
the business, and whether or not the employee or subcontractee is normally
considered an entertainer.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. These
massages are normally given to provide sexual stimulation or satisfaction
to paying customers. This definition shall not be construed to include such
health-related facilities as a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, health
club or the office of any health-care massage practitioner duly licensed
by the State of New York, nor barber shops or beauty parlors in which
massages are administered to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders, nor a
nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool,
tennis court or other educational athletic facilities for the welfare of the
residents of the area. Adult massage establishments are expressly
prohibited in the City of Mount Vernon because they may encourage
unlawful activity to occur. (See New York State Penal Code, Article
230).[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — Any establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are shown to patrons that are
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.[Added 2-3-1999]
ADULT RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A planned residential development
for senior citizens, which consists of multifamily dwelling units or singlefamily
units, in which each individual living unit contains a kitchen and
bathroom, and which include universal design features and are handicap
adaptable, and that may provide social and recreational activities for its
residents and may provide supportive amenities such as dining program,
transportation, linen services, housekeeping services, beauty parlor, library,
convenience store or cafe, swimming pool, computer room, and other
similar activities and amenities, with such activities and amenities being
provided within the same structure as the dwelling units or in an accessory
space or building dedicated for those purposes.[Added 12-11-2013,
approved 12-12-2013]
ALTER — To change, enlarge or rearrange the structural parts, either
interior or exterior, or the exit or entrance facilities of a structure or to
move a building from one location or position to another or to modify the
construction of a building or its building equipment.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building for the medical and/or surgical care of
animals.
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:821
APPLICATION — The application form and all accompanying documents
and exhibits required of an applicant by an approving agency for
review.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
APPROVED CONDITIONS — Physical conditions and use of a building,
structure, land or part thereof, approved under a valid permit issued by the
Department of Buildings.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A multiunit residential facility constructed,
operated, and providing oversight pursuant to Article 46-B of New York
State Public Health Law (Assisted Living Reform Act of 2004), NYCRR Title
10, Section 4662, Part 1001.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
ATTIC — That part of a building between the uppermost story and the roof.
BAR — A business enterprise primarily engaged in the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages, such as beer, wine or liquor to patrons seated at a table
or counter, served for consumption on the premises.
BASE HEIGHT — The base height of a building is the permitted height
of the facade facing a street, otherwise known as the front wall or street
wall, of a building before any building step-back is required as specified by
certain zoning districts.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, self-supporting or supported by
columns, walls, air pressure or similar supports, which is affixed to the
ground and intended for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to the principal building
or buildings on the lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to
that of the principal building. When an accessory building is attached to
the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such
accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building.
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal cross-section of a building,
including roofed-over porches, decks and balconies more than three feet
above the average adjoining ground elevation, but excluding cornices, roof
overhangs or gutters projecting not more than three feet from the exterior
building wall.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area covered by the
combined building area of all buildings on a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from grade to the level of the
highest point of the roof if the roof is flat or mansard, or to the mean level
between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any other
type.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal distance measured between the
furthermost exterior of the finished walls of the building in a generally
perpendicular direction.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which said building is located.
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:822
BUILDING STEP-BACK — The distance, as specified by certain zoning
districts, that a portion of a building is recessed from the facade, rather
than a lot line. A building step-back is required for the portion of a building
above the base height, as specified by certain zoning districts, only when
the building height will exceed the specified base height.[Added
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
CAR WASH — A car wash is an establishment engaged in washing, waxing,
and/or polishing of motor vehicles or in furnishing facilities for the selfservice
washing of motor vehicles.
CATERING HALL — A business enterprise engaged in preparing and
serving food and beverages selected in advance for a predetermined
number of people, often large in number, at a specified time, including,
but not limited to, the provision of live or mechanical entertainment and
dancing.112
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Commissioner
of the Department of Buildings, upon completion of the construction of a
new building or addition, or upon a change in the use of a building or
use of the land, which certifies that all requirements of this chapter, the
City Code and the New York State Uniform Code have been complied with
and authorizes the occupancy of the premises in accordance with such
certificate and all applicable codes, rules and regulations. When the term
"certificate of occupancy" is used in this chapter, it shall be deemed to
include the terms "certificate of tenancy" and "letter of completion" where
such may be appropriate.[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
CERTIFICATE OF TENANCY — A certificate of occupancy issued by the
Commissioner of the Department of Buildings for a tenancy space. The
certificate of tenancy is issued to the business owner and authorizes the
occupancy of the tenancy space in accordance with such certificate and
all applicable codes, rules and regulations.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
CHANGE OF USE — Any change in the use of a building or land which
results in a different use classification or use nomenclature in the lists of use
regulations listed in this chapter.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR — A concentration of parcels that have
commercial, retail and mixed uses, which serve a common trade area and
surround and/or lie along a single street.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A structure, lot, room or dedicated space used
principally by the community for clubs, fraternities, organizations and other
types of social groups for the purposes of providing a meeting place.[Added
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
COMMUNITY PURPOSE BUILDING — A building used and occupied by
a not-for-profit religious or membership corporation providing religious,
112. Editor's Note: The former definition of "certificate of completion," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009.
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:823
charitable, recreation, entertainment, guidance, counseling or other similar
amenities and facilities on a nonprofit basis similar to organizations
commonly described as "YMs," "YWs," "Boys and Girls Clubs," "scout
groups" and other fraternal membership groups.
CONVERSION — See "change of use."[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
COURT or COURTYARD — An open, uncovered and unoccupied space,
bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is
a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of one or more buildings.
All other courts are outer courts.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
COVERAGE — See "building coverage" and "impervious coverage."[Added
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
CUSTOMARY PERSONAL SERVICES — Services to the general public for
personal or household use such as beauty salon, barbershop, spa, exercise
outfit, tailoring, upholstery repair, household appliances repairs,
etc.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A program, licensed by the New York State
Department of Social Services, which provides care for three or more
children away from their home for more than three hours per day, excluding
those children receiving family day care, or group family day care as defined
in this section.
DE MINIMIS — Within the context of land use law, an applicant may
obtain an exception to the City's zoning ordinance when there is only a
minor deviation from the zoning ordinance and rigid compliance is not
necessary to protect the public policy concerns inherent in the ordinance. A
de minimis exception may generally be considered to be 10% or less of what
is permitted under the zoning variance.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
DENSITY — The number of residential units allowed on a parcel based
on the lot area dwelling unit requirements specified in the zone
district.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
DENSITY BONUS — A density increase over the otherwise maximum
allowable residential density under the applicable Zoning Ordinance as of
the date of application by the developer to the City.[Added 12-11-2013,
approved 12-12-2013]
DESIGN EXCEPTIONS — See "waiver."[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
DOMICILIARY-CARE FACILITY — A private proprietary nursing home,
convalescent home or home for adults, an intermediate-care facility, a
family home for adults, a home for the aged, a group residence or other
residential-care facility for adults as defined in the New York State Social
Services Law or regulations promulgated thereunder, and any similar
facilities operated under the supervision of federal departments and
agencies. The keeping of a roomer or roomers as otherwise permitted in this
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:824
chapter, pursuant to the regulations of the New York State Department of
Social Services for family-type homes for adults (18 NYCRR Part 485), does
not constitute a domiciliary-care facility.
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units, or a part of a mixed-use building containing three or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A dwelling containing only one principal
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling containing only two principal
dwelling units, whether located side by side or in any other manner.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family, including independent cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED — A dwelling unit sharing one or more
common side or rear walls with another dwelling unit or units, but
occupying the entire volume within its portion of the building from the
lowest level to the roof and having its own separate entrance or entrances
to the outside. This type of dwelling unit is also sometimes known as a
"townhouse."
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED — A dwelling unit located in its own separate
building which does not abut any other dwelling.
ENRICHED HOUSING — Enriched housing is defined in New York State law
(NYCRR, Title 18, Chapter II, Subchapter D) as an adult care facility and
is licensed and overseen by the New York State Department of Health. An
enriched housing program is an adult-care facility established and operated
for the purposes of providing long-term residential care to five or more
adults, primarily persons 65 years of age or older, in community-integrated
settings resembling independent housing units. Such a program provides or
arranges the provision of room, and provides board, housekeeping, personal
care and supervision.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
FAMILY — One or more persons having a common domestic bond who
live together in one dwelling unit as a traditional family or its functional
equivalent, headed by one or more resident persons who have the authority
over the care, functioning or management of their common household.
FLOATING OVERLAY ZONE — A zoning designation that is unmapped on
the Official Zoning Map that at the discretion of the City Council may
be superimposed on one or more qualifying parcels of land to impose
supplemental restrictions on uses within the district, permit specific uses
that are otherwise not permitted or implement incentives while retaining
the underlying zoning to foster development. Floating overlay zones can be
affixed to qualifying parcel(s) by the application of the owner of a parcel or
by the City Council initiative. Upon approval, the parcel(s) is governed by
the uses, dimensions and other provisions under the Floating Overlay Zone
Ordinance.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:825
FLOATING ZONE — A zoning designation that is unmapped on the Official
Zoning Map that at the discretion of the City Council may be superimposed
on one or more qualifying parcels of land to impose supplemental
restrictions on uses within the district, permit specific uses that are
otherwise not permitted or implement incentives to foster development.
Floating zones can be affixed to qualifying parcel(s) by the application of
the owner of a parcel or by the City Council initiative. Upon approval, the
parcel(s) is governed by the uses, dimensions and other provisions under
the Floating Zone Ordinance.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
FLOOR AREA — The horizontal area of a story of a building, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall
separating two buildings, from the center line of such common walls, but
excluding unroofed porches, balconies, raised platforms, roof overhangs,
gutters and chimneys.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the floor areas of all stories of all
principal buildings on a lot, excluding floor area used for accessory offstreet
parking purposes.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area divided by the lot area.
GRADE — The average level of the ground surrounding and 10 feet distant
from the exterior walls of the building, but within the property.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building at or nearest street level.[Added
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
HEALTH CLUB — Membership facilities designed and used for body
conditioning and rehabilitation, including activities such as aerobic and
related class exercises. Health clubs may contain equipment such as
whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, showers, locker facilities and, as an
accessory use, a health food bar.
HOME OCCUPATION, CUSTOMARY — An occupation of a service character
accessory to and customarily incidental to the use of a dwelling unit by
a resident thereof, the conduct of which is clearly secondary to the use
of the dwelling unit for living purposes, does not change the character
thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use and does
not involve the keeping of stock of merchandise for sale in connection
therewith. Tutoring and instruction, including art, music, voice, violin or
other musical instrument, limited to a single pupil at a time, shall be
deemed a customary home occupation. Group instruction in dancing, vocal
or instrumental music, tea rooms, barber shops, beauty parlors, real estate
offices, insurance offices and tourist homes are not customary home
occupations.
HOTEL/MOTEL — Any building or group of buildings containing rooms
occupied by transient guests who are lodged with or without meals, in
facilities also commonly referred to as "inns," "motor lodges" and other such
similar designations.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of the land area covered
by the combined area of all buildings, structures, paved areas and other
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:826
impervious surfaces on the lot.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface or material through which water
will not flow under ordinary hydrostatic pressure and including structures,
parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, terraces and paved areas.
LEGAL CONDITIONS — Conditions of a building, structure, land or part
thereof sanctioned by a certificate of occupancy or tenancy, or a letter of
completion.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
LEGALIZATION — The type of permit application and/or work required
from the owner to bring a building, structure, land or portion thereof,
which use or physical conditions have been changed or altered without
a permit issued by the Department of Buildings, to approved and legal
conditions.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
LETTER OF COMPLETION — A certificate issued by the Commissioner
of the Department of Buildings indicating the satisfactory completion of
alterations in accordance with the permit issued thereof.[Added 7-8-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — A
business enterprise engaged in the distribution of LGP, received by truck
transport, and having on-site bulk storage of more than 2,000 gallons of
LPG and usually having container-filling and truck-loading facilities.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) DISTRIBUTION POINT — A business
enterprise engaged in the retail sale and distribution of LPG in small
portable tanks, cylinders or containers and having on-site storage facilities
of 100 gallons or more. Notwithstanding the above, the incidental retail
sale of LPG in small portable tanks, cylinders or containers of less than 20
pounds or as prescribed by National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 58,
Chapter 5, whichever is more restrictive, shall not be considered a liquefied
petroleum gas distribution point.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to a street.
LOT — A recorded piece, plot or parcel of land or assemblage of recorded
contiguous parcels of land, all in common ownership, occupied or to be
occupied by principal and accessory buildings and uses and having its
principal frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may
be deemed, in accordance with the provisions of law, to be adequate as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit for a building or buildings on
such land.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within the lot boundaries.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets
where the interior angle formed by the intersection of the streets is 135° or
less; all corner lots are presumed to have two front yards, one primary and
one secondary.[Amended 3-10-1999, approved 3-11-1999]
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:827
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The continuous extent of a lot along a street.
LOT LINE — A property line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the
lot line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the
owner may elect any street line as the front lot line, except that where the
majority of lots in any block are developed, the front lot line shall be the
same as that used by such other lots. In the case of a through lot having
frontage on two streets, the front yard setbacks and other requirements
of this chapter applicable to front yards shall apply for both streets. For a
lot with less than 70% of the minimum frontage required for the district in
which it is located, the front lot line shall be deemed to be a line within the
lot and which is parallel to the street and at least equal in length to the
minimum frontage requirement.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot line
and most distant therefrom. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length,
or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to
be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly
within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than the front lot line and the rear lot
line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured perpendicular to the lot depth.
MEDICAL OFFICE — Generally an office use which provides medical and
allied health services to the individual by physicians, surgeons, dentists,
podiatrists, psychologists, psychiatrists, chiropractors, or any other healthcare
professionals when licensed by a state-sanctioned Board overseeing
the provision of medically oriented services. It includes a clinic, primarily
providing outpatient care in medical, psychiatric or other health services,
and not part of a residential health care facility, as defined in this
Code.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR SHOP — An establishment engaged in the
repair of automotive tops, bodies and interiors or in automotive painting,
detailing and refinishing.
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERSHIP — An establishment primarily engaged in
the retail sale of new automobiles and which may include, as an accessory
use, the sale of used automobiles, parts and accessories for said
automobiles, including minor service and repair work.
MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL AGENCY — Establishments primarily engaged
in the short-term rental of vehicles without drivers and including the on-site
storage of such vehicles.
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:828
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR FACILITIES — An establishment
engaged in the installation, repair, and/or sale of automotive exhaust
systems, front-end wheel alignment, glass, tires, electrical components,
transmissions and similar types of functions.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An establishment engaged in the
retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and lubricating oils and the sale of parts,
accessories and services for motor vehicles, excluding body repair.
NIGHTCLUB — A business enterprise which provides live or mechanical
music or theatrical entertainment and permits dancing in connection with
the service of food or beverage. The term "nightclub" shall include cabarets,
dance halls, discotheques or other similar establishment.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION — A corporation formed or existing
under the Not-For-Profit Corporation Law of New York State.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A social and educational program for children,
operated for less than three hours per session, two to five times a week,
often following a school-year schedule, and registered with the New York
State Education Department.
PARKING FACILITY — An off-street area for the parking of licensed motor
vehicles on a transient basis. This does not include any motor vehicle
storage areas.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
licensed motor vehicle on a transient basis and having direct usable access
to a street.
PERMIT HOLDER — The contractor listed on the permit.[Added 7-8-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — An institution conducting a regularly scheduled
academic curriculum of study similar to that of public schools and operated
in accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York.
PROFESSIONAL PERSON — An attorney admitted to practice in the State
of New York; or a certified public accountant, a professional engineer, an
architect, a landscape architect, a physician, a dentist, a speech pathologist,
an audiologist, a chiropractor, a podiatrist, a physical therapist, an
optometrist or an individual licensed to practice psychology and all others
as defined and regulated in the Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC AMENITIES — Areas provided and maintained by a private
property owner and designated for public access, public traffic, and/or
public accommodation within private or public development projects,
including but not limited to public plazas, public art, public parks, urban
green spaces and public parking.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:829
PUBLIC ART — Original works of art open and accessible to the public
and conceived in any discipline or medium, including visual, performance,
literary, media and temporary works.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
PUBLIC PLAZA — A public square or area designed as a gathering place
for the public and designated by the City Council as a privately owned open
area adjacent to buildings and accessible to the public which is generally
at grade with the adjoining sidewalk.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
PUBLIC SCHOOL — An educational institution operated by a public school
district in accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person duly authorized to furnish to the public,
under public regulation, electricity, gas, water, sewage treatment, steam,
cable TV or telephone, cellular telephone or telegraph service.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Residential facilities providing
rooms, supportive assistance, health care, skilled nursing care, and
therapies. Commonly referred to as nursing homes, skilled nursing
facilities, or green houses, these facilities are constructed, operated, and
overseen pursuant to Article 28 of New York State Public Health Law,
NYCRR Title 10, Section 86.2.[Added 12-11-2013, approved
12-12-2013]
RESTAURANT — A business enterprise primarily engaged in preparing and
serving food selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table or
counter, served by a waiter or waitress and consumed on the premises.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A business enterprise primarily engaged
in the retail sale of food products for consumption off the premises but
which may also include the incidental sale of ready-to-consume food and
beverages from a counter-type installation for consumption on the premises
where patrons usually select their orders from a posted menu and service
and cleanup is generally performed by the customer, provided that the area
devoted to customer seating represents less than 25% of the gross floor
area of the establishment. The term "carry-out restaurant" shall not include
bakeries, delicatessens, grocery stores or other food sales establishments
not providing customer seating on the premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business enterprise primarily engaged in
the retail sale of ready-to-consume food served in disposable containers
and selected by patrons from a limited number of specialized items, such
as, but not limited to, hamburgers, chicken, fish and chips, pizza, tacos
and hot dogs, which are prepared according to standardized procedures for
consumption either on or off the premises. The term "fast-food restaurant"
shall include, but not be limited to, facilities where a substantial portion of
the sales to the public is by stand-up service.
RETAIL — The selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for
personal or household use.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:830
RETAIL DRY CLEANERS — A business enterprise having facilities for the
cleaning and pressing of clothing which deals directly with ultimate
consumers, does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, uses
only solvents with a flash point of not less than 138.2° F. and has a total
aggregate dry load capacity of machines not exceeding 60 pounds.
RETAIL LAUNDRY — A business enterprise with facilities for the washing of
clothing which deals directly with ultimate consumers and does not exceed
2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
ROOMER — An occupant of a rooming unit. The term shall also include
boarder.
ROOMING UNIT — A portion of a dwelling unit, including access to cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities, which is leased for occupancy by no more
than one person.[Amended 3-10-1999, approved 3-11-1999]
SATELLITE EARTH STATION OR DISH ANTENNA — A combination of
antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or
other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources;
a low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the
receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals;
a coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of the
buildings.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Any person 55 years and older. Age eligibility
requirements may vary depending upon the type of project and/or the
source of funding requested.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Housing which is designed and constructed
for occupancy by at least one senior citizen per dwelling unit and which
is limited in occupancy to those meeting the definition of senior citizen,
age 55 years and older, unless specified otherwise in the law establishing
the development's construction funding source or other applicable law
or regulation and which may be constructed with federal, state, or local
subsidies, or constructed with conventional funding sources.[Amended
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, other than
a hotel, motel or similar establishment, offering accommodations which, for
any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons
may congregate, associate or consort in any connection with specified
sexual activities. This definition shall not include an establishment where
a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional
person licensed by the State of New York engages in sexual therapy. Sexual
encounter establishments are expressly prohibited in the City of Mount
Vernon because they may encourage unlawful activity to occur. (See New
York State Penal Code Article 230.)[Added 2-3-1999]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes any of the following: less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
aureole; human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.[Added 2-3-1999]
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:831
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following: the
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or bestiality; masturbation,
actual or simulated; or excretory functions as part or in connection with any
of the activities set forth above in this definition.[Added 2-3-1999]
SITE PLAN — A map showing the layout, arrangement and use of buildings
and land, including accessory uses, structures, facilities and services and
meeting the informational requirements of this chapter.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — A device or combination of devices which
relies upon solar radiation as an energy source and that is employed for
the purpose of heating or cooling a building, the heating of water or the
generation of electricity.
STORY — That portion of a building which is between one floor level and the
next higher floor level or the roof. Any floor of a building used for purposes
other than storage or other mechanical equipment shall be counted as a
story.
STREET — An existing state, county or City highway or road, or a road on
a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board or on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of
the Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to approve
subdivision plats, including all of the land within the right-of-way.
STREET LINE — Any line dividing a lot from a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. Included are swimming pools, parking garages, decks not attached
to a building, tents, basketball, tennis and paddle tennis courts, tents, but
not anything requiring only simple paving or surfacing of the ground, such
as parking lots, driveways or sidewalks.
STRUCTURE, MINOR ACCESSORY — A building containing less than 500
cubic feet of volume, not exceeding 15 feet in height and customarily found
accessory to dwelling units, including dog houses, tree houses, playhouses,
pigeon coops, storage sheds and greenhouses.[Amended 3-10-1999,
approved 3-11-1999]
SWIMMING POOL — A man-made body of water or receptacle for water
having a depth of more than 24 inches and a water surface area of more
than 80 square feet and constructed, installed or maintained in or above
ground outside any building.
TENANCY SPACE — A building, or portion thereof, owned or leased by a
business owner to conduct such business. The term "tenancy space" shall
be limited to space with nonresidential use only.[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
UNDERLYING ZONING — The original zoning designation given to a
parcel(s) of land within the City prior to an overlay zone or a floating
§ 267-4 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-4
1:832
overlay zone superimposed on the parcel(s). Please refer to "zoning
district."[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
UNIVERSITY or COLLEGE — An institution of higher education operated in
accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York.
USABLE OPEN SPACE, AREA OF — The portion of a lot which is unoccupied
by driveways, drive aisles, service drives, off-street parking spaces and/or
loading berths, principal buildings, and accessory buildings. This area of
usable open space shall be available and accessible to all occupants of the
building for use for recreation and other leisure activities normally carried
on outdoors.[Added 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
USE — The specific purpose for which property is designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
WAIVER — Permission to depart from the requirements of this chapter with
respect to the submission of required information or documents.[Added
12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
YARD — The open space on a lot separating the lot line from the nearest
building or, where there is no building, the minimum required yard for the
district in which it is located.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the front lot line and the nearest building on the lot.
YARD, MINIMUM — The minimum yard as required in accordance with
the applicable Schedule of Dimensional Regulations,113 which yard shall be
measured from the front, side or rear lot line, whichever the case may be.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest building on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a side lot line(s) and the nearest building on
the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of
either of such yards, to the front and rear lot line, as the case may be.
ZONING DISTRICT — A designation given to parcel(s) within the City
to govern the use of land and bulk of buildings.[Added 12-11-2013,
approved 12-12-2013]
113. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Dimensional Regulations is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-4
1:833

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 267-5. District classification.
The City of Mount Vernon is hereby divided into the following classes of
districts:
§ 267-6. Zoning Map establishment.
The boundaries of all districts are hereby established as shown on a map
entitled "Zoning Map, City of Mount Vernon, New York," dated October
16, 1997, and as may be amended from time to time and certified by the
City Clerk, which map accompanies and with all explanatory matter thereon
is made part of this chapter. The official copy of this map is kept by the
City Clerk, with copies thereof kept by the Department of Planning and
Department of Buildings. Unofficial copies at a reduced scale are included
with copies of this chapter.114 Whenever the City Council amends the Zoning
Map, the City Clerk shall notify the Commissioner of Planning, who shall
cause the amendment to be made to the official copy of the Zoning Map
and to the copies kept by the Department of Planning and Department of
Buildings.
Residence districts. [Amended 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
R1-7 One-Family Residence
R1-4.5 One-Family Residence
R1-3.6 One-Family Residence
R2-4.5 Two-Family Residence
RMF-6.75 Multifamily Residence
RMF-10 Multifamily Residence
RMF-15 Multifamily Residence
H Hospital
A.
Nonresidence districts.
NB Neighborhood Business
OB Office Business
DB Downtown Business
CB Commercial Business
LI-15 Landscaped Industrial
LI-7.5 Landscaped Industrial
I Industry
B.
114. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 267-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:835
§ 267-7. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 267-8. Order of restrictiveness.
Where zoning districts are referred to as "more restrictive" or "less
restrictive," the designations shall refer to the order in which the districts
are named in § 267-5, the first named being the most restrictive.
§ 267-9. Lot in two or more districts or municipalities.
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more district
boundary lines, the following shall apply:
District boundary lines follow lot lines, streets, municipal boundaries,
rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, or are parallel or
perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by
dimensions, as shown on the Zoning Map.
A.
Where district boundaries as shown approximately following streets,
rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, the center lines
thereof shall be such boundaries.
B.
Where district boundaries are shown approximately following
municipal boundaries or lot lines, such municipal boundaries or lot lines
shall be the district boundaries.
C.
Where district boundary lines divide a lot, the location of any such
boundary, if not indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of
the map scale appearing thereon.
D.
If the district classification of any property is in question, it shall be
deemed to be in the most restrictive adjoining district.
E.
Uses permitted in one district may not extend into another district
where they would not otherwise be permitted.
A.
Dimensional requirements shall be measured from the lot lines and not
zoning district lines.
B.
§ 267-7 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-9
1:836
ARTICLE IV
Regulations
§ 267-10. Application of regulations.
§ 267-11. Nonconforming uses and other nonconformities.
Conformity required. No building shall be erected, constructed, moved,
altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor shall any land, water or building be
used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose except in
conformity with this chapter.
A.
Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the
requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements necessary for the protection and promotion of the public,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B.
Conflicting standards. This chapter shall not be deemed to affect in
any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes
a greater or lesser restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or
upon the erection, construction, establishment, movement, alteration
or enlargement of buildings than are imposed by other ordinances,
rules, regulations, licenses, certificates or other authorizations, or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail. Where any standard or provision of this
chapter is found to be inconsistent or in conflict with any other standard
or provision, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
C.
Continuing existing uses, buildings and structures.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawfully permitted use of
lands or buildings and the lawfully permitted existence of buildings
and structures at the time of adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use, building or structure does not
conform to the standards specified in this chapter for the district
in which such lands, buildings or structures are located. Similarly,
whenever a zoning classification or the restrictions affecting
property within a district shall be changed hereafter so as to render
nonconforming a use, building or structure then presently lawfully
existing, such use, building or structure may nevertheless continue
subject to the conditions set forth below. Said uses shall be deemed
nonconforming uses and said buildings and structures shall be
deemed dimensionally nonconforming.
(1)
Any use in existence as of the effective date of this chapter which
is by this chapter made a special permit use in the district in which
it is located shall be presumed to have a special permit to the
extent such use is legally conforming as of the effective date of this
chapter.
(2)
A.
§ 267-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-11
1:837
Nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures.
The nonconforming use of land may be continued; provided,
however, that no such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
intensified, nor shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of
land than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of
this chapter, nor shall the lot area be reduced, unless specifically
allowed by other provisions in this chapter, nor shall any such
nonconforming use be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such nonconforming
use at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(1)
A building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the
use regulations for the district in which it is situated, shall not be
enlarged, extended or altered structurally unless the use therein is
changed to a conforming use, or except to conform to an order of
the Building Commissioner to either correct an unsafe condition or
to conform to the requirements of applicable laws or ordinances.
(2)
No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be enlarged
or extended, except that any such nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any parts of the building or structure which
were obviously or manifestly arranged or designed only for such
use at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(3)
No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming
use, except as provided in Subsection E.
(4)
If a nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a period of one
year, or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of the land,
building or structure shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Substantial discontinuance of activities consistent
with or required for the operation of such nonconforming use
or substantial vacancy of the building or structure in which the
nonconforming use was conducted, together with substantial
discontinuance of activities consistent with or required for the
operation of such nonconforming use shall be deemed to constitute
a cessation thereof within the meaning of this chapter, irrespective
of whether an intention to abandon the nonconforming use may
exist.
(5)
If any building or structure in which any nonconforming use is
conducted or maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent use
of the land on which such building or structure was located and
the subsequent use of any building or structure thereon shall be
in conformity with the standards specified by this chapter for the
district in which such land is located.
(6)
B.
Dimensional nonconformity. A building or structure that is conforming
in use but does not conform to the lot dimension, yard dimension,
height, building coverage, floor area ratio, off-street parking, loading or
similar dimensional requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be
C.
§ 267-11 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-11
1:838
dimensionally nonconforming. No building permit shall be issued that
will result in the increase of any such dimensional nonconformity, but
any building or structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease
its dimensional nonconformity.
Reconstruction.
Should a building or structure, the use of which, or the use of
a portion of which, is nonconforming, or which is dimensionally
nonconforming, be destroyed or damaged by any means to an
extent greater than 50% of the replacement cost of the entire
building or structure used in connection therewith at the time of
the reconstruction, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or used
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(1)
Should a building or structure, the use of which, or the use of
a portion of which, is nonconforming or which is dimensionally
nonconforming, be destroyed or damaged by any means to an
extent of 50% or less of the replacement cost of the entire building
or structure used in connection therewith at the time of the
reconstruction, it may be reconstructed and any accompanying
nonconforming use continued, provided that the reconstruction
is commenced within one year of the date of such damage and
completed within two years of said date, and further provided that
it shall be reconstructed in accordance with a plan approved by the
Board of Appeals on Zoning so as to result, where reasonable, in
greater conformity with this chapter.
(2)
D.
Change to other nonconforming use. On application, any
nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures may be changed
to another nonconforming use upon approval by the Zoning Board of
Appeals based upon a finding that the proposed use is more appropriate
to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such
change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary or appropriate to further the
purposes of this chapter.
E.
Improvement of nonconforming uses. In order that nonconforming uses
may gradually be brought into greater conformity with this chapter
and the adverse external effects of such uses may be reduced, the
owner of the land, building or structure so used may be permitted to
make limited changes to such building, structure or use in conjunction
with a site plan whereby through landscaped screening and buffer
areas, control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting, architectural changes,
location and layout of parking lots and access drives, or by any other
appropriate means, these purposes may be achieved. Such plan shall
be presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which may then grant
approval or approval with modifications, provided that said agency
finds that the purposes of this section would be furthered by such
action.
F.
§ 267-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-12
1:839
§ 267-12. Provisions governing lots.
Any change of lot line, except where only the dimensions of two existing
lots are changed and additional building lots are not created, shall be
considered to be a subdivision and shall be subject to Planning Board review
and approval. A plat indicating such change shall be filed with the office of
the Westchester County Clerk prior to such change taking effect. A copy of
the filed plat shall also be submitted to the City Assessor. No building permit
shall be issued for the use or development of any lot which has not been so
created subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
Lot for every building. Every building hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot and there shall be no more than one principal building and
its accessory buildings on one lot, except for multifamily and
nonresidential buildings in districts where such uses are permitted.
A.
Subdivision of a lot. Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot
already occupied by a building, such separation shall be effected in a
manner which will not impair conformity with any of the requirements
of this chapter with respect to the existing building and all yards and
other required spaces in connection therewith. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless
it complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
B.
Irregularly shaped lots. Where a question exists as to the proper
application of any of the requirements of this chapter to a particular lot
because of its peculiar or irregular shape, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall determine how the requirements of this chapter apply.
C.
New building on lots smaller than required. A permit may be issued for
the erection of a building for a permitted use on a lot for which a valid
conveyance has been recorded prior to July 1, 1963, notwithstanding
that the area or dimensions of such lot are less than that required for
the district in which such lot is located, provided that:
The lot met the zoning requirements at the time the deed to the lot
was created.
(1)
All yard setbacks and other building related requirements which
are in effect at the time of the obtaining of the building permit
are complied with; provided, however, that in a one- or two-family
residence district, the required side and rear yard setbacks may be
reduced in proportion to the dimensional nonconformity of the lot
to allow for the construction of a one- or two-family dwelling.
(2)
The ownership of such lot was not the same as any other lot or
lots contiguous thereto on July 1, 1963. If that is not the case,
such other lot or lots, or so much thereof as may be necessary,
shall be combined with the first-named lot to make one or more
conforming lots, whereupon a permit may be issued, but only for
such combined lots. Where the required area or dimensions of
lots are changed by an amendment to this chapter, any lot legally
(3)
D.
§ 267-12 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-12
1:840
§ 267-13. Provisions governing yards. [Amended 3-10-1999,
approved 3-11-1999; 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009; 12-11-2013,
approved 12-12-2013]
in existence on that date and made nonconforming by such
amendment may be built upon as provided in this section.
Minimum distance between buildings on the same lot.
Minimum distance between principal buildings in residence
districts. In all residence districts, the minimum distance between
principal buildings shall equal at least the average height of such
buildings at the points where such buildings are closest to one
another.
(1)
E.
Use of yards.
Buildings and structures. No building shall be constructed on any
portion of a lot which is less in width than the minimum required
for the district in which it is located. No building or structure shall
be permitted within any minimum required yard except:
Decks or terraces not exceeding 18 inches above the level of
the ground beneath them and not extending into a side or rear
yard closer than three feet of any side or rear lot line.
(a)
(b) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
(c) Fences as regulated by § 267-14B.
Other minor accessory structures in a side or rear yard but no
closer than three feet from any property line.
(d)
(e) Ground floor steps and entrance porches.
(1)
Parking.
No parking shall be permitted within any required yard except
as provided in Article VIII.
(a)
No parking or storage of means of conveyance, other than
passenger motor vehicles, is permitted in residence districts.
(b)
No parking or storage of commercial vehicles, trucks, and
other means of conveyance, other than passenger vehicles,
is permitted in nonresidence districts except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter.
(c)
(2)
Structural projections.
Open one-story porches, roof overhangs, canopies and other
similar architectural features may extend to within a minimum
distance of the front lot line as follows:
(a)
(3)
A.
§ 267-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-13
1:841
[1] R1-7 District: 20 feet.
[2] R1-4.5, R1-3.6, R2-4.5 and RMF-6.75 Districts: 15 feet.
[3] RMF-10 and RMF-15 Districts: 10 feet.
The ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses,
chimneys, cornices, eaves and other similar architectural
features shall not project more than two feet into any side or
rear yard.
(b)
Front on corner lots.
The owner of a corner lot in a residence district may elect either
yard fronting on a street as the required front yard, with the
secondary front yard being equal to at least the following:
(a) R1-TH: 30 feet.
(b) R1-7: 18 feet.
(c) R1-4.5: 12 feet.
(d) R1-3.6, R2-4.5: eight feet.
(e) RMF-6.75: 10 feet.
(f) RMF-10: 15 feet.
(g) RMF-15: 20 feet.
(1)
The owner of a corner lot in a landscaped industrial district may
elect either yard fronting on a street as the required front yard,
with the secondary front yard equal to at least the following:
(a) LI-15: 18 feet.
(b) LI-7.5: 12 feet.
(2)
B.
Obstruction to visibility at intersections. The following requirements
with respect to obstruction to visibility at intersections shall apply to
one- and two-family properties in residence districts only. Standards
with regard to visibility affecting other properties shall be as
determined adequate by the Planning Board as set forth in Article VII
of this chapter.
Driveway intersections. Obstructions to visibility which exceed 2 1/
2 feet in height shall be prohibited in the triangles formed by the
edge of the paved street, the edge of the driveway and a line joining
points located along the street pavement edge 30 feet therefrom
and the driveway edge 15 feet therefrom.
(1)
Street intersections. Obstructions to visibility which exceed 2 1/
2 feet in height shall be prohibited in the triangle formed by
intersecting street pavement edges and a line joining points located
(2)
C.
§ 267-13 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-13
1:842
§ 267-14. Miscellaneous provisions.
along said street pavement edges which are 40 feet from the
theoretical point of intersection of such lines, as extended.
Height limitations. Spires, cupolas, belfries, flagpoles, radio towers,
masts, antennas and other similar structures covering a total of not
more than 10% of the horizontal area of the roof on which they are
located shall be permitted to exceed the otherwise maximum permitted
building height by not more than 10 feet unless a special permit
therefor is obtained from the Planning Board.
A.
Fences. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Residence districts:
Front yard. Wrought iron or aluminum fences and masonry
walls of at least 25% open construction, or any combination
thereof, not exceeding four feet in height, are permitted within
required front yards. Solid masonry walls, whether used on
their own or in combination with other types of fences, shall
not exceed three feet in height.
(a)
Side and rear yards. Fences and masonry walls not exceeding
six feet in height are permitted in side and rear yards, except
that where the lot area exceeds 7,000 square feet and lot
frontage exceeds 75 feet, a fence of at least 75% open
construction, located in side or rear yard, may have a
maximum height of eight feet.
(b)
(1)
Nonresidence districts:
Business districts. Wrought iron or aluminum fences and
masonry walls of at least 25% open construction, or any
combination thereof, not exceeding six feet in height, are
permitted within a street-facing yard. Solid masonry walls,
whether used on their own or in combination, shall not exceed
four feet in height when facing a street. Fences and masonry
walls not exceeding eight feet are permitted in other yards.
(a)
Industrial districts. Fences and masonry walls of at least 25%
open construction not exceeding eight feet are permitted in
any yard, except that the front yard fence shall be as permitted
in a business districts when facing a residence district.
(b)
(2)
Additional regulations for all districts:
(a) All fences and walls must be completely inside lot lines.
If any fence or wall has a finished or a more attractive side,
such side shall face the neighboring property or street.
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 267-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-14
1:843
Any fence or wall separating a lot for residence use from a lot
for nonresidence use may have a maximum height of eight feet.
(c)
Any fence or masonry wall surrounding a public utility use or
a use of a governmental agency in any district may have a
maximum height of eight feet, except that a fence within a
yard facing a street shall comply with the street-facing fence
regulations for the business and industrial districts.
(d)
A fence of at least 75% open construction and a maximum of
10 feet in height shall be permitted to enclose tennis courts.
(e)
Electrically charged fences, barbed-wire fences and other
fences constructed of sharp materials are not permitted.
Barbed wire or razor is permitted as part of a fence in an
I-Industrial District, provided such barbed wire is located at
least eight feet above the ground and is not visible from any
residence district within 250 feet thereof and approval has
been granted by the City Council.
(f)
Swimming pools. All permanent, portable or movable swimming pools
shall not be located, installed, constructed or maintained on any lot
except when in compliance with the following requirements:
Swimming pools installed above the ground shall have a height no
greater than 48 inches as measured from the mean ground level
at the base of the pool to the rim of the pool. The exposed sides
of such swimming pool shall be screened by evergreen landscaping
whose height at the time of installation shall be at least equal to
the height of the exposed portion of the swimming pool, exclusive
of deck rails. Such swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence
of at least six feet in height which shall be in compliance with all
other applicable laws and regulations.
(1)
Swimming pools installed in the ground, where the rim of the
pool is flush with the ground or with an on-ground deck, shall be
required to be surrounded with six-foot-high fencing which shall
be in compliance with all other applicable laws and regulations. In
addition, an evergreen screen which shall have a minimum height
of four feet shall be provided around the swimming pool, outside of
the fence, and shall be adequate to screen the view of the pool area
from adjacent properties and from the street.
(2)
Any lights illuminating swimming pools shall be so directed as
to eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays of light on
neighboring streets and properties.
(3)
All swimming pools shall be located no less than five feet from all
lot lines and shall not be located within any front yard.
(4)
All swimming pools shall be limited to the exclusive use of the
occupants of the premises and their nonpaying guests.
(5)
C.
§ 267-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-14
1:844
The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner that the proposed swimming pool will comply with
all other applicable codes and regulations.
(6)
The emptying of swimming pools shall comply with all other
applicable codes and regulations.
(7)
All swimming pool fences shall be located on a line not more than
20 feet parallel to the edge of the swimming pool.
(8)
The filter pump and electrical switch shall be secured and at a
location where noise will not emanate beyond the perimeter of the
property and shall not be located in any required yard.
(9)
Where the construction of a lake or pond, which otherwise meets
the definition of a swimming pool, is reviewed as part of a site
plan or special permit application, that review shall suffice and a
separate permit under this section need not be obtained.
(10)
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts. All such
courts shall not be located, installed, constructed or maintained on any
lot except when in compliance with the following requirements:
(1) All such courts shall be located in the side or rear yard only.
All such courts shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any
side or rear lot line.
(2)
Any lights illuminating such a court shall be so directed as to
eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays of light on
neighboring streets and properties.
(3)
(4) All such courts shall cease operation at 10:00 p.m.
No fence shall be constructed without prior approval of the Board
of Architectural Review.
(5)
D.
Land underwater. No land which is located below the high-water line or
beyond the bulkhead line or land elsewhere which is underwater may
be claimed as available for building development or for compliance with
any requirement contained in this chapter, other than yard setbacks,
unless plans for filling such land in a manner satisfactory to the
Planning Board and other responsible governmental agencies are made
a part of the application for which the permit is requested.
Notwithstanding the above, such underwater areas may be used to
comply with yard setback requirements, provided that the resultant
building setback is equal to the average setback of other existing
principal buildings on properties within 200 feet.
E.
Wetlands setbacks. No building or structure shall be erected within
25 feet of the boundary of any tidal or freshwater wetlands, other
than piers, docks, marinas or boat launching, storage, repair or service
F.
§ 267-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-14
1:845
facilities for which approval is granted by the appropriate approving
agency.
Floodplains. No structure shall be erected in a designated floodplain
without compliance with flood hazard protection requirements.
G.
Security grilles. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Roll-up, folding or sliding grilles of noncombustible construction
may be installed in nonresidence districts only, provided that:
Security grilles and accompanying devices, motor and housing
shall be installed on the interior side of the building and shall
unfold or roll down on the interior side of the window or door.
(a)
Security grilles shall be open-mesh construction, with no
openings smaller than two inches in any direction and shall
provide complete transparency and visibility into the interior
space.
(b)
Security grilles shall be completely in open position during
business hours. The enclosure which houses the grille during
business hours shall not be visible from either the inside or the
outside of the building.
(c)
Security grilles and accompanying devices, motor and housing
shall be installed so that they may be removed at any time
without endangering the structural and fire safety of the
building.
(d)
(1)
Upon written notification by the Commissioner of Buildings,
existing security grilles which are rendered nonconforming by the
adoption of this amendment, shall be removed within six months of
written notification. The area where the security grille housing and
tracks were attached shall be restored to proper conditions and
good maintenance.
(2)
Security grilles shall be installed or removed in accordance with
this chapter under a sign permit.
(3)
It shall be a violation of this chapter to maintain in place an
existing nonconforming security grille beyond six months of written
notification or to install a new security grille in nonconformity of
this chapter.
(4)
H.
Landscaping, screening and buffer areas.
All portions of lots which are not used for locations for buildings,
structures, parking and loading facilities, sidewalks or similar
purposes shall be suitably landscaped and permanently maintained
with planting of groundcover, grass, trees and/or shrubbery. Such
planting shall be provided and permanently maintained in
accordance with specifications approved as part of the site plan
(1)
I.
§ 267-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-14
1:846
for properties that are, or have been, subject to site plan approval.
[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Any application to construct or alter any building or structure or to
establish any use in any nonresidence district or any nonresidential
use in any district shall include provisions for a buffer screening
area at least 10 feet in width along any lot line abutting a privately
owned lot in a residence district. Any application to construct
a development of multifamily dwellings requiring more than 10
parking spaces shall include provisions for a buffer screening area
at least 10 feet in width along any lot line abutting a privately
owned lot in a one-family or two-family residence district. These
requirements may be waived by the approving agency in situations
where it determines that adjoining land uses, topographic features
or existing vegetation satisfy the same purpose. The approving
agency may allow the substitution of a wall or fence of location,
height, design and materials approved by it, and meeting the
requirements of § 267-14B, for part or all of the required planting.
Where such a buffer screening area is required, it shall be of
evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and arrangement
as in the judgment of the approving agency will screen the activity
involved from the neighboring residential area. Non-evergreen
planting may seasonally supplement evergreen planting but not
take its place. The plan and specifications for such planting shall
be filed with the plans for the use of the lot.
(2)
All required landscaping shall be properly trimmed and maintained
in healthy growing condition at all times.
(3)
Fee in lieu of landscaping. Application for a permit for construction,
alteration, addition or change of use shall not be granted if the
maximum permitted impervious surface coverage for the district is
exceeded, or if the required landscaped buffer and screening area
are not provided, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
The applicant shall pay a landscaping fee in lieu of providing the
minimum required landscaped pervious surfaces upon approval
from the Zoning Board of Appeals of an area variance for
impervious surface coverage in excess of the permitted coverage.
The landscaping fee shall be paid to the issuing agency prior to
the issuance of the permit, except that the fee may be paid at
any time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
project under construction at the time this amendment takes effect.
[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(4)
Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting accessories on private property,
including the lighting of signs, shall be of such type and location and
have such shading as will prevent the source of light from being seen
from any adjoining streets and residential properties and which shall
prevent objectionable glare observable from such streets or properties.
J.
K. Solar energy collectors.
§ 267-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-14
1:847
Installation of solar energy collectors, other than for one- and
two-family dwellings, shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Board, which shall take into account the needs of energy
conservation.
(1)
Access to sunlight for present and potential solar energy systems,
both on- and off-site, as well as building siting, orientation and
landscaping, shall be considered by all approving agencies as part
of their review of any application.
(2)
New construction on any lot which would block access to sunlight
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Eastern standard
time, for existing approved solar energy collectors or for solar
energy collectors for which a permit has been issued is prohibited
except by permission from the Board of Appeals on a showing that
other arrangements are infeasible or impractical or that the degree
of blocking is negligible.
(3)
Sale of adult entertainment merchandise in a non-adult entertainment
store. The sale, rental or offer for any consideration of adult
entertainment merchandise as defined by § 267-4 may be permitted in
any otherwise legally established store or shop subject to the following
conditions: [Added 2-3-1999]
The total floor space used for display of the adult entertainment
merchandise shall not exceed 20 square feet or 25% of the total
stock of merchandise offered for sale, rental or other consideration
to the public, whichever is less.
(1)
All adult entertainment merchandise shall be displayed out of view
from persons under the age of 18, and access by persons under the
age of 18 shall be prohibited at all times.
(2)
No displays of adult entertainment merchandise shall be permitted
to be visible from any public right-of-way.
(3)
All adult entertainment merchandise shall be sold, rented or
otherwise offered for consideration for off-site use only. Any onsite
viewing, reading or listening areas for adult entertainment
merchandise or live performances shall classify the business as an
adult entertainment business as defined by § 267-4, which business
shall then be regulated in accordance with all provisions in this
chapter as an adult entertainment business, regardless of the
amount of floor space used for the adult entertainment business.
(4)
L.
Accessory buildings and structures. The height of an accessory building
in any districts shall be limited to one story with a maximum building
height of 12 feet. Exception: The maximum height of an accessory
structure used solely as an accessory parking facility in a district other
than a one-, two- or three-family dwelling district, shall be permitted
to be the same as the permitted height for the district in which it is
located if the structure setbacks comply with the required setbacks of
M.
§ 267-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-14
1:848
a principal building in such district. [Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
Exterior walls located three feet or closer from property lines: [Added
7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Exterior wall located three feet or closer from property lines shall
be finished on the exterior side with any type of masonry or
concrete materials that does not require periodical maintenance.
(1)
Exterior wall located at property line shall be constructed of
masonry or concrete that has at least one finished side on the
exterior side of the wall.
(2)
N.
Storefront obstructions. [Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Transparency. Storefront glass shall be transparent. No visual
obstruction of a temporary or permanent nature shall be placed
behind a storefront window or door to obstruct the view of the
entire interior space from the public street, or to obstruct egress.
The following features shall constitute a storefront obstruction:
Painting, decal, blinds, curtains, etc., placed onto or behind the
storefront glass to make it opaque, translucent or obscured,
shall be prohibited.
(a)
Storage of merchandise, shelves, counters, refrigerators, and
other features shall not be placed within three feet of the
storefront. The side of appliances or display furniture, if facing
the storefront, shall be attractively finished.
(b)
Exception. Window display such as fashion or furniture display
shall not be considered an obstruction when they are
attractively and professionally arranged and do not obstruct
the view.
(c)
(1)
Removal of obstructions.
Obstructions in existence at the time of adoption of this
amendment. Storefront obstructions which are in existence at
the time of adoption of this subsection shall be removed upon
written notification by the Commissioner. The obstructions
shall be removed within the time period prescribed below:
Temporary obstructions, such as window signs, or movable
obstructions, such as shelved storage of merchandise,
shall be removed immediately upon receipt of written
notification.
[1]
Fixed obstructions, such as appliances with water and
waste connection, or such as fixed counters, shall be
removed within six months of written notice. Fixed
[2]
(a)
(2)
O.
§ 267-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-14
1:849
obstructions shall be removed under the applicable
permit(s).
Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the business
owner to maintain the storefront at his/her place of business
free of obstruction. A business owner who fails to maintain
the storefront free of obstruction or who fails to comply to the
Commissioner's written notification within the prescribed time
shall be in violation of this chapter.
(b)
Encroachments. [Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
No person shall erect, construct or place any building,
appurtenance, fixture or structure connected therewith, in whole
or in part, underground, overhead or upon any street, highway,
public lane, alley, public street or right-of-way. Exceptions:
Decorative architectural components such as window sills and
cornices are permitted to encroach no more than 18 inches if
located more than seven feet above the adjacent ground.
(a)
Structures permitted to encroach in accordance with other
sections of the City Code.
(b)
(1)
Existing encroachments. Existing buildings or structures, or parts
thereof, encroaching into the City's right-of-way and constructed
under a valid permit allowing such encroachment, shall be
permitted to remain in place as long as they are in good
maintenance and/or structurally safe and provided that the owner
execute an indemnification agreement with the City. Failure to
execute said indemnification agreement shall be grounds for the
removal of the structure(s).
(2)
Reconstruction and maintenance.
Reconstruction of a building or structure, or part thereof,
which encroaches into the City's right-of-way, shall be
prohibited.
(a)
Minor repairs and maintenance of a building or structure,
or part thereof, which encroaches into the City's right-of-way
shall be permitted in accordance with applicable codes, laws
and regulations. Any person seeking such minor repairs and/
or maintenance of an encroaching building or structure, or
part thereof, shall indemnify the City or remove the building or
structure or part thereof from within the City's right-of-way.
(b)
Relief and interpretation. Any application to reconstruct any
portion of a building and/or structure which encroaches within
the City's right-of-way shall be denied in writing by the
Department of Buildings. Upon such denial, the applicant may
seek relief of the denial from the City Council.
(c)
(3)
P.
§ 267-14 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-14
1:850
ARTICLE V
Districts
[Amended 3-10-1999, approved 3-11-1999; 7-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009; 12-11-2013, approved 12-12-2013]
§ 267-15. Purposes.
In addition to the general purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 267-1,
the following specific purposes are set forth for residence and nonresidence
districts:
Residence districts.
To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life
where safe streets, wide yards and quiet neighborhoods are of
paramount importance.
(1)
To avoid, as far as possible, commercial traffic and through traffic
of all kinds in residential areas.
(2)
To encourage a balanced variety of housing types, sizes and
densities, consistent with the character of existing neighborhoods
and the provision of adequate open space, sunlight and air.
(3)
For the RMF-6.75 Multifamily Residence District, to provide a
medium-density housing environment that promotes the
development of one- and two-family dwellings; also, for the
conversion of large existing dwellings to multifamily use, and
encourage the construction of new multifamily dwellings, not to
exceed three units, on sites where adequate on-site parking and
open space can be provided.
(4)
For all RMF Multifamily Residence Districts, to encourage the
development of dwelling units suitable for a variety of household
sizes at higher densities which will allow for the construction of
such housing at a relatively more moderate cost. Such districts
are generally intended to be located in convenient proximity to
employment, shopping, transportation and community facilities.
Adequate on-site parking and open space must be provided.
(5)
For the H Hospital District, to ensure the development and
continuation of hospital and medical-related facilities needed to
serve the City's healthcare needs.
(6)
A.
Nonresidence districts.
For the NB Neighborhood Business District, to serve the retail and
service convenience shopping needs of residential areas and to
provide the opportunity for the continuation of pedestrian-oriented
retail and service business uses in the City's residential
neighborhoods.
(1)
B.
§ 267-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-15
1:851
For the OB Office Business District, to provide a medium-density
office district which is intended to encourage the development of
modern office buildings within the downtown area of the City.
(2)
For the DB Downtown Business District, to allow the future growth
and orderly development of the major downtown area in the City
with a wide variety of retail, office and service business uses.
(3)
For the CB Commercial Business Districts, to provide a wide
variety of retail, office and service business uses in character and
scale with existing and planned future development along some of
the major arterial commercial streets of the City.
(4)
For the LI Landscaped Industrial District, to promote a
combination of manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale storage
and other industrial type uses in areas with good highway access
and which have already developed an industrial character.
(5)
For the I Industry District, to provide appropriate location and
development standards for more intensive types of industrial
development.
(6)
Special zoning districts.
For the R1-TH Townhouse Residence District, to promote the
development of one-family attached or detached dwellings on sites
where topographic features, landscape resources, locational
characteristics and acreage suggest clustering of buildings as the
most appropriate building type.
(1)
For the RMF-SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating
Overlay Zoning District, to provide housing opportunities for senior
citizens in locations convenient to shopping, transportation and
community facilities which comprise of superior functional design,
quality of construction, appearance and operational standards.
(2)
For the Urban Renewal Planned Development, to encourage a
predominately residential mixed-use planned unit development of
a large tract of land in such manner as to permit a variety of
compatible land uses, encourage flexibility of design and
development, to expand the City's tax base and to otherwise
promote development in connection with the stated goals and
objectives of the City.
(3)
For the PUD-2 Planned Unit Development, to encourage flexibility
of design and development of land in such a manner as to minimize
negative environmental impacts, provide for excellence in
architectural design of buildings, maximize fiscal benefits for the
City and otherwise promote the most environmentally desirable
form of future development.
(4)
C.
§ 267-15 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-16
1:852
§ 267-16. List of use regulations and Schedule of Dimensional
Regulations.
The accompanying list of use regulations (§§ 267-17, 267-18 and 267-19)
and Schedule of Dimensional Regulations115 list and define the permitted
uses of land, buildings and structures, and the minimum and maximum
dimensional requirements to be met in connection with such uses. All
permitted uses are set forth in the list of use regulations by district. Any use
not specifically listed as being permitted shall be deemed to be prohibited.
Only in multifamily and nonresidence districts is more than one permitted
principal use allowed on a single lot.
§ 267-17. List of residence district uses.
District R1-7 One-Family Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Public schools.
(c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(f) Minor accessory structures.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(b)
(c) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
(3)
A.
115. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Dimensional Regulations is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 267-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-17
1:853
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(d)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(e)
(f) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
District R1-4.5 One-Family Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Public schools.
(c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19.
(e)
(f) Minor accessory structures.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(b)
(c) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(d)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(e)
(f) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(3)
B.
§ 267-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-17
1:854
(g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
District R1-3.6 One-Family Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Public schools.
(c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(f) Minor accessory structures.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(b)
(c) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(d)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(e)
(f) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
C.
District R2-4.5 Two-Family Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
One-family dwellings as regulated in the R1-4.5 Residence
District.
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 267-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-17
1:855
(b) Attached dwelling units.
(c) Two-family dwellings.
(d) Public schools.
(e) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(f) Minor accessory structures.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(e)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(f)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(g)
(h) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
District RMF-6.75 Multifamily Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
One-family dwellings as regulated in the R1-4.5 Residence
District.
(a)
(1)
E.
§ 267-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-17
1:856
Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated
in the R2-4.5 District.
(b)
(c) Multifamily dwellings, not to exceed three units per building.
(d) Public schools.
(e) Community purpose buildings.
(f) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(f) Minor accessory structures.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(e)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(f)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(g)
(h) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
District RMF-10 Multifamily Residence.
(1) Permitted principal uses.
F.
§ 267-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-17
1:857
One-family dwellings as regulated in the R1-4.5 Residence
District.
(a)
Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated
in the R2-4.5 District.
(b)
Multifamily dwellings containing no more than three units per
building as regulated in the R-6.75 Residence District.
(c)
(d) Multifamily dwellings.
(e) Public schools.
(f) Community purpose buildings.
(g) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(e)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(f)
(g) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(h)
(i) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(3)
§ 267-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-17
1:858
(j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
District RMF-15 Multifamily Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
One-family dwellings as regulated in the R1-4.5 Residence
District.
(a)
Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated
in the R2-4.5 Residence District.
(b)
Multifamily dwellings containing no more than three units per
building as regulated in the R-6.75 Residence District.
(c)
(d) Multifamily dwellings.
(e) Public schools.
(f) Community purpose buildings.
(g) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(e)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(f)
(3)
G.
§ 267-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-17
1:859
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated
by § 267-28C.
(g)
(h) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
(i) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
District H Hospital.
Permitted principal uses.
Hospital and related facilities, including nursing schools and
housing for staff members, nurses and interns, resident
physicians, researchers, employees, faculty members, students
and their immediate families; sanitariums for noncontagious
diseases; private proprietary nursing homes; and private
proprietary convalescent homes.
(a)
(b) Medical and dental offices.
(c) Medical-care facilities.
(d) Medical laboratories.
One-family dwellings as regulated in the R1-4.5 Residence
District.
(e)
Attached dwelling units, two-family dwellings and multifamily
dwellings as permitted and regulated in the RMF-10 Residence
District.
(f)
(g) Public schools.
(h) Community purpose buildings.
(i) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(2)
(3) Uses allowed by special permit.
H.
§ 267-17 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-17
1:860
§ 267-18. Additional regulations for residence districts.
§ 267-19. List of nonresidence district uses.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(d)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(e)
(f) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
(g) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(h) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations. In districts where permitted, one office of a professional
person or a customary home occupation may be established in a
dwelling unit subject to the following:
Any such use must be located entirely within the dwelling unit of
its practitioner and not elsewhere on the lot or in any accessory
building or structure.
(1)
No signs shall be permitted for a customary home occupation.
For the office of a professional person, one sign meeting the
requirements of Article XIII, Signs, shall be permitted.
(2)
The individual involved in such use must be domiciled in the
dwelling unit.
(3)
One nonresident partner, associate or employee shall be permitted
to work on the premises, provided that site plan approval in
accordance with Article VII of this chapter has been obtained or, in
the case of an existing structure, such use has been registered with
the Building Department.
(4)
No more than 25% of the floor area of one story of the dwelling
unit or 500 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for such
purposes.
(5)
There may be only one patient, client, customer or any other kind
of visitor being served at any one time.
(6)
A.
A. District NB Neighborhood Business.
§ 267-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-19
1:861
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Public schools.
(b) Business, professional or governmental offices.
Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail or the
performance of customary personal services.
(c)
(d) Museums and/or art galleries.
(e) Medical and/or dental offices.
(f) Medical laboratories.
(g) Business and/or trade schools.
(h) Retail laundries or retail dry cleaners.
(i) Hotels and motels.
(j) Motor vehicle dealerships.
(k) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
(l) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20.
(m) Bakeries, retail.
(n) Restaurants.
(o) Restaurants, carry-out.
(p) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-up window service).
(q) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly
incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted principal use
on the lot on which they are located.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Funeral parlors.
(e) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(f)
(3)
§ 267-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-19
1:862
(g) Banks.
(h) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by § 267-28G.
(i) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
(j) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
(k) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(l) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(m) Social clubs as regulated by § 267-23A.
District OB Office Business.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(b) Medical and/or dental offices.
(c) Hotels.
(d) Banks.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20A.
Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail or the
performance of customary personal services.
(g)
(h) Medical laboratories.
(i) Public schools.
(j) Museums and art galleries.
(k) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly
incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted principal use
on the lot on which they are located.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
(3)
B.
§ 267-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-19
1:863
(e) Funeral parlors.
(f) Theaters and/or concert halls.
(g) Off-street parking facilities.
(h) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
(i) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
District DB Downtown Business.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
Stores and shops for sales at retail or the performance of
customary personal services.
(b)
(c) Hotels.
(d) Bakeries, retail.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Restaurants, carry-out.
(g) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-up window service).
(h) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20A.
(i) Medical and dental offices.
(j) Theaters and/or concert halls.
(k) Museums and/or art galleries.
(l) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
(m) Motor vehicle dealerships.
(n) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly
incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted principal use
on the lot on which they are located.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Day-care centers.
(3)
C.
§ 267-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-19
1:864
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Banks.
(e) Funeral parlors.
(f) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
(g) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
(h) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by § 267-28G.
(i) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
(j) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(k) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
Multifamily dwellings regulated by § 267-28E. [Added
4-9-2014, approved 4-10-2014]
(l)
District CB Commercial Business.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Hotels and/or motels.
(b) Community purpose buildings.
(c) Business, professional or governmental offices.
Stores and shops for sales at retail or the performance of
customary personal services.
(d)
Manufacture and/or assembly of products for retail sale on the
premises only, provided that not more than 50% of the gross
floor area of any establishment be so used.
(e)
(f) Retail laundries or retail dry cleaners.
(g) Banks.
(h) Bakeries, retail.
(i) Restaurants.
(j) Restaurants, carry-out.
(k) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-up window service).
(l) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20A.
The storage of commercial vehicles within fully enclosed
buildings.
(m)
(n) Funeral parlors.
(1)
D.
§ 267-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-19
1:865
(o) Beverage bottling and distribution as regulated by § 267-20B.
(p) Bowling alleys and billiard halls.
(q) Printing plants.
(r) Medical and/or dental offices.
(s) Medical and/or dental laboratories.
(t) Car washes as regulated by § 267-20B.
(u) Theaters and/or concert halls.
(v) Animal hospitals.
(w) Motor vehicle dealerships.
(x) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly
incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted principal use
on the lot on which they are located.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
Restaurants, fast-food, with drive-up window service as
regulated by § 267-28F.
(b)
(c) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
(d) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by § 267-28G.
Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and
distribution in fully enclosed buildings.
(e)
Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products,
in fully enclosed buildings, as regulated by § 267-25V.
(f)
(g) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
(h) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(j) Social clubs as regulated by § 267-20A.
(3)
District LI-7.5, LI-15 Landscaped Industrial.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(1)
E.
§ 267-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-19
1:866
Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products,
in fully enclosed buildings.
(b)
(c) Motor vehicle dealerships.
(d) Banks.
(e) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-up window service).
(f) Restaurants.
(g) Funeral parlors.
(h) Retail dry cleaning.
(i) Animal hospitals.
(j) Printing plants.
(k) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
Stores and shops for sales at retail, provided that such
products are manufactured or assembled on the premises.
(b)
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
Restaurants, fast-food, with drive-up window service as
regulated by § 267-28F.
(b)
(c) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20.
Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and
distribution, in fully enclosed buildings.
(d)
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) distribution points as regulated
by § 267-20B.
(e)
(f) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
District I Industry.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(1)
F.
§ 267-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-19
1:867
Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products,
in fully enclosed buildings.
(b)
(c) Animal hospitals.
(d) Car washes.
(e) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
(f) Motor vehicle dealerships.
(g) Banks.
(h) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-up window service).
(i) Restaurants.
(j) Printing plants.
(k) Beverage bottling and distribution.
Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and
distribution, in fully enclosed buildings.
(l)
(m) Storage of motor vehicles.
Storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction
equipment and/or supplies.
(n)
Trucking terminals and truck trailer storage as regulated by
§ 267-20B.
(o)
(p) Fuel distribution businesses and/or facilities.
(q) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly
incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted principal use
on the lot on which they are located.
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Cemeteries.
Restaurants, fast-food, with drive-up window service as
regulated by § 267-28F.
(c)
(d) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-20A.
(e) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by § 267-28G.
(f) Motor vehicle body repair shops as regulated by § 267-28G.
(3)
§ 267-19 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-19
1:868
§ 267-20. Additional regulations for nonresidence districts.
§ 267-21. List of special zoning district uses.
(g) Outdoor storage.
LPG distribution points and/or facilities as regulated by
§ 267-20B.
(h)
Asphalt heating and/or mixing facilities as regulated by
§ 267-25U.
(i)
(j) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(k) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
Adult entertainment store, subject to all conditions listed in
§ 267-28I.
(l)
Adult live entertainment business, subject to all conditions
listed in § 267-28I.
(m)
Adult motion picture theater, subject to all conditions listed in
§ 267-28I.
(n)
Bars, nightclubs and catering halls. No bar, nightclub and/or catering
establishment shall be permitted to be established within 200 feet of a
building occupied exclusively as a public school, public housing project,
church or other place of worship measured along street lines between
their closest entrances.
A.
Nonresidential uses prohibited adjacent to residence districts.
Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter, the following
nonresidential uses are prohibited on any lot directly adjoining and/or
opposite a residence district:
(1) Beverage bottling and/or distribution.
(2) Car wash.
(3) LPG distribution points and/or facilities.
(4) Trucking terminals and truck trailer storage.
B.
District R1-TH One-Family Townhouse Residence.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings and attached dwelling units.
(b) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
(2) Permitted accessory uses.
A.
§ 267-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-21
1:869
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(c)
(d) Customary home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
Uses allowed by special permit.
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(c) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
District RMF-SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Zone.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Senior citizen housing.
(b) Senior residential health-care facility.
(c) Assisted living residence.
(d) Adult retirement community.
(e) Enriched housing.
(f) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which directly serve the residents of the
principal use such as pharmacies, kitchens, personal services,
parking facilities and offices.
(a)
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(b)
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
(e) Community center.
(f) Medical and dental offices.
(2)
B.
§ 267-21 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-21
1:870
(g) Medical-care facilities.
(h) Public schools.
(i) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(j) Medical supply stores.
(k) Museums and/or art galleries.
(l) Medical laboratories.
(m) Business and/or trade schools.
(n) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
(o) Shops for the performance of customary personal services.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(p)
(q) Senior-citizen-oriented adult day-care.
District UR-PUD Urban Renewal Planned Unit Development as
regulated by § 267-23.1.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) One-family dwellings and attached dwelling units.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Multifamily dwellings.
(d) Public schools.
(e) Community purpose buildings.
Office space for physicians, surgeons and dentists, located
within the lobby or lowest residential story of a multifamily
dwelling, limited to not more than 30% of the total rentable
floor area of that story, and subject to all the off-street parking
requirements as set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
(f)
(g) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(h) Hotels.
(i) Banks.
(j) Restaurants.
(k) Museums and art galleries.
(l) Theaters and/or concert halls.
(m) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(1)
C.
§ 267-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-21
1:871
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
(c) Swimming pools as regulated by § 267-14C.
Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as
regulated by § 267-14D, but not in required yard areas.
(d)
Office in residence of a professional person and customary
home occupations as regulated by § 267-19A.
(e)
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(d) Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by
§ 267-28A.
(e)
Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by
§ 267-28D, but only when accessory to a permitted principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
(f)
(g) Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
(h) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
(3)
District PUD-2 Planned Unit Development as regulated by § 267-23.2.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Multifamily dwellings.
(b) Community purpose buildings.
(c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
(d) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(e) Business incubator space.
Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail for the
performance of customary personal services.
(f)
(g) Restaurants.
(h) Universities, colleges and private schools.
(1)
D.
§ 267-21 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-21
1:872
§ 267-22. R1-TH Districts.
§ 267-23. RMF-SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone
District.
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot
on which they are located.
(a)
(2)
Uses allowed by special permit.
(a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
(b) Day-care centers.
(c) Nursery schools.
(3)
Eligibility. The minimum parcel size shall be no less than four acres and
the maximum parcel size shall be no greater than 20 acres. Eligible
parcels must abut a street with a paved roadway of such width as shall
be deemed appropriate by the City Council after recommendation by
the Planning Board.
A.
Size of dwellings. All buildings may have up to four attached dwelling
units. No more than 50% of the permitted dwelling units shall be
in buildings with a maximum length of 120 feet. The balance of the
permitted units shall be in buildings with a maximum permitted length
of 100 feet. Where special topographical and/or environmental
conditions, such as steep slopes, rock outcroppings, wetlands, a stand
of major trees or a unique ecological resource, would be better
protected, the Planning Board may permit an increase in the number of
dwelling units which may be in buildings of four attached units with a
maximum length of 120 feet.
B.
Recreation facilities. The use of any recreation buildings and structures
shall be limited to the residents of the dwellings in the development and
their nonpaying guests. No entertainment, live or mechanical, or the
use of outdoor public address systems shall be permitted.
C.
Purpose. The City Council determined that due to the rising population
of senior citizens within the City, a provision for such housing is
necessary to accommodate this growing segment of the population
while retaining the City's existing character.
A.
Creation of subareas. In order to effectively carry out the provisions
of this section, there are hereby created and established certain
"development intensity areas" which distinguishes the inclusion of
senior citizen housing in the residential areas from the inclusion of
senior citizen housing in the City's commercial areas. These areas are
the Residential Area and Commercial Corridor Area.
B.
§ 267-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:873
Eligibility. The RMF-SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating
Overlay Zone District is an established, unmapped floating overlay
zone. Parcels eligible for RMF-SC designation by the City Council shall
be currently zoned RMF-10, RMF-15, CB, DB, OB, NB or H and located
within the area delineated on the "Areas Eligible for RMF-SC
Designation Map", found in Attachments of Chapter 267 of this Code.116
Residential Area.
Definition. A development site where the RMF-SC Multifamily
Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone may be applied
to any parcel currently zoned RMF-10 or RMF-15.
(a)
Residential character preservation. In an effort to retain the
existing residential character of the development site
designated with the RMF-SC Multifamily Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone and located on any parcel with
the RMF-10 or RMF-15, underlying zoning may occupy only the
ground floor with one of the accessory uses as permitted in
§ 267-21B(2). In the event the developer elects to do so, the
permitted accessory use shall not exceed the ground floor total
area.
(b)
(1)
Commercial Corridor Area.
Definition. A development site where the RMF-SC Multifamily
Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone may be applied
to any parcel currently zoned CB, DB, OB, NB or H within the
prescribed senior citizen housing floating overlay zone area as
shown on the Zoning Map.
(a)
Mixed-use preservation. In an effort to facilitate the
preservation of the commercial character and mixed-used
development patterns along the City's commercial corridors,
development site(s) to be designated with the RMF-SC
Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone
located along a commercial corridor and on a parcel(s)
currently zoned CB, DB, OB, NB and H shall occupy the ground
floor with the principal permitted uses of the underlying
zoning. Development site(s) to be designated with RMF-SC
Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone that
are located on commercially zoned parcels (CB, DB, OB, NB or
H), but not located along a commercial corridor, may occupy
the ground floor with a commercial use(s) as permitted in
accordance with the principal permitted uses of the underlying
zone.
(b)
(2)
C.
Boundary. The boundaries of each RMF-SC Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone District shall be fixed by amendment to the
official City Zoning Map as a floating overlay zone which has been
D.
116. Editor's Note: Said map is an file in the City offices.
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:874
authorized by the City Council, wherever the district is applied. A metes
and bounds description of each such district shall be kept on file in the
Office of the City Clerk.
Applicability. In accordance with § 267-53 of the Zoning Code, the City
Council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition by
applicants and after public notice and hearing as required by law,
act to amend, supplement, repeal or change the existing regulations
and provisions and rezone property to the RMF-SC Multifamily Senior
Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District established under this
chapter.
E.
Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the
minimum or maximum requirements, as the case may be, but may be
made more restrictive where such is determined appropriate by the
City Council, based upon consideration of the particular circumstances
of the individual application, to satisfy the purposes as set forth in
§ 267-15C(2) hereof.
Requirements.
Building height.
The maximum building height where senior citizen
housing is permitted in accordance with this ordinance
shall not exceed 90 feet. The minimum base height shall
not be less than 45 feet. For every 45 feet of building
height along greater road function class, there shall be a
building step-back of 10 feet. For every 45 feet of building
height along lesser road function class, there shall be a
building step-back of 15 feet.
[1]
(a)
Building coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed
50%.
(b)
Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall
not exceed 80%.
(c)
Lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 10,000
square feet.
(d)
Lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall be 250 square feet.
(e)
Lot width and frontage. The minimum lot width and frontage
shall be 100 feet.
(f)
Front yard setback. The front yard setback shall be the average
front yard setback of the existing buildings on the same side of
the street.
(g)
Secondary front yard setback. Secondary front yard setback
shall be the average front yard setback of the existing
(h)
(1)
F.
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:875
buildings on the same side of the street in which the secondary
front yard faces.
Side yard setback. The side yard setback(s) shall not be less
than the average side yard setback(s) of the existing buildings
on the same side of the street.
(i)
Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback for
structures shall be 20 feet.
(j)
Primary front yard.
Primary front yard on corner lots. The owner of lots having
frontages on intersecting streets, ingress and egress shall
be the street with the lesser road function class to
accommodate senior citizen drop-off point.
[1]
Primary front yard on through lots. For the owner of lots
having frontages on more than one street, ingress and
egress shall be the street with the greater road function
class.
[2]
(k)
Through lots.
Any application consisting of a through lot shall include
provisions for a buffer screening area where the through
lot abuts the street with the lesser road function class. The
Planning Board may allow for the construction of a wall,
fencing, landscaping and/or any other item which in its
judgment will appropriately screen the activity involved or
structure(s) involved from the neighboring residential area
and the abutting street(s). Where such a buffer screening
is required, it shall be of a design, materials, location,
type, height, spacing and arrangement to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board. These requirements may be waived
by the Planning Board in situations where the Planning
Board determines that adjoining land uses, abutting
street(s), topographic features or existing vegetation
satisfy the same purpose. The plan and specifications for
such buffer screening shall be filed with the plans for the
use of the lot. All required landscaping shall be properly
trimmed and maintained in healthy growing condition at
all times.
[1]
(l)
Merging tax lots.
The property owner who owns two or more contiguous
parcels of land and seeks the Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone designation shall merge all
associated tax lots for municipal regulation and tax
purposes through the Office of the City Tax Assessor.
[1]
(m)
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:876
Parking requirements. All parking requirements and parking
facilities shall be in accordance with Article VIII of this chapter.
(2)
Density bonus. Upon approval by the City Council, an applicant
may be granted a density bonus by establishing public amenities
such as, but not limited to, plazas, arcades and displays of public
art. In such instances where the City Council finds the proposed
public amenity to be acceptable, the applicant shall be afforded a
bonus not to exceed 10 additional dwelling units.
(3)
De minimis exceptions, design exceptions and waivers. Deviation from
the development requirements, provisions, standards, uses and
regulations may be necessary in unusual circumstances. To account
for these circumstances, the City Council has the ability to waive or
allow an applicant to deviate from this section of this chapter based on
existing conditions hardship or a special reasons hardship.
Existing conditions hardship and/or special reasons hardship. In
instances where the applicant is confronted with hardships arising
from an existing condition of the land or instances where the
applicant creates the hardship to enhance the building and site
design, the City Council may grant exceptions from certain bulk,
uses, parking or design requirements, provided that the applicant
demonstrates:
That the proposed design exception will not substantially
impair the intent of the City's long-range planning strategy.
(a)
That the proposed design will not present a substantial
detriment to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community.
(b)
That the proposed design will enhance the aesthetic value of
the overall design, the site itself and the surrounding area.
(c)
That the proposed design will advance the purposes of this
chapter.
(d)
(1)
G.
Obtaining approval of design exceptions and waivers.
The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City
Council the following for approval of an exception or waivers:
The goals and objectives of this chapter and the City's longrange
planning strategy shall be further advanced.
(a)
The project will have no adverse impact on the physical, visual
and spatial character of the surrounding area.
(b)
The project will enhance the physical, visual and spatial
character of the streetscape.
(c)
(1)
H.
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:877
Deviations, exceptions or waivers shall not be granted for uses
that are not specified in this section of this chapter and shall not
be granted for height increases which exceed 10 feet beyond the
maximum permitted height of this section.
(2)
Conflicting requirements.
Within the areas designated by the City Council as RMF-SC Senior
Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District, all ordinances or
parts of ordinances inconsistent with this section of this chapter
are repealed, to the extent of such inconsistency only.
(1)
If any standards, objectives, land uses, provisions, controls,
permitted uses and other restrictions and requirements stated in
this section of this chapter differ in content from provisions set
forth in other section(s) of this chapter, unless otherwise specified,
this section of this chapter shall prevail.
(2)
If any provision or regulation of this section of this chapter shall
be judged, ruled or deemed invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this section of this chapter and such section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section of this chapter is
hereby declared severable.
(3)
I.
Design standards. The purpose of these standards is to ensure that
proposed senior citizen housing developments exhibit creativity and
variety in design features so that the unique character of Mount Vernon
is preserved. These guidelines shall be applicable to all proposed senior
citizen housing developments.
The placement, pattern, scale, size, and rhythm of window and door
openings on building facades, including proportions and details
around them make up building fenestration. The disposition and
design of window and door openings of traditional buildings help
determine their appeal and charm, and distinguish a building
facade from a generic, uninteresting appearance. Buildings with
poor fenestration appear visually uninteresting and/or boxy. The
relationship of window and door openings to the wall surface of
the facade contributes to a building's appeal and character. The
added architectural details, including materials, trims, bands and
cornices bring visual interest to building facades, enhance the
"box" and provide a human-scaled backdrop to the street space.
Buildings shall maximize the number of street level facade
openings for windows and doors.
(a)
Buildings shall maximize upper level facade openings for
punched-in windows, or glass and metal curtain wall. (Note: a
glass block-filled wall opening is part of the solid wall surface
and not considered a window.)
(b)
(1)
J.
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:878
Buildings shall set ground-floor window frames at a height
above the finished grade to reflect traditional main street
building qualities.
(c)
Buildings shall recess all window frames, particularly along the
ground floor, from the typical wall plane surface to provide a
shadow line and accentuate the ground floor.
(d)
All windows shall exhibit proportional scale that appropriately
indicates functions within the building.
(e)
Buildings shall delineate change in surface material by a reveal
or a recess detail.
(f)
All sides of a building open to public view shall employ
architectural features such as windows, a variety of colors,
patterns and complex massing to achieve interest especially at
the pedestrian level. Flat, blank walls along public rights-ofway
shall be prohibited.
(g)
Architectural massing refers to the way a building is shaped.
Building designs featuring a single geometric shape such as
a simple rectangle shall not be allowed. The requirement for
complex massing may be met by building designs featuring a
variety of parapet heights, varying building wall setbacks or
balconies, a variety of roof forms at different heights and an
irregular building footprint.
(h)
Each building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible
ground floor entryways featuring no less than three of the
following:
Entryways shall be recessed or projected along the street
level facade of the typical wall plane;
[1]
[2] Canopies or porticos;
[3] Overhangs;
[4] Recesses/projections;
[5] Raised corniced parapets over the door;
[6] Peaked roof forms;
[7] Arches;
[8] Outdoor patios;
[9] Planters;
[10]Wing walls; and
Any other architectural detail or feature that accentuates
the entryways for the public.
[11]
(i)
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:879
Review process. Application for development approval with the RMFSC
Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District shall follow
a three-phase review process. The site plan/subdivision review and
certificate of appropriateness review may occur simultaneously.
Application for the floating overlay zone designation and
dimensional standards approval reviewed by the City Council.
(1)
(2) Application for site plan approval reviewed by the Planning Board.
Application for certificate of appropriateness reviewed by the
Architectural Review Board.
(3)
K.
Procedure. Designation of a property for uses within the RMF-SC
Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District shall be
established by the City Council either on its own motion, on petition of
the property owner or its designee or recommendation of the Planning
Board, as with any request for legislative action, the City Council
has discretion as to whether or not to entertain a petition or a
recommendation of the Planning Board.
Development concept plan. In the case of an application of a
property owner or its designee requesting the establishment of a
use or uses as permitted by § 267-17I of RMF-SC Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District, the applicant shall submit
a preliminary development concept plan of the proposed
development concept showing all proposed buildings and uses on
the site, proposed building spacing, yard setbacks, the proposed
location and design of all streets, driveways, parking lots,
screening, landscaping, open spaces and recreation areas,
proposed architectural features of all buildings, the relationship
of the proposed development to adjacent land, and the health,
safety and general welfare of the community. Such plans shall
be accompanied by a brief analysis which shall include a market
demand analysis and traffic analysis and shadow analysis in written
form, explaining the proposed development concept and the
planning purposes of § 267-15A(7) which will be derived for the
City and the immediate surrounding neighborhood.
(1)
Referrals for review and report. The City Council shall refer any
such application or petition to the Corporation Counsel, Planning
Board and Architectural Review Board who shall report to it as
to whether the establishment of such zone will be in accordance
with the standards contained herein and will be of benefit to the
City by satisfying the intent and purposes as set forth in Article
V, § 267-15C(2) hereof. The Corporation Counsel shall report to
the City Council regarding the form of the proposed amendment.
The Planning Board shall report to the City Council regarding the
proposed operation in terms of traffic demand in relationship to
its location, compatibility with the City's long range goals and
strategies and the form of the proposed application. The
(2)
L.
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:880
Architectural Review Board shall report to the City Council
regarding the scale, mass, shape, style and size of all proposed
structures in relationship to its location and the form of the
proposed application.
Report and recommendation. Following completion of their
respective reviews, the Corporation Counsel, Planning Board
and Architectural Review Board shall prepare and submit their
report and recommendations to the City Council with respect
to the potential applicability of the RMF-SC Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District to the subject property
and, where applicable, with respect to the proposed
preliminary development concept plan and design.
(a)
Public hearing. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations
of the Planning Board and Architectural Review Board and any
revised proposed amendment from an applicant or notification by
the applicant that no revision will be made, the City Council may
schedule and hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
(3)
Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
on at least three different dates in the City's official newspaper, the
first insertion to be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior
to the date of the hearing. For proposed amendments to the Zoning
Map, at least one week prior to the public hearing a notice of such
hearing and a brief description of the proposed change shall be
mailed to all owners of property, as shown by the tax assessment
roll, within 200 feet of any land which would be affected by such
change. A copy of such notice, with proof of mailing, together with
proof of notice in the official newspaper, shall be filed in the City
Clerk's office on or before the date of the public hearing. The public
hearing shall also be published on the City's website not less than
10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the public
hearing. In addition to notification and publication requirements, a
sign shall be posted along all street frontages of the subject site at
least 14 days prior to the hearing date which meets the following
criteria:
(a) Be at least 24 inches by 36 inches.
(b) Consist of sturdy and serviceable material.
(c) Contain a white background with black letters.
(d) Legible with lettering and at least two inches in height.
Be placed in a location plainly visible from each street frontage
upon which the property fronts.
(e)
(f) Be placed more than five feet back from the property line.
(g) Not placed in the City's right-of-way.
(4)
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:881
(h) Not be placed more than five feet above ground.
Shall read as follows:
"THIS SITE IS PROPOSED FOR ISSUANCE OF A SENIOR
CITIZEN HOUSING ZONE CHANGE. THIS MATTER IS
SUBJECT TO A PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE THE CITY OF
MOUNT VERNON CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD AT CITY HALL
ON _____.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT AT (914) 699-7230."
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a duly sworn
affidavit attesting that such notification was completed. The
sign must be removed 48 hours after the public hearing.
Failure to abide by these rules for public hearing notification
will result in a delay of processing the application and
scheduling of the public hearing.
(i)
Referral to Westchester County Planning Board and adjacent
municipalities. Not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing,
the City Clerk shall forward copies of the proposed amendment
with the notice of public hearing to the Westchester County
Planning Board and to the clerks of any abutting municipalities
when required by law.
(5)
Council action. Following the close of the public hearing and
completion of the SEQRA process, the City Council shall act to
approve the proposed floating overlay zone designation and, where
applicable, the proposed development concept plan, either with
or without modifications, or shall disapprove the application. In
the event of its approval, notification of the action taken shall be
forwarded to the Planning Board and Architectural Review Board
for their further review and action, as appropriate. The Planning
Board and Architectural Review Board review and action may
occur simultaneously.
Rendering decisions. Every such application for the
establishment of RMF-SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating
Overlay Zone District on which the City Council may act is
a legislative act seeking to amend the Zoning Ordinance and
is therefore subject to the full legislative discretion of the
City Council. The City Council shall either approve, deny or
approve with conditions any such application and in making its
determinations shall consider the following criteria:
Compatibility with the City's long-range goals and
planning strategy;
[1]
[2] Does not change the neighborhood character;
(a)
(6)
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:882
Preservation of the mixed-use development pattern within
commercial areas and along commercial corridors;
[3]
[4] Conceal density through building design;
That the proposed designation will encourage appropriate
use of the land in accordance with the general purposes,
intent and spirit of this chapter and without detriment to
surrounding property values;
[5]
That the safety, health, welfare or the order of the City
shall not be adversely affected by the proposed use and its
location;
[6]
That the site is suitable for the location of such use in the
City;
[7]
That the proposed application shall not have a negative
impact on groundwater, traffic, public services and other
issues considered pursuant to SEQRA;
[8]
That there is sufficient roadway access to provide for
emergency services while reducing transportation needs;
[9]
That proposed landscaping and buffer areas have natural
and attractive plantings that are compatible with the
adjacent area and terrain;
[10]
That the applicant exhibits the wherewithal to complete
the project;
[11]
That the applicant provides for innovative and imaginative
approaches to senior citizen housing that does not detract
or severely depart from the existing neighborhood
character; and
[12]
That the proposed application has appropriate height,
scale, mass, size, shape and density in relationship to its
location.
[13]
The historical, architectural and/or cultural significance
of the existing site or existing structures to assess local
significance.
[14]
That there is the consideration of the Architectural Review
Board and the Planning Board.
[15]
Council vote. The action of the City Council to approve any
proposed amendment to this chapter shall be by majority vote,
except, however, if a protest is presented against such amendment,
duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of
the area of any land included in such proposed change, or by the
owners of 20% or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent
(7)
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23
1:883
and extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more
of the area of land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet
from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment
shall not be passed except by a 3/4 vote of the City Council.
Records. The City Clerk shall keep the official record copy of the
Zoning Map and text sections, and shall be responsible for the
posting of all changes thereto. Said Clerk shall also maintain a
file of all such zoning maps and text sections which have been
superseded by amendment of this chapter and must be available
for public inspection.
(8)
Planning Board and Architectural Review Board approval. Prior
to any construction within the RMF-SC Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone District, application shall be made for site
and certificate of appropriateness approval by the Planning Board
and the Architectural Review Board, respectively, in accordance
with each boards' respective rules and procedures.
Public hearing and public meeting. The Planning Board and
Architectural Review Board shall schedule a public hearing
and public meeting, respectively, on the proposed site plan
and certificate of appropriateness within 45 days of the date
of its receipt of a complete application in proper form and in
compliance with all SEQRA requirements. Notice of the public
hearing shall be as required by law.
(a)
(9)
Planning Board and Architectural Review Board action. Within 62 days
of the close of the public hearing or public meeting, the Planning Board
and Architectural Review Board shall act either to approve, with or
without modifications, or disapprove the proposed site plan/certificate
of appropriateness, respectively. The Planning Board and Architectural
Review Board decision shall be based upon the requirements of the City
Council rezoning approval, the purposes, standards and regulations of
the RMF-SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District,
site plan standards in accordance with Article VIII of the Zoning Code,
Chapter 10 of the City Charter and the requirements of SEQRA.
Approval shall be-required prior to the issuance of any building permit
or certificate of occupancy.
M.
Amendments during construction.
Minor amendments. During construction, the Commissioners of
Building and Planning may authorize minor adjustments to the
approved site plan and/or certificate of appropriateness when such
adjustments appear necessary, appropriate and/or de minimis
adjustments as the result of technical or engineering
considerations, the existence or materiality of which was first
discovered during actual construction. De minimis adjustments
shall be given to provide for economic growth while protecting the
(1)
N.
§ 267-23 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23
1:884
§ 267-23.1. UR-PUD Districts.
integrity of the site, the surrounding neighborhood, the City's longrange
planning strategy and the intent of the Zoning Code.
Substantial amendments. Where unforeseen conditions are
encountered which require any change to an approved site plan
and/or certificate of appropriateness which the Commissioner of
Planning considers substantial, or where the applicant wishes to
modify the approved site plan and/or certificate of appropriateness
for other reasons, an amended site plan and/or certificate of
appropriateness shall be filed for review and approval in
accordance with the same procedures required for an initial site
plan and/or certificate of appropriateness application.
(2)
Amendments after approval. An approved site with the RMF-SC Senior
Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone designation shall be amended
in the same manner and subject to the same limitations as any other
regulation established by this chapter.
O.
Eligibility. Eligible parcels for UR-PUD zoning shall be only those
located in an area officially designated as appropriate for urban
renewal by the City Council and having a minimum parcel size of 10
contiguous acres.
A.
Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the
minimum/maximum requirements, as the case may be, but may be
made more restrictive where such is determined appropriate based
upon consideration of the particular circumstances of the individual
application to satisfy the purposes as set forth in § 267-15C hereof.
Maximum dimensional requirements for residential use.
(a) The maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 2.50.
The maximum building height shall be 200 feet in height from
the finished grade.
(b)
The maximum lot coverage by residential structures less than
six stories but exclusive of any enclosed parking facilities
whose roof and exposed sides are bermed and landscaped to
screen such parking from public view is 30% of the total parcel
area.
(c)
The maximum lot coverage by residential structures greater
than six stories but exclusive of any enclosed parking facilities
whose roof and exposed sides are bermed and landscaped to
screen such parking from public view is 20% of the total parcel
area.
(d)
(1)
(2) Minimum dimensional requirements.
B.
§ 267-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23.1
1:885
§ 267-23.2. PUD-2 District.
The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 545 square
feet.
(a)
There shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of usable open
space per dwelling unit.
(b)
Off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street parking
and loading requirements shall be as set forth in Article VIII of this
chapter. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter,
where a parcel is located within 300 feet of a municipal parking
facility, the parking requirements of the URA-PUD District shall be
as follows:
Residential: A minimum of 0.75 parking spaces per dwelling
unit.
(a)
(b) Commercial: zero.
(3)
Maximum dimensional requirements for nonresidential use. The
maximum building height shall be 160 feet in height from the
finished grade.
(4)
Eligibility. The following are the minimum requirements for
establishing the eligibility of any property for PUD-2 Planned Unit
Development zoning:
The minimum parcel size shall be two contiguous acres. Where
parcels comprising the development site are divided by existing
City streets, the area of those streets between the lot lines of the
subject parcels may be counted as parcel area to meet the two-acre
minimum.
(1)
The eligible existing zoning districts shall be:
For residential development: RMF-6.75, RMF-10, and RMF-15
Districts.
(a)
(b) For nonresidential developments: CB and I Districts.
For residential/nonresidential mixed-use developments:
subject to the further restrictions set forth in § 267-23.2B(3)(f),
a combination of: (i) all three of the NB, CB and RMF-15
Districts; or (ii) the NB and RMF-15 Districts.
(c)
(2)
A.
Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the
minimum/maximum requirements, as the case may be, but may be
made more restrictive where such is determined appropriate based
upon consideration of the particular circumstances of the individual
application to satisfy the purposes as set forth in § 267-15C hereof.
(1) Standards for residential uses.
B.
§ 267-23.1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23.2
1:886
Building height.
Low-rise or one-family attached or detached dwellings
and/or multifamily dwellings the height of such buildings
does not exceed 90 feet in height from the finished grade.
[1]
Midrise multifamily dwellings consisting of attached units
in structures of not more than 160 feet in height from the
finished grade.
[2]
(a)
Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for uses other than
family detached dwellings shall be 25% for buildings and 50%
for all impervious surfaces.
(b)
Lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall be 545 square feet.
(c)
Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks for residential uses
from all perimeter lot lines shall be 20 feet.
(d)
The minimum distance between buildings shall be determined
as part of the application review process. In no case shall such
spacing be less than 25 feet or the average height of the two
buildings, whichever requirement is more restrictive.
(e)
Standards for nonresidential use.
Building height. A maximum of 160 feet in height from the
finished grade.
(a)
(2)
Standards for residential and nonresidential mixed use.
Building height. A maximum of 160 feet in height from the
finished grade and not more than 14 stories.
(a)
Coverage. For lots divided by mapped streets, the maximum lot
coverage per individual lot or lots comprising the development
site shall be 100% for buildings and 100% for all impervious
surfaces.
(b)
Lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall be 225 square feet based on qualifying parcel size as
calculated pursuant to § 267-23.2A(1) above.
(c)
Setbacks. There are no minimum yard setbacks for residential
and nonresidential mixed uses.
(d)
The minimum distance between buildings on an individual site
with lots divided by a mapped street shall be determined as
part of the application review process.
(e)
Additional limiting eligibility standards. A PUD-2 District of
residential and nonresidential mixed uses shall only be mapped
on sites that: (i) contain a combination of all three of the NB,
(f)
(3)
§ 267-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23.2
1:887
CB and RMF-15 Districts and are wholly or partially within
a radius of 1/2 mile of the Mount Vernon East Metro-North
station; or (ii) contain the NB and RMF-15 Districts and are
wholly or partially within a radius of 1/2 mile of the Mount
Vernon East Metro-North station.
Off-street parking space requirements.
Number of required parking spaces.
The minimum number of parking spaces required for
multifamily dwellings shall be: one per dwelling unit;
except that for senior housing 0.25 per dwelling unit.
[a]
The minimum number of required parking spaces for
all other permitted principal uses and uses allowed by
special permit shall be determined by the City Council
as part of its review of a proposed development
concept plan.
[b]
Municipal parking spaces displaced by a PUD-2
development shall be replaced at a ratio of 1:1 and
shall be provided as public parking spaces in a
location to be determined by the City Council as part
of its review of a proposed development concept plan.
[c]
[1]
Location of required parking spaces.
The parking spaces required for multifamily dwelling
units and all other permitted principal uses, with the
exception of senior housing, shall be located: (i) on
site; (ii) in a municipal garage or lot within 500 feet of
the dwelling units or other permitted uses for which
the parking spaces are required, as measured from
the edge of the site to the closest edge of the
municipal garage or lot; or (iii) a combination of both
(i) and (ii), the amount of parking spaces provided in
each category to be determined by the City Council as
part of its review of a proposed development concept
plan.
[a]
The parking spaces required for senior housing shall
be located on site.
[b]
[2]
(g)
Off-street loading space requirements.
Number and location of required off-street loading spaces.
The minimum number of loading spaces required for
multifamily dwellings, senior housing in a PUD-2
District and for all other permitted principal uses and
uses allowed by special permit, and their location,
[a]
[1]
(h)
§ 267-23.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23.2
1:888
shall be determined by the City Council as part of its
review of a proposed development concept plan.
Procedure.
Uses in §§ 267-17 and 267-18 may be established by the City
Council in the PUD-2 District either on its own motion or on
petition of the property owner for residential and nonresidential
developments. In the case of residential and nonresidential mixeduse
developments, uses shall be limited to the following permitted
principal and permitted accessory uses and uses allowed by special
permit. Uses allowed by special permit shall not be permitted to
occupy building space at the street level.
Permitted principal uses.
[1] Multifamily dwellings.
[2] Community purpose buildings.
[3] Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
[4] Business, professional or governmental offices.
[5] Business incubator space.
Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail for the
performance of customary personal services.
[6]
[7] Restaurants.
[8] Universities, colleges and private schools.
(a)
Permitted accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and
customarily accessory to the permitted principal use on
the lot on which they are located.
[1]
(b)
Uses allowed by special permit.
Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of
worship.
[1]
[2] Day-care centers.
[3] Nursery schools.
(c)
(1)
Development concept plan. In the case of an application of a
property owner requesting the establishment of a use or uses as
permitted by § 267-23.2 of the PUD-2 District, the applicant shall
submit a preliminary development concept plan of the proposed
development concept showing all proposed buildings and uses on
the site, proposed building spacing and yard setbacks, the
proposed location and design of all streets, driveways, parking
(2)
C.
§ 267-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23.2
1:889
lots, screening, landscaping, open spaces and recreation areas,
proposed architectural features of all building, the relationship
of the proposed development to adjacent land, health, safety and
general welfare of the community. Such plans shall be accompanied
by a brief analysis, in written form, explaining the proposed
development concept and the planning purposes of § 267-15C
which will be derived for the City and the immediately surrounding
neighborhood.
Planning Board referral. The City Council may refer any such
application to the Planning Board which shall report to it as to
whether the establishment of such zone will be in accordance with
the standards contained herein and will be of benefit to the City by
satisfying the intent and purposes as set forth in § 267-15C hereof.
Notification. Upon receipt, the Planning Board shall refer a
copy of the proposal to such City boards, agencies and
departments as it determines to be appropriate. A copy of
the proposal shall also be mailed to the neighborhood
association(s) representing the neighborhood(s) within which
the proposed PUD-2 District is to be located and to any such
association(s) representing a neighborhood(s) located within
1,500 feet of such development.
(a)
Preliminary meeting. The applicant and the licensed
professional preparing the preliminary development concept
plan shall attend a preliminary, informal meeting with the
Planning Board for the purpose of representing and discussing
this proposal. Appropriate neighborhood associations, as
defined in § 267-23.2C(3)(a) above, shall be notified of such
meeting by the applicant at least 10 days in advance.
(b)
Report and recommendation. Following completion of its
review, the Planning Board shall prepare and submit its report
and recommendations to the City Council with respect to the
potential applicability of PUD-2 zoning to the subject property
and, where applicable, with respect to the proposed
preliminary development concept plan.
(c)
(3)
Public hearing. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations of
the Planning Board, if any, the City Council, may schedule and hold
a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
on at least three different dates in the City's official newspaper,
the first insertion to be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days
prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, the neighborhood
association(s) shall be notified as required in § 267-23.2C(3)(a). A
copy of such notice, with proof of mailing, shall be filed in the City
Clerk's office by the applicant on or before the date of the public
hearing.
(4)
§ 267-23.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23.2
1:890
Council action. Following the close of the public hearing and
completion of the SEQRA process, the City Council shall act to
approve the proposed rezoning and, where applicable, the
proposed development concept plan, either with or without
modifications, or shall disapprove the application. In the event
of its approval, notification of the action taken and copies of all
application materials shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for
its further review and action, as appropriate.
(5)
Planning Board approval. Prior to any construction within a PUD-2
District, application shall be made for site plan and, where
appropriate, subdivision approval by the Planning Board. If a
subdivision is required, such application shall be filed with the
Planning Board simultaneously with the site plan and shall be
processed in accordance with the requirements of the City of
Mount Vernon subdivision and site regulations.
Referrals for review and report. The Planning Board shall refer
the site plan application for review and report to all other
boards, agencies and officials of the City which it deems
appropriate. All such boards, agencies and officials to which
referral is made shall have not less than 30 days from the date
of forwarding to submit their reports.
(a)
Report from the Commissioner of Planning. The Commissioner
of Planning shall report to the Planning Board whether the
proposed site and/or subdivision plan complies with all of the
standards and requirements of the PUD-2 District and its
purposes.
(b)
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall schedule a public
hearing on the proposed site plan within 45 days of the date
of its receipt of a complete application in proper form and in
compliance with all SEQRA requirements. Notice of the public
hearing shall be as required by law.
(c)
(6)
Common lands and facilities.
Where a PUD-2 District approved pursuant to this authorization
results in the permanent preservation of open spaces or the
creation of commonly used lands or facilities, including streets,
driveways and parking lots, their location, design, ownership and
use shall be as approved as part of the application review process,
using as a guide the purposes set forth herein and in § 37 of the
General City Law.
(1)
Subject to approval as a part of the combination of the following
arrangements:
As a general rule, all such lands and facilities in and associated
with a building composed of individually owned units, such as
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 267-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23.2
1:891
a condominium or cooperative, shall be owned by a property
owners' association as described in § 267-23.2D(2) below.
The lands and facilities may be conveyed to a recognized
conservation organization dedicated to the preservation and
maintenance of open space, provided that such organization
has indicated its agreement to maintain such lands, and
further provided that such organization is acceptable to the
City Council.
(b)
Such lands and facilities may be dedicated to the City of Mount
Vemon, provided that public access is assured and the City
Council has voted to accept such offer.
(c)
All or the balance of the common lands which are not to be
conveyed or dedicated in accordance with § 267-23.2D(2)(b)
or 267-23.2D(2)(c) above or 267-23.2D(2)(e) below, and any
private common facilities, shall be owned and maintained by
a property owners' association, subject to the following
requirements:
The property owners' association shall be a legal entity,
including but not limited to a condominium corporation,
cooperative corporation or a not-for-profit membership
corporation created by a trust agreement or certificate
of incorporation, approved as to form and sufficiency by
the Corporation Counsel and designed to assure the
permanent preservation, protection and maintenance of
the common lands and any improvements thereon for their
intended purpose.
[1]
The property owners' association shall be made
responsible for the continued future maintenance,
ownership and use of all such common lands and facilities.
[2]
The property owners' association shall not be permitted
to be dissolved and shall not dispose of any common land
or any improvements thereon or thereunder, by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization established to own
and maintain such common land and improvements as
hereinabove referred to and subject to the same
restrictions on maintenance and use as the first such legal
entity, as well as approval by the Planning Board as set
forth above.
[3]
The property owners' association shall be subject to an
agreement with the City, provided that in the event it,
or any successor organization, shall at any time after
approval of the development fail to maintain the common
land or any improvements thereon in reasonable order
or condition in accordance with the approved plan, the
City may serve written notice upon such legal entity or
[4]
(d)
§ 267-23.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23.2
1:892
successor organization, or upon the property owners
within the development, setting forth the manner in which
the association has failed to maintain the common land or
any improvements thereon, and said notice shall include
a demand that such deficiencies be corrected within a
designated timeframe. If the deficiencies are not corrected
within the designated timeframe, the City of Mount
Vernon, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
property within the development and to prevent the
common land and improvements thereon from becoming
a public nuisance, may enter upon and take possession
of said common land and improvements and maintain the
same until such time as the City Council shall determine
that the property owners' association is ready and able to
maintain the common land and improvements in proper
condition. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the
public any rights to use the common land or improvements
except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the
public by the property owners' association and the offer of
dedication is accepted by the City Council. The decision of
the City with respect to the action described in this section
shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
review in accordance with the provisions of Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The cost to the City
of any such maintenance shall be assessed against the
properties within the PUD-2 District and, in the event of
the failure or refusal of any property owner to pay any
such charges when due, the unpaid amount thereof shall
become a lien against the property and, together with
interest from the due date thereof, shall be included in
the annual tax levy of the City upon such property for
each such fiscal year, and the amount so levied shall be
collected in the same manner as other City taxes.
The property owners' association agreement shall require
that every property owner within the PUD-2 District shall
automatically be and remains a member of the association
and shall be subject to a charge for his proportionate
share of expenses of the association's activities, including
but not limited to the maintenance and operation of the
common land and improvements thereon. The charge shall
be a lien on the property in the event that it remains
unpaid by the property owner for a period of more than
60 days after assessment thereof by the governing body
of the property owners' association. The obligation of each
property owner to pay a proportionate share of the
association's expenses may be enforced by an action in
the name of the association or by the City as provided in
§ 267-23.2D(2)(d)[3], or in the name of both.
[5]
§ 267-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-23.2
1:893
The permanent preservation of common open space lands
and facilities or their intended purposes shall further be
legally assured to the satisfaction of the Planning Board
and the Corporation Counsel by the filing of appropriate
covenants, deed restrictions, easements or other forms of
agreement. The permitted uses within such areas shall
be limited to those specifically approved by the Planning
Board and shown on the site development plan, plus other
uses customarily incidental and accessory thereto.
Subsequent to the approval of the final site development
plan, the uses permitted within privately owned common
land areas may be modified only upon approval by the
Planning Board and only upon application by the entity
owning such common land area. In each such case, a
public hearing shall be held with the same notice as
required by law for final site development plan approval.
Such modification may permit a use in the same general
category of use previously approved or may allow a change
in the location of a particular use from one portion of the
common land areas to another.
[6]
Dedication of the common land areas, including any
common facilities or improvements thereon, to the
common use of all property owners within the PUD-2
District shall be recorded directly on the site development
plan or by reference on the site development plan to a
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions in a
separate document recorded or to be recorded at or about
the time of the filing of the approved final site development
plan. Such declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall permanently grant to each property
owner in common with all other property owners within
such PUD-2 District an easement in and to the common
land areas and the common facilities thereon and of the
use thereof.
[7]
All such lands and facilities in and associated with a building
composed of rental units shall be owned and maintained by the
entity which owns the building.
(e)
Planning Board action. Within 62 days of the close of the public hearing,
the Planning Board shall act either to approve, with or without
modifications, or disapprove the proposed site plan. The Planning
Board decision shall be based upon the requirements of the City
Council rezoning approval, the purposes, standards and regulations of
the PUD-2 District and the requirements of SEQRA. Approval shall be
required prior to the issuance of any building permit or certificate of
occupancy within the PUD-2 District.
E.
§ 267-23.2 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-23.2
1:894
ARTICLE VI
Special Permit Uses
§ 267-24. General provisions.
Special permit uses for which conformance to additional requirements is
mandated by this chapter shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions and
standards set forth in this section, in addition to all other requirements of
this chapter. All such uses are declared to possess characteristics of such
unique and special form that each specific use must be considered as an
individual case.
§ 267-25. Approving agency.
The approving agency for the following listed special permit uses shall be
the Planning Board:
A. Universities or colleges as regulated by § 267-28A.
B. Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
C. LPG distribution businesses and/or facilities.
Fast-food restaurants providing drive-up window service as regulated
by § 267-28F.
D.
E. Domiciliary-care facilities as regulated by § 267-28B.
F. Public utility uses as regulated by § 267-28H.
G. Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by § 267-30.
H. Height limitations as regulated by § 267-14A.
I. Private schools as regulated by § 267-28A.
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
§ 267-28G.
J.
K. Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by § 267-23A.
L. Motor vehicle dealerships.
M. Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by § 267-28G.
N. Motor vehicle service and repair facilities as regulated by § 267-28G.
O. Motor vehicle body repair shops as regulated by § 267-28G.
P. Car washes.
Q. Churches or other places of worship.
R. Day-care centers.
§ 267-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-25
1:895
§ 267-26. Procedure.
S. Nursery schools.
T. Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by § 267-28D.
Asphalt heating and/or mixing plant located at least 1,200 feet from a
residence district.
U.
Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products, in fully
enclosed buildings, provided that the off-street loading facilities are
located at least 50 feet from a residence district.
V.
Adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment business, adult
motion-picture theater, as regulated in § 267-28I. [Added 2-3-1999]
W.
Application. Applicants shall submit a preliminary application to the
Building Department prior to formal submission of a complete special
permit application to the approving agency. An application shall be
considered officially submitted at such meeting, provided that the
approving agency or staff determines such application to be complete.
If not, such application shall be rejected. The application shall include
a site plan meeting the requirements of § 267-33, as well as a written
statement describing the nature of the proposed use and how it will
meet the requirements of this chapter. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
A.
Review and decision. Review shall be in accordance with the following
procedure:
Review by other agencies. Upon acceptance of a complete
application, the approving agency shall forward copies for review
and report to such other agencies and officials of the City as it
deems appropriate. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with the
notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board
and to the clerks of abutting municipalities as required by law.
[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(1)
Public hearing. A public hearing on an application for a special
permit shall be held by the approving agency within 62 days of the
date that a complete application is received.117
(2)
Action. Within 62 days of the date that the public hearing is closed,
the approving agency shall make its decision and shall file with
the Building Commissioner a written report setting forth the facts
of the case and its findings, conclusions and decisions on the
application. The approving agency may only authorize the issuance
of a special permit where it finds that all standards of this chapter
have been met or a variance therefor has been granted.
(3)
B.
117. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Notice, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009. This local law also provided for the
renumbering of Subsection B(4) and (5) as Subsection B(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 267-25 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-26
1:896
§ 267-27. Standards.
All special permit uses shall comply with the following standards in addition
to all other requirements of this chapter. The approving agency shall attach
such additional conditions and safeguards to any special permit as are, in
its opinion, necessary to ensure initial and continual conformance to all
applicable standards and requirements.
§ 267-28. Standards and requirements for specific special permit
uses.
The following standards and requirements are hereby established for
specific special permit uses. They must, as applicable, be met before
issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board.
Extensions of time periods. The applicant may be granted
extensions of any of the above stipulated time limits; provided,
however, that any extension of time granted to an official or agency
making a report to the approving agency shall equally extend any
time limit for the approving agency.
(4)
The location and size of the special permit use, the nature and intensity
of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size
of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is located.
A.
The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences and the
nature and extent of existing or proposed plantings on the site are
such that the special permit use will not hinder or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings.
B.
Operations in connection with any special permit use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, traffic, fumes,
vibration or other such characteristics than would be the operations of
permitted uses not requiring a special permit.
C.
Universities, colleges and private schools.
(1) The institution shall be a not-for-profit corporation.
The institution shall be chartered by the Board of Regents of the
State of New York and shall be operated in accordance with the
requirements of the New York State Education Department.
(2)
Outdoor playing fields shall be set back from neighboring streets
and property lines and shall be screened from public view with
fencing and/or buffer landscaping all in accordance with a plan as
determined adequate by the approving agency.
(3)
The minimum off-street parking and loading space requirements
shall be determined by the approving agency based on
(4)
A.
§ 267-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:897
consideration of at least the following: gross floor area; expected
number of students and staff; capacity of classrooms, laboratories
and places of public assembly; scheduling of classes; availability of
public transit; availability of public parking in the immediate area;
and expected number of students to be resident on campus.
Domiciliary-care facilities. No office of a professional person shall be
permitted except for the treatment of residents of the facility itself.
B.
Radio towers.
Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations shall not exceed
75 feet above the established grade.
(1)
The radio tower shall be set back from any lot line a distance at
least equal to its height.
(2)
The tower shall have either a smooth, nonclimbable surface to a
height of 10 feet above grade or else a six-foot-high fence with a
locked gate completely enclosing the tower and located within 10
feet of it.
(3)
The radio tower shall be a commercially manufactured type with
published specifications, standards and stresses.
(4)
The base of the tower shall be no greater than two square feet in
area.
(5)
Guy wires shall be provided as necessary and shall terminate at a
solid structure not less than 10 feet above grade.
(6)
C.
Satellite earth stations and dish antennas. A satellite earth station or
dish antenna may be located, installed, constructed or maintained on
any lot, building or structure only when in compliance with all the
following requirements:
All satellite earth stations or dish antenna shall be designed,
constructed and installed in conformance with all building,
electrical, fire prevention, noise and other applicable codes and
regulations, as well as any other construction or performance
standards, rules and regulations of any government entity having
jurisdiction over such devices, including, without limitation, the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(1)
The height of the satellite earth station or dish antenna shall be
measured from the bottom of its base or pad to the highest point of
the earth station or antenna when in the most vertical position.
(2)
All satellite earth stations and dish antennas shall be located in the
rear yard.
(3)
D.
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:898
Setbacks from the property line shall be equal to or greater than
the height of the proposed structure, but not less than 15 feet from
the rear and side lot lines.
(4)
The distance from any guy anchorage or similar device shall be at
least 10 feet from any property line.
(5)
Suitable protective nonclimbable fencing and a landscape planting
screen shall be provided and maintained around the structure and
accessory attachments in order to minimize visibility from streets
and surrounding properties.
(6)
The applicant shall present appropriate documentation related to
any license required by federal, state or local agencies.
(7)
No satellite earth station or dish antenna shall be erected to a
height greater than the permitted building height in the district in
which it is located.
(8)
Only one such structure shall exist at any one time on any single
residentially zoned and used lot or parcel.
(9)
The application shall include construction drawings showing the
proposed method of installation, structural engineering analysis
and site plan depicting structures and plantings on the property
and all residential structures on adjacent properties. At the request
of the approving agency, documentation of a maintenance program
may be required.
(10)
The construction and installation of roof-mounted satellite dish
antennas may be permitted only when the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the approving agency that locating the
satellite dish antenna in conformance with Subsection D(3) above
would obstruct the antenna's reception window or otherwise
excessively interfere with the reception by not allowing receipt of
at least 70% of the available programming, and such obstruction
or interference involves factors beyond the applicant's control.
The construction and installation of roof-mounted satellite dish
antennas shall meet the following requirements:
The load distribution within the building's roof and/or a wind
velocity test shall be provided by a registered engineer where
deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner.
(a)
A roof-mounted satellite dish antenna installed on a pitched
roof shall be installed on that side of the pitched roof not facing
any public or private road.
(b)
A roof-mounted satellite dish antenna installed on a flat roof
shall be installed on that portion of the flat roof which is least
visible from any public or private road.
(c)
(11)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:899
A satellite dish antenna mounted on a roof or building shall not
exceed 12 feet in height, nor shall any such antenna project
more than six feet above the peak or highest point of the roof
line.
(d)
Where feasible, and taking into consideration structural and
architectural factors, roof-mounted satellite dish antennas
shall be installed with parapets and/or an architecturally
matching screening plan.
(e)
Multifamily dwellings. [Added 4-9-2014, approved 4-10-2014]
Application: This special permit use shall be applicable only to
properties meeting the following standards:
(a) An area of at least 1/2 acre;
Within 1/4 mile of a train station, as measured in a direct line
from the closest edge of a passenger platform to the closest
point of the property;
(b)
Within 200 feet of an exit to a limited-access highway or
parkway, as measured in a direct line from the closest point of
an entrance to or exit from such highway or parkway to the
closest point of the property; and
(c)
Within 1/4 mile of a municipally operated parking facility, as
measured in a direct line from the closest pedestrian entrance
of such facility to the closest pedestrian entrance of the
property.
(d)
(1)
Procedure: Notwithstanding any other provision of the codes, laws,
rules and ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon, and in
recognition of the unique characteristics of this type of
development, the following shall apply:
The special permit application shall be reviewed and approved
by the City Council;
(a)
The site plan to be submitted with the special permit
application shall depict the proposal to the extent necessary to
explain the project; and
(b)
If the special permit is approved, the detailed site plan meeting
all requirements of § 267-33 shall be submitted within six
months of such approval, and shall include a stormwater
management plan only where clearing, grading, excavating,
soil disturbance or placement of fill results in land disturbance
of equal to or greater than one acre, or the same activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a
larger common plan of development.
(c)
(2)
(3) Standards:
E.
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:900
The maximum average height of development may not exceed
a height of 120 feet and no more than 12 stories. However, in
the case of a corner lot, a height of 180 feet and no more than
18 stories may be permitted for up to 1/3 of the lot area and the
rest of the lot area must be developed at a lower height so that
the average height of all development on the lot is maintained
at no more than 120 feet;
(a)
Note 1 on the Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
Nonresidence Districts118 shall not apply; and
(b)
The minimum number of parking spaces shall be one per
dwelling unit.
(c)
Fast-food restaurants providing drive-up window service. No fast-food
restaurant providing drive-up window service shall be located within
200 feet of a public school, church or other place of worship or any
other fast-food restaurant providing drive-up window service.
F.
Motor vehicle service stations, repair facilities and body repair shops.
All repair work and servicing, except for the sale of fuel and
lubricants, shall be performed within a fully enclosed building.
(1)
All vehicles in the process of repair or servicing, and all products
for sale, except lubricants in sealed containers, shall be stored
within a fully enclosed building.
(2)
No part of any building, equipment or pump shall be located within
30 feet of any residence district or within 15 feet of any lot line.
(3)
All motor vehicle filling stations, service stations, repair facilities,
body repair shops, storage and sales areas shall be screened along
all streets and property lines, except where adjoining another
automotive use and except at points of ingress and egress. Such
screening shall consist of an evergreen hedge or wall of masonry
construction (faced in brick or stone). Along the street frontage
portion of a lot, the height of screening shall be no less than two
nor more than three feet. In all other areas, it shall be a minimum
of three feet six inches and a maximum of six feet in height, except
where a lesser height is required to provide safe sight distance
for traffic or pedestrians. All such screening areas shall be at least
three feet in width.
(4)
G.
Public utility uses.
When proposed, aboveground public utility uses shall comply with
the district dimensional regulations in which they are located and
shall be subject to a finding, in addition to the standards of
§ 267-27, that a public necessity exists for such use and that the
(1)
H.
118. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:901
use of the particular site for which application is made is either
necessary or appropriate from a public standpoint.
The approving agency shall require that such use be enclosed by
protective fencing with a gate which shall be closed and locked
except when necessary to obtain access thereto.
(2)
The installation shall be so designed, enclosed, painted and
screened with evergreens that it will be harmonious with the area
in which it is located. The entire property shall be suitably
landscaped and maintained in reasonable conformity with the
standards of property maintenance of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(3)
Adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment business and adult
motion-picture theater. An adult entertainment store, adult live
entertainment business or adult motion-picture theater may be
established on a property by special permit subject to the following
conditions: [Added 2-3-1999]
No one establishment may exceed more than 5,000 square feet of
floor space. Floor space includes storage areas and other areas
restricted to employees or owners only, but does not include spaces
where human occupation does not normally occur, such as an
unfinished attic or basement with less than six feet from floor to
ceiling of said attic or basement.
(1)
Only one type of adult entertainment business shall be established
on any one property.
(2)
All adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited from
displaying any adult entertainment merchandise or creating any
display or sign illustrating specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas in such a manner that it may be wholly or
partially visible from any public right-of-way.
(3)
All adult live entertainment businesses and adult motion-picture
theaters shall be prohibited from conducting performances or
creating viewing areas that are conducted out-of-doors and/or are
wholly or partially visible from any public right-of-way.
(4)
Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted to patronize or
be employed for the purpose of working at any adult entertainment
business as defined by § 267-4.
(5)
Viewing booths used for the viewing of films, videos or other visual
material or for viewing live entertainment shall not be enclosed and
shall not have more than three walls and shall be placed in such
a manner that patrons can be monitored by the employees or the
owner of the business in order to control indecent or lewd behavior
by the patrons of such viewing booths.
(6)
I.
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:902
No property with an adult entertainment business shall be located
any closer than 500 feet from an property line of any residential
district, parks, schools, places of worship, community centers,
youth services, day-care centers, nursery schools or museums
within the City or in any adjoining municipality. Distance between
property lines shall be measured from the shortest distance
between the two property lines irrespective of rights-of-way.
(7)
No adult entertainment business shall be established in any
building that has a residence, even if the residence is classified
as a nonconforming use for that district or located within 500
feet of any residence, even if the residence is classified as a
nonconforming use in the district where the residence is located
within the City or in any adjoining municipality.
(8)
No adult entertainment business shall be established within 1,000
feet of any other adult entertainment business, as defined by
§ 267-4.
(9)
Adult live entertainment business with on-site entertainment shall
be prohibited from operating from the hours of 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
(10)
All adult entertainment business uses shall meet all other
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and
laws of the City of Mount Vernon, including parking regulations as
set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
(11)
No adult entertainment business shall be established on the same
property or an adjacent property where there is another previously
established business that is regularly patronized by children.
(12)
Regulations for the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities.
[Added 2-23-2005, approved 2-24-2005]
Purpose and legislative intent. The Telecommunications Act of
1996 affirmed the City of Mount Vernon's authority concerning
the placement, construction and modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities. The City of Mount Vernon finds that
wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant
concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and
environment of the City and its inhabitants. The City also
recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service
technology can be an economic development asset to the City and
of significant benefit to the City and its residents. In order to
insure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities is consistent with the City's land use
policies, the City is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless
telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The
intent of this zoning regulation is to minimize the negative impact
of wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and
(1)
J.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:903
efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure
an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of
such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the City
of Mount Vernon as well as protect the scenic and aesthetic facets
of the City and be in line with the City's Master Plan for Land Use
adopted November 27, 1961.
Severability.
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or
other portion of these regulations or any application thereof to
any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional,
or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence,
part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed
application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of these regulations, and all applications thereof,
not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid,
shall remain in full force and effect.
(a)
Any special use permit issued under these regulations shall be
comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed
or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect
by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent
authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination
by the City.
(b)
(2)
Definitions.
For purposes of these regulations, and where not inconsistent
with the context of a particular section, the defined terms,
phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have
the meanings given in this section. When not inconsistent with
the context, words in the present tense include the future
tense, words used in the plural number include words in the
singular number and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not
merely directory.
(a)
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An accessory
facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with
wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the
same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications
facilities, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission
equipment storage sheds or cabinets,
APPLICANT — Any wireless service provider submitting an
application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(b)
(3)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:904
APPLICATION — All necessary and appropriate documentation
that an applicant submits in order to receive a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit
or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other
wireless signals. Such shall include, but not be limited to,
radio, television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications
services (PCS), microwave telecommunications and services
not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the
City's siting, building and permitting authority.
BASE TRANSMITTER — A stationary transmitter that provides
radio telecommunications service to mobile and/or fixed
receivers, including those associated with mobile stations.
CO-LOCATION — The use of an existing tower or structure to
support antennas for the provision of wireless services.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — The inability to perform an act on terms
that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of
which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen
and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The
inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on
investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation
to be commercially impracticable and shall not render an act
or the terms of an agreement commercially impracticable.
COMMON CARRIER — An individual, partnership, association,
joint-stock company, trust or corporation engaged in rendering
radio telecommunications services to the general public for
hire.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains
all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed
decision to be made with respect to an application and where
a consultant is involved, when the consultant has issued a final
report.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM or DAS — A network of
spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common
source via a transport medium that provides wireless service
within a geographic area or structure.[Added 9-23-2009,
approved 9-24-2009]
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the
distance measured from the preexisting grade level to the
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:905
highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest
point is an antenna or lightning-protection device.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The addition, removal or
change of any of the physical and visually discernible
components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas,
cabling, radios, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing,
utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually
discernible components, vehicular access, parking and/or an
upgrade or change-out of equipment for better or more
modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service
provider to a telecommunications tower or
telecommunications site is a modification. A modification shall
not include the replacement of any components of a wireless
facility where the replacement is identical to the component
being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal
repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding,
removing or changing anything, or for the addition of internal
equipment which will not result in any change to the visual
appearance of a wireless facility.
MONOPOLE — Any freestanding pole greater than 12 feet
in height in a residential district and 25 feet in height in a
nonresidential district upon which an antenna is or has been
located.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust,
partnership, joint-stock company, association of two or more
persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for
"wireless telecommunications facilities."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS — Commercial
mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier wireless exchange access services, including cellular
radiotelephone, specialized mobile radio system and personal
communications services as defined and used in the 1996
Telecommunications Act.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Mount
Vernon, New York.
SITE PLAN — A map showing the layout, arrangement and
use of buildings and land, including accessory uses, structures,
facilities and services and meeting the informational
requirements of these regulations.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit by
which an applicant is allowed to construct and use wireless
telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by the City.
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:906
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Minimize adverse
aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings,
and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally
the same area as the requested location of such wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least
visually and physically intrusive facility.
STATE — The State of New York.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or
reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire,
radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic
systems.
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — A structure used in
the provision of services described in the definition of "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TEMPORARY — Temporary in relation to all aspects and
components of these regulations, something intended to, or
that does, exist for fewer than 90 days.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES means and
includes a TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER and TOWER
AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE and PERSONAL
WIRELESS FACILITY — A structure, facility or location
designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support,
antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This
includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and
structures that employ camouflage technology, including but
not limited to structures such as a multistory building, church
steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other structures that can
be used to mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the
functional equivalent of such, including all related facilities,
such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures
associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended
for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular,
paging, 911, personal telecommunications services,
commercial satellite services, microwave services and services
not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the
City's siting, building and permitting authority, excluding those
used exclusively for the City's fire, police or exclusively for
private, noncommercial radio and television reception and
private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar
noncommercial telecommunications where the height of the
facility is below the height limits set forth in these regulations
and local zoning.
(4) Special use permit application and other requirements.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:907
Permit granting agency; applications to be complete.
All applicants for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities or any modification of such
facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
section. The Planning Board is the officially designated
agency or body of the City to whom applications for a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review,
analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to
granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying,
or revoking special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities. The City may at its
discretion delegate or designate other official agencies of
the City to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make
recommendations to the Planning Board with respect to
the granting or not granting, recertifying or not
recertifying or revoking special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
[1]
An application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of
the applicant by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made
therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the
information. The landowner, if different than the applicant,
shall also sign the application and shall agree to remove
any existing violations and make all existing
telecommunications facilities compliant with these
regulations and all applicable local, state and
telecommunications codes prior to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy or compliance or the functional
equivalent for a new or modified wireless facility. At the
discretion of the City, any false or misleading statement in
the application may subject the applicant to denial of the
application without further consideration or opportunity
for correction.
[2]
Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein
or which are otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the
City.
[3]
(a)
The applicant shall include a statement in writing:
That the applicant's proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a safe
manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the
special use permit, without exception, unless specifically
granted relief by the City in writing, as well as all
applicable and permissible local codes, laws, and
[1]
(b)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:908
regulations, including any and all applicable City, state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations;
That the construction of the wireless telecommunications
facilities is legally permissible, including, but not limited
to the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business
in the state. Written evidence of that authorization shall be
provided.
[2]
No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or
constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by
the City, and the special use permit has been issued and a
building permit.
(c)
All applications for the construction or installation of new
wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain the
information hereinafter set forth. The application shall be
signed by an authorized individual on behalf of the applicant.
Where a certification is called for, such certification shall bear
the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in
the state. The application shall include the following
information:
Documentation that demonstrates the need for the
wireless telecommunications facility to provide service
primarily and essentially within the City with service to
adjacent municipalities to not exceed 40% of the total area
to be covered by the proposed facility. Such documentation
shall include propagation studies and maps of the
proposed site and all other planned, proposed, in service
or existing sites in the City and in all contiguous
municipalities. If the applicant is addressing a capacity
issue, documentation must be submitted to include but
not be limited to the following: usage and forecasted or
present blockage; call volume, drive-test data results,
including date of test. Locations of tests, and signal
strength results; and any other technically pertinent
information.
[1]
The name, address and phone number of the person
preparing the report.
[2]
The name, address, and phone number of the property
owner, operator, and applicant, and to include the legal
form of the applicant.
[3]
The postal address and Tax Map parcel number of the
property.
[4]
The zoning district or designation in which the property is
situated.
[5]
(d)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:909
Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot
lines; in the case of a new tower, topographical map of
property and adjacent land at increments of two feet zero
inches; topographic lines which clearly define the slopes
and height of the land and structure location and heights
at each finished floor and roof.
[6]
[7] The location of nearest landmark.
The location of nearest residential structure which shall
include a vicinity map to show what facilities are adjacent
to the installation.
[8]
The property owner and address of all adjacent residential
structures, occupiable structures, child day-care center,
schools, camps, public parks and playgrounds.
[9]
The location, size and height of all structures on the
property which is the subject of the application.
[10]
The location, size and height of all proposed and existing
antennas and all appurtenant structures.
[11]
The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and
existing landscaping, and fencing; in the case of a new
tower, such shall be shown via the use of plans, sections
and three-dimensional models.
[12]
The number, type and design of the tower(s) and
antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of
the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users.
[13]
The owner, make, model and manufacturer of the tower
and antenna(s) and the number and type of existing
antennas.
[14]
A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above preexisting grade, materials, color
and lighting.
[15]
The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or
other transmitting equipment.
[16]
The actual intended transmission and the maximum
effective radiated power of the antenna(s).
[17]
Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of
the antenna(s).
[18]
Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are
within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC and that
[19]
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:910
the proposed site will not produce or contribute to the
production of emissions levels exceeding the thresholds
listed in Table IV or any subsequent superseding emission
standard adopted by the FCC, based on the maximum
equipment output.
Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications devices.
[20]
A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use
of the wireless telecommunications facilities.
[21]
Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study
and analysis has been conducted and that taking into
account the subsurface and substrata, and the proposed
drainage plan, that the site is adequate to assure the
stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications
facilities on the proposed site.
[22]
Certification, where co-location is not proposed, that colocation
is not feasible and why.
[23]
In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to
submit a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to
secure shared use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative
buildings or other structures within the City. Copies of written
requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to
the City in the application, along with any letters of rejection
stating the reason for rejection.
(e)
The applicant shall certify that the telecommunications facility,
foundation and attachments are designed and will be
constructed to meet all local, City, state and federal structural
requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads.
(f)
The applicant shall certify that the wireless
telecommunications facilities will be effectively grounded and
bonded so as to protect persons and property and installed
with appropriate surge protectors.
(g)
The Planning Board intends to be the lead agency, pursuant to
SEQRA. The Board shall conduct an integrated, comprehensive
environmental review of the proposed project in combination
with its review of the application under these regulations.
(h)
An applicant shall be required to submit an environmental
assessment form and a visual addendum. Based on the results
of the form, including the visual addendum, the City may
require submission of a more detailed visual analysis. The
scope of the required environmental and visual assessment will
be reviewed at the preapplication meeting.
(i)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:911
The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which
shall include:
A Zone of Visibility Map which shall be provided in order
to determine locations from which the tower may be seen
by a turning radius of 360°.
[1]
Pictorial representations of before and after views from
key viewpoints both inside and outside of the City as may
be appropriate, including but not limited to state highways
and other major roads; state and local parks; other public
lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites
normally open to the public; and from any other location
where the site is visible to a large number of visitors,
travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided
concerning the appropriate key sites at a preapplication
meeting.
[2]
An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy
wires and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent
properties and streets as relates to the need or
appropriateness of screening.
[3]
(j)
The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/
or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the
base and all related facilities and structures of the proposed
wireless telecommunications facilities.
(k)
Any and all representations made by the applicant to the City
on the record during the application process, whether written
or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be
relied upon in good faith by the City.
(l)
All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall
be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, rules
and regulations of New York State and of the City, including
specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety
Code and the National Electrical Code, where appropriate.
(m)
All wireless telecommunications facilities applications shall
contain a demonstration that the facility is sited so as to be
the least visually intrusive reasonably possible and thereby
have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its
character, on existing vegetation, and on the residences in the
area of the wireless telecommunications facility.
(n)
Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all
accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of
building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with
the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize
with the natural surroundings; this shall include the utilization
(o)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:912
of stealth or concealment technology as may be required by the
City.
At a telecommunications site, an access road, turnaround
space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize
ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation, which
cutting of vegetation shall be replaced in equal amount to near
or in proximity to the location of the proposed cutting. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal
visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
(p)
A person who holds a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall construct, operate,
maintain, repair, provide for removal of, modify or restore
the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes adopted by the City, state, or United
States, including but not limited to the most recent editions of
the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical
Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes
that include, but are not limited to, construction, building,
electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event
of a conflict between or among any of the preceding, the more
stringent shall apply.
(q)
A holder of a special use permit granted under these
regulations shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and
licenses required by applicable law, rule, regulation or code,
and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long
as required by the City or other governmental entity or agency
having jurisdiction over the applicant.
(r)
An applicant shall submit to the City 11 completed applications
determined to be needed at the preapplication meeting.
Written notification of the application shall be provided to the
legislative body of all adjacent municipalities.
(s)
The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a
proposed tower to accommodate future demand for at least
five additional commercial applications; for example, future
co-locations. The tower shall be structurally designed to
accommodate at least five additional antenna arrays equal to
those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's
antenna as possible without causing interference. This
requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in
writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared
(t)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:913
usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is
commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and
unreasonable burden, based upon:
The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the
area.
[1]
The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed.
[2]
The number of existing and potential licenses without
wireless telecommunications facilities spaces/sites.
[3]
[4] Available space on existing and approved towers.
Shared use.
The owner of the proposed new tower, and his/her
successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the
shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless service
providers in the future, and shall:
Respond within 60 days to a request for information
from a potential shared-use applicant;
[a]
Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests
for shared use of the new tower by other
telecommunications providers;
[b]
Allow shared use of the new tower if another
telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay
reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are
not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site
selection, planning, project administration, land costs,
site design, construction and maintenance financing,
return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs
of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate
a shared user without causing electromagnetic
interference.
[c]
[1]
Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be
grounds for revocation of the special use permit for the
tower.
[2]
(u)
There shall be a preapplication meeting. The purpose of the
preapplication meeting will be to address issues which will
help the applicant with the review and permitting process. A
preapplication meeting shall also include a site visit if there
has not been a prior site visit for the requested site. Costs
of the City's consultants to prepare for and attend the
preapplication meeting will be borne by the applicant.
(v)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:914
The holder of a special use permit shall notify the City of any
intended modification of a wireless telecommunications facility
and shall apply to the City to modify, relocate or rebuild a
wireless telecommunications facility.
(w)
In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new
telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the
public hearing on the application, hold a "balloon test." The
applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast,
a minimum of a three-foot in diameter brightly colored balloon
at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates
(including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial
date), times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised
by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test
date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the City. The
applicant shall inform the City, in writing, of the dates and
times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall
be flown for at least four consecutive hours sometime between
7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date
shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the
initial date, the secondary date may be on a weekday.
(x)
The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis,
completed by a qualified individual or organization, to
determine if the tower or existing structure intended to
support wireless facilities requires lighting under Federal
Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77. This requirement
shall be for any new tower or for an existing structure or
building where the application increases the height of the
structure or building. If this analysis determines that the FAA
must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all responses
from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be
provided in a timely manner.
(y)
Location of wireless telecommunications facilities.
Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall
locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications
facilities in accordance with the following priorities, [1] being
the highest priority and [11] being the lowest priority.
[Amended 9-23-2009, approved 9-24-2009]
On existing towers, buildings or other structures on Cityowned
properties, including the right-of-way, and
properties owned by the Industrial Development Agency
(IDA) and the Urban Renewal Agency (URA).
[1]
On existing towers, buildings or other structures
elsewhere in the City.
[2]
(a)
(5)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:915
A new tower on City-owned properties, including the rightof-
way, and properties owned by the IDA or URA in areas
zoned for industrial use.
[3]
A new tower on City-owned properties, including the rightof-
way, and properties owned by the IDA or URA in areas
zoned for commercial use.
[4]
A new tower on City-owned properties, including the rightof-
way, and properties owned by the IDA or URA in areas
zoned for downtown business use.
[5]
A new tower on City-owned properties, including the rightof-
way, and properties owned by the IDA or URA in areas
zoned for neighborhood business use.
[6]
A new tower on City-owned properties, including the rightof-
way, and properties owned by the IDA or URA in areas
zoned for residential use.
[7]
A new tower on properties in areas zoned for commercial
use.
[8]
A new tower on properties in areas zoned for downtown
business.
[9]
A new tower on properties in areas zoned for
neighborhood business use.
[10]
A new tower on properties in areas zoned for residential
use.
[11]
If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority
listed above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as
to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person
seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the
reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the
proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the
applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site.
(b)
An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating
the site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An
application shall address co-location as an option. If such
option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the
reasonable satisfaction of the City why co-location is
commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements
between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not
be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or
hardship.
(c)
Notwithstanding the above, the City may approve any site
located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided
that the City finds that the proposed site is in the best interest
(d)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:916
of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants
and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and
character of the community and neighborhood.
The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority,
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection.
If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a
detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority
were not selected shall be included with the application.
(e)
Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an
area of highest priority or highest available priority, the City
may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons:
Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and
requirements.
[1]
Conflict with the historic nature or character of a
neighborhood or historical district.
[2]
The use or construction of wireless telecommunications
facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of
a specific zoning or land use designation.
[3]
The placement and location of wireless
telecommunications facilities which would create an
unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such,
to residents, the public, employees and agents of the City,
or employees of the service provider or other service
providers.
[4]
[5] Conflicts with the provisions of these regulations.
(f)
Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities and other
structures.
Locating on existing towers or other structures without
increasing the height shall be preferred by the City, as opposed
to the construction of a new tower. The applicant shall submit
a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other
suitable structures within four miles of the location of any
proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some
other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure
cannot be used.
(a)
An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other
suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of
the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant.
(b)
Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna
array technologically required to provide service primarily and
(c)
(6)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:917
essentially within the City, to the extent practicable, unless
good cause is shown.
Height of telecommunications tower(s).
The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total
height of any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis
therefor. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context
of the justification of the height needed to provide service
primarily and essentially within the City, to the extent
practicable, unless good cause is shown.
(a)
The maximum permitted height of a new tower shall be the
minimum height necessary to provide service to locations
within the City of Mount Vernon, but in no case shall the height
exceed 80 feet above average grade level, unless the applicant
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that a greater
height is necessary.
(b)
Omnidirectional or whip antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in
height or seven inches in diameter and shall be of a material or
color which matches the exterior of the tower or tall building.
(c)
Directional or panel antenna shall not exceed six feet in height
or two feet in width and shall be of a material or color which
matches either the exterior of the tower or tall building or the
sky tone above and beyond.
(d)
Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed three
feet in diameter and, when building- or rooftop-mounted, shall
be located or screened so as not be easily visible from abutting
public streets. No dish antennas shall be clustered.
(e)
Building-mounted antennas should be located and designed
to be an integral part of the building and any wall-mounted
antennas should not exceed more than four feet from wall.
(f)
No tower constructed after the effective date of these
regulations, including allowing for all attachments, shall
exceed that height which shall permit operation without
required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with
municipal, City, state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law,
City law, code, rule or regulation.
(g)
(7)
Appearance and visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.
(a)
Towers shall be galvanized and painted with a rust-preventive
paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations.
(b)
(8)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:918
If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed
plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations.
(c)
Security and noise of wireless telecommunications facilities. All
wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be
located or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents
unauthorized access. Specifically:
All antennas, towers and other supporting structures,
including guy wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals
and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot
be climbed or collided with; and
(a)
Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be
installed such a manner that they are readily accessible only to
persons authorized to operate or service them;
(b)
Equipment shelters in connection with facilities on existing
buildings shall be constructed either within the building or on
the rooftop in a location secured from the public;
(c)
Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and insulated to
guarantee there is no increase in noise above allowable
ambient levels measured from habitable or used spaces as per
codes at the property line and adjacent edifice.
(d)
(9)
Signage. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign
no larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate
notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of
an antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain
the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as
well as emergency phone number(s); the date of installation and
the application number and inspection dates. The sign shall be on
the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible
from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment
owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless
lighting is required by applicable law, rule or regulation. No other
signage, including advertising, shall be permitted.
(10)
Lot size and setbacks. All proposed towers and any other proposed
wireless telecommunications facility structures shall be set back
from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street
lines by the greater of the following distances: a distance equal to
the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications
facility structure plus 10% of the height of the tower or structure,
or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning
district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be
located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback
requirements for the property on which it is situated.
(11)
(12)Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:919
The Board and City may hire any consultant and/or expert
necessary to assist the Board and the City in reviewing and
evaluating the application, including the construction and
modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
recertification.
(a)
An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to
reimburse the City for all reasonable costs of consultant and
expert evaluation and consultation to the City in connection
with the review of any application, including the construction
and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit
shall be $5,000. The placement of the $5,000 in escrow fees
with the City shall precede the preapplication meeting. The
City will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds.
The City's consultants/experts shall invoice the City for its
services in reviewing the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted. If
at any time during the process this escrow account has a
balance less than $1,500, the applicant shall immediately, upon
notification by the City, replenish said escrow account so that it
has a balance of at least $3,000. Such additional escrow funds
shall be deposited with the City before any further action or
consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the
amount held in escrow by the City is more than the amount
of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the
remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
[Amended 10-13-2010, approved 10-14-2010]
(b)
The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in Subsection
J(12)(b) of this section may vary with the scope and complexity
of the project, the completeness of the application and other
information as may be needed to complete the necessary
review, analysis and inspection of any construction or
modification.
(c)
An applicant shall have 10 days for the date of billing to appeal
to the Planning Board through the Commissioner of Planning
and Development for any fee that the applicant deems
unreasonable. The Commissioner of Planning and
Development shall conduct a investigation into the matter and
report back to the Planning Board and the applicant within 30
days. The Planning Board shall make the final determination as
to the fee's reasonableness. [Added 10-13-2010, approved
10-14-2010]
(d)
Exceptions from a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct,
modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of wireless
telecommunications facilities as of the effective date of these
(a)
(13)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:920
regulations without having first obtained a special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities and a building
permit. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
section, no special use permit shall be required for those
noncommercial exceptions noted in the definition of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before
the effective date of these regulations shall be allowed to
continue as they presently exist; provided, however, that any
visible modification, including visible deterioration, of an
existing wireless telecommunications facility must comply with
these regulations.
(b)
Public hearing and notification requirements.
Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities, a public hearing
shall be held by the Board, notice of which the applicant shall
handle, and shall be published in the official newspaper of the
City no fewer than 10 calendar days prior to the scheduled
date of the public hearing. The applicant shall also notify
nearby landowners whose property is located within 1,500
feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the
new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be
located. For co-locations without increasing the height, the
applicant shall notify nearby landowners whose property is
located within 500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel
on which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are
proposed to be located.
(a)
The Board will set the public hearing date referred to in
Subsection J(14)(a) of this section only after it finds the
application is complete. The Board, at any stage prior to
issuing a special use permit, may require such additional
information as it deems necessary.
(b)
In addition, the applicant shall post a sign on the property
proposed for the special permit on or before 15 days prior to
the first date of public hearing and shall remove such sign
within two days following such hearing. The sign shall be at
least 30 inches by 20 inches, consist of sturdy and serviceable
material containing a white background with black letters and
shall be placed in a location plainly visible from the most
commonly traveled street upon which the property fronts but
in no case more than 20 feet back from the front lot line. Such
sign shall not be more than three feet above the ground and
shall read as follows, in legible lettering at least two inches
high:
(c)
(14)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:921
THIS SITE IS PROPOSED FOR ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL
PERMIT AS FOLLOWS (DESCRIBE PROPOSED SPECIAL
PERMIT). THIS MATTER IS SUBJECT TO A PUBLIC
HEARING BEFORE THE CITY OF MOUNT VERNON
PLANNING BOARD ON (GIVE DATE) AT 9:00 A.M. AT CITY
HALL IN THE MAYOR'S CONFERENCE ROOM UNLESS
OTHERWISE INDICATED
In addition, an applicant for a new facility on an existing
building shall post a copy of the notice of public hearing at
least 10 days prior to public hearing in the lobby of the
building.
(d)
Prior to the first public hearing on the application, the
applicant shall submit a notarized statement to the secretary
of the Planning Board certifying full compliance with the
requirements set forth above.
(e)
Action on an application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
The Board will undertake a review of an application pursuant
to these regulations in a timely fashion and shall act within
a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of
the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the
public's interest and need to be involved and the applicant's
desire for a timely resolution.
(a)
The Board may refer any application or part thereof to any
advisory or other committee for a nonbinding
recommendation.
(b)
After the public hearing and after formally considering the
application, the Board may approve, approve with conditions,
or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing
and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit
shall always be upon the applicant.
(c)
If the Board approves the special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be
notified of such approval in writing within 15 calendar days of
the Board's action, and the special use permit shall be issued
within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary
building permits and subsequent certificates of compliance,
once a special use permit has been granted hereunder and
approval of the site plan, no additional permits or approvals
from the City, such as zoning approvals, shall be required by
the City for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered
by the special use permit.
(d)
(15)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:922
If the Board denies the special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be
notified of such denial in writing within 15 calendar days of the
Board's action.
(e)
Extent and parameters of special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities. The extent and parameters of a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall
be as follows:
(a) Such special use permit shall be nonexclusive.
Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred
or conveyed without the express prior written approval of
the Board, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. The
applicant shall submit an executed assignment and assumption
agreement to the Board prior to obtaining such approval by
which the assignee or transferee agrees to all requirements of
this chapter and the special permit.
(b)
Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due
prior notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or
terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of
the special use permit, or for a material violation of these
regulations after prior written notice to the holder of the
special use permit.
(c)
(16)
Application fee.
At the time that a person submits an application for a special
use permit for a new tower or collocating on an existing tower
or other suitable structure where there is an increase in height
of the tower or structure, such person shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee of $10,000 to the City, such fee
is exclusive of any and all other fees. If the application is for a
special use permit for collocating on an existing tower or other
suitable structure, where no increase in height of the tower or
structure is required, the nonrefundable fee shall be $4,500.
[Amended 10-13-2010, approved 10-14-2010]
(a)
No application fee is required in order to rectify a special
use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless
there has been a visible modification of the wireless
telecommunications facility since the date of the issuance of
the existing special use permit for which the conditions of
the special use permit have not previously been modified. In
the case of any modification, the fees provided in Subsection
J(17)(a) shall apply.
(b)
(17)
Performance security. The applicant and the owner of record of
any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities property site
shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file
(18)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:923
with the City a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the
City as to type of security and the form and manner of execution,
in an amount of at least $75,000 and with such sureties as are
deemed sufficient by the City to assure the faithful performance
of the terms and conditions of these regulations and conditions of
any special use permit issued pursuant to these regulations. The
full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and
effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until
any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a
condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of
the original special use permit.
Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications
facilities. In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees,
renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities,
place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas,
in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building,
and zoning codes, laws and regulations and other applicable
requirements, the City may inspect all facets of said permit
holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction,
modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not
limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures
constructed or located on the permitted site.
(19)
Liability insurance.
A holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall secure and at all times
maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death
and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for
the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth
below:
Commercial general liability covering personal injuries,
death and property damage: $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
[1]
Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
[2]
[3] Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
(a)
The commercial general liability insurance policy shall
specifically include the City and its officers, boards, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as
additional named insureds for all wireless facilities located on
City-owned property, which includes properties owned by IDA
and Urban Renewal Agency.
(b)
(20)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:924
The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or
representative of an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state and with a Best's rating of at least A.
(c)
The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating
the insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30
days' prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the
insurance.
(d)
Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be
delivered to the City at least 15 days before the expiration of
the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace.
(e)
Before construction of a permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities is initiated, but in no case later
than 15 days after the grant of the special use permit, the
holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the City a
copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the
insurance in the required amounts.
(f)
Defense and indemnification.
Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that
is proposed for City property, pursuant to these regulations,
shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such
provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted
by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save,
hold harmless, and exempt the City, and its officers, boards,
employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and
consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or
charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands,
causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory
or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or
in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the
placement, construction, erection, modification, location,
product performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said
facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits,
demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be
attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions
of the City, or its servants or agents. With respect to the
penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable
attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are
included in those costs that are recoverable by the City.
(a)
Notwithstanding the requirements noted in Subsection J(21)(a)
of this section, an indemnification provision will not be
required in those instances where the City itself applies for and
secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities.
(b)
(21)
(22)Fines.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:925
In the event of a violation of these regulations or any special
use permit issued pursuant to these regulations, the City may
impose and collect, and the holder of the special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the City,
fines or penalties as set forth below.
(a)
A violation of this local section is hereby declared to be a
violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day
per occurrence or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
15 days. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a
separate additional violation.
(b)
Notwithstanding anything in this section, the holder of the
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other
penalties to evade or avoid compliance with these regulations
or any section of these regulations. An attempt to do so shall
subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and
revocation of the special use permit. The City may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of these
regulations, without limiting other remedies available to the
City.
(c)
Default and/or revocation.
If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt,
placed, moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that
is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of these
regulations or of the special use permit, then the City shall
notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such
violation. Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation
or noncompliance and that the violations must be corrected
within seven days of the date of the postmark of the notice,
or of the date of personal service of the notice, whichever
is earlier. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
subsection or any other section of these regulations, if the
violation causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or
threat to the health or safety of lives or property, the City may,
at its sole discretion, order the violation remedied immediately.
(a)
If within the period set forth in Subsection J(23)(a) above,
the wireless telecommunications facilities are not brought into
compliance with the provisions of these regulations or of the
special use permit, or substantial steps are not taken in order
to bring the affected wireless telecommunications facilities
into compliance, then the City may revoke such special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, and shall
notify the holder of the special use permit within 48 hours of
such action.
(b)
(23)
(24)Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:926
Under the following circumstances, the City may determine
that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the City
warrant and require the removal of wireless
telecommunications facilities:
Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have
been abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless
telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90
consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any threehundred-
sixty-five-day period, except for periods caused
by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or
removal shall commence within 90 days;
[1]
Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into
such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety
hazard;
[2]
Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located,
constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a
manner not authorized by, the required special use permit,
or any other necessary authorization.
[3]
(a)
If the City makes such a determination as noted in Subsection
J(24)(a) of this section, then the City shall notify the holder
of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications
facilities within 48 hours that said wireless
telecommunications facilities are to be removed. The City may
approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as
to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities.
(b)
The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or
assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless
telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures
and facilities, from the site and restore the site to its original
condition, such restoration being limited only by physical or
commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of
written notice from the City. However, if the owner of the
property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities
are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless
telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the
approval of the City.
(c)
If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or
substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit
holder has received notice, then the City may order officials
or representatives of the City to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner
or special use permit holder.
(d)
If, the City removes, or causes to be removed, wireless
telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless
(e)
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-28
1:927
telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it
from the site to a lawful location within 10 days, then the City
may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications
facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the
City may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the
wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more than 90
days, during which time a suitable plan for removal,
conversion, or relocation of the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder
of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the City,
and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder
of the special use permit and the City. If such a plan is not
developed, approved and executed within the ninety-day time
period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the
affected wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner
provided in this section.
(f)
Relief. Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any
aspect or requirement of these regulations may request such at
the preapplication meeting, provided that the relief or exemption
is contained in the original application for either a special use
permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special
use permit, a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities.
Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete.
However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief,
waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The
applicant shall bear all costs of the Board and the City in
considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No
such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted,
the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant effect on
the health, safety and welfare of the City, its residents and other
service providers.
(25)
Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief,
or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal
agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special
use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable
rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or
federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the
FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules
and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical
and RF emission standards.
(a)
To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not
(b)
(26)
§ 267-28 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-28
1:928
§ 267-29. Miscellaneous provisions.
limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any
rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security
are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities,
then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform
the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard,
or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective
date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be
required by the issuing entity.
Conflict with other laws. Where this section differs or conflicts
with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is
preempted or prohibited by the City, state or federal government,
this section shall control.
(27)
Expiration. A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the
specific use identified in the permit and, unless other provisions are
specifically set forth by the approving agency, the special permit shall
expire if said use shall cease for more than one year for any reason,
or if substantial construction, in accordance with the special permit,
has not been completed within two years from the date of issue. Such
time limits shall be tolled by any judicial proceedings to review the
approving agency's decision.
A.
Modification of special permits.
Any change or increase in use or reduction in lot size requires
amendment to the special permit in accordance with the
application and review requirements of this section, except that the
Building Commissioner may issue building permits as requested,
without amendment of the special permit, where he finds that:
There is no change in use, or that the proposal falls within the
definition of the existing special permit.
(a)
The change would require less than 10 additional parking
spaces.
(b)
(1)
Notwithstanding the above, the Building Commissioner may
require the formal filing of a complete amended application where
he finds that the proposed change will be significant in the
essential characteristics of the existing layout, arrangement or use
of buildings or land.
(2)
B.
Renewal. On written application, a special permit approved with a time
limitation may be renewed by the Planning Commissioner upon notice
to the approving agency which authorized the issuance of the special
permit, provided that no such renewal shall be made by the Planning
C.
§ 267-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-29
1:929
§ 267-30. Uses of other governmental agencies.
Commissioner unless there has been compliance with all applicable
codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. The
Planning Commissioner shall notify in writing the approving agency
which authorized the issuance of the special permit at least 45 days
prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be
made by the Planning Commissioner if there is objection by a majority
vote of the approving agency.
Introduction. The City Council recognizes the necessity, in furtherance
of the public health, safety and welfare, for other governmental
agencies, from time to time, to plan the location of uses within the
City of Mount Vernon. Absolute immunity from the requirements of
this chapter for other governments can, however, undermine one of the
essential purposes of zoning, which is to rationally coordinate land use
planning so as to promote orderly development and the preservation
of property values. To ensure that other governments will not
unnecessarily prejudice the welfare of the citizens of Mount Vernon,
and in furtherance of the welfare of their constituencies, the City
Council will examine proposed uses of other governments and balance
the competing public interests represented by such other governments
against those represented by the City of Mount Vernon.
A.
General rule. No use of a government or public authority other than
that of the City of Mount Vernon may be established or enlarged
without obtaining a governmental use special permit from the Planning
Board.
B.
Standards. A governmental use shall meet either of the following
standards:
It shall be essentially consistent with the purposes and
requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is to be
located; or
(1)
In balancing the interest and needs of the citizenry represented by
the other governmental agency against those of the citizenry of the
City of Mount Vernon, it shall be clear that the interest and needs
of the citizenry represented by the applicant are more vital with
respect to the particular use, taking into account the following:
The public health, safety and welfare on a regional or
statewide basis, as applicable.
(a)
Predicted effects on the area-wide land use pattern, the natural
environment, noise, traffic congestion and public services.
(b)
(c) Expected impacts on surrounding landowners.
(2)
C.
§ 267-29 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-30
1:930
The adequacy of accessory services and facilities proposed
as a part of such governmental use, such as parking and
landscaping.
(d)
The availability of feasible alternative locations for such
proposed governmental use or of alternative methods of
meeting the need for such use.
(e)
§ 267-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-30
1:931

ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Approval
§ 267-31. Approval required.
§ 267-32. Procedure.
Site plan approval is required prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the construction or enlargement of any principal use, other than a
one-, two- or three-family dwelling where such dwelling is permitted by
right and where the natural grade is not changed by more than four
feet at any point on the site, and prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for any change of use or occupancy which would result
in an increase in the requirement for off-street parking or loading
spaces in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter.
The Planning Board shall be the approving agency for all site plan
applications.
A.
The approved site plan, and any conditions attached thereto, shall be
complied with prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
Continued compliance with all such conditions shall be a requirement
of the continued validity of the certificate of occupancy. Site plan
revisions, other than minor adjustments approved by the
Commissioners of Buildings and Planning, pursuant to § 267-32F(1)
hereof, shall be subject to the same approval procedure and
requirements as the initial site plan.119
B.
Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter to the contrary,
site plan approval shall not be required for any new use sponsored
by the Mount Vernon Industrial Development Agency or Mount Vernon
Urban Renewal Agency.
C.
Application. Applicants for site plan approval shall submit a preliminary
informal application and discuss it with the Department of Planning
prior to the formal submission of a complete site plan application. An
application shall be considered officially submitted provided that the
approving agency or staff determines such application to be complete.
A receipt for the required application fee shall accompany the
application. The Department of Planning shall send one print to the
Commissioner of Public Works, the Building Commissioner and the
Fire Commissioner and other such officials and/or agencies it deems
appropriate for their review and comments. In addition, copies shall be
forwarded with notice of the public meeting to the Westchester County
Planning Board and to the clerks of abutting municipalities as required
by law. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009120
A.
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the Planning Board adopting rules and
regulations, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009. This local law also provided for the renumbering of Subsection D as
Subsection C.
§ 267-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-32
1:933
Action. Within 62 days of the date of receipt of a complete application,
unless such time is extended by mutual agreement between the
Planning Board and the applicant, the Planning Board shall approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove the application. The Planning
Board shall approve the application where it finds that the standards
of § 267-34 have been met. The Planning Board may approve such
application conditionally where it finds that such conditions or
modifications are necessary to ensure initial and continued
conformance with the standards of § 267-34 have been met. The
Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision,
and the decision shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and
the Department of Buildings. Any conditions required by the Planning
Board shall be noted on the original and all file copy prints of the
site plan. The Chairman of the Planning Board shall sign the original
and prints, as approved by the Planning Board, when they determine
that the plans submitted are in full compliance with all requirements
and conditions of their approval and comply with all other applicable
requirements. The Department of Planning shall retain the original and
all file copy prints and return one print to the applicant and to the
Building Department. The City Clerk's Office, the Assessor's Office and
the Law Department shall receive one copy of the signed Planning
Board resolution. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
B.
Variances in conjunction with a site plan.
Site plan approval shall comply with all the requirements of this
chapter. Where an application requires a variance from any
requirement of this chapter, site plan approval shall not be effective
until and unless such variances shall be issued by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(1)
In cases where an applicant requires one or more variances, the
applicant shall file an application with the Building Department,
which shall also advise the applicant of the procedures and
requirements to be followed in seeking those variance(s) from the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
C.
Expiration. Unless otherwise specifically set forth by the Planning
Board in connection with its approval of a site plan, such approval shall
expire if a building permit is not issued within one year from the date of
approval and if all construction work is not completed within two years
of the date of issue of such permit. Upon application to the Planning
Board, extensions totaling a maximum of 12 months may be granted to
each of these time periods, for appropriate cause. Such time limits shall
be tolled by any judicial proceedings to review the Board's decision.
D.
E. Amendments.
120. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed Subsection B, Notification, which immediately
followed this subsection. This local law also provided for the renumbering of Subsections
C through F as Subsections B through E, respectively.
§ 267-32 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-32
1:934
§ 267-33. Application.
The site plan application shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan
prepared by a legally qualified individual, firm or licensed design
professional, including but not limited to a registered architect, landscape
architect or professional engineer. A site plan shall demonstrate that the
standards of § 267-34 of this chapter can be met and shall include at least
the following information:
Minor amendments. During construction, the Commissioners of
Building and Planning may authorize minor adjustments to the
approved site plan when such adjustments appear necessary or
appropriate as the result of technical or engineering
considerations, the existence or materiality of which was first
discovered during actual construction. Such minor adjustments
shall be consistent with the concepts of the approved site plan.
(1)
Substantial amendments. Where unforeseen conditions are
encountered which require any change to an approved site plan
which the Commissioner of Planning considers substantial, or
where the applicant wishes to modify the approved site plan for
other reasons, an amended site plan shall be filed for review and
approval in accordance with the same procedures required for an
initial application. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(2)
General. Site plans shall be drawn on sheets not exceeding a size of 30
inches by 40 inches, and to a convenient scale, but not less than one
inch equals 20 feet, unless approved by the Commissioner of Planning.
A.
Legal data.
The name and the address of the applicant and authorization of the
owner if different from the applicant.
(1)
The name, address, signature and seal of the professional
preparing the site plan.
(2)
Title of the development, date prepared and date of revisions, if
any.
(3)
North arrow, scale and site vicinity map drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals 600 feet.
(4)
(5) Proof of the certified mailings as required in § 267-32B.
Map, block and lot numbers of the property as shown on the official
tax records.
(6)
Description of all existing and proposed deed restrictions or
covenants applying to the property.
(7)
(8) Existing zoning of the property and all adjoining properties.
B.
§ 267-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-33
1:935
Zoning schedule chart of required and proposed standards for each
site plan, including any variances granted. The chart shall include
the following:
(a) Use of structure.
(b) Floor area by use.
(c) Floor area ratio.
(d) Building height: stories and feet.
(e) Building length.
(f) Building coverage.
(g) Impervious surface coverage.
(h) Lot area (square feet).
(i) Lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
(j) Floor area per dwelling unit (square feet).
(k) Lot width and frontage.
(l) Yards: front, side and rear.
(m) Area of usable open space.
(n) Number of off-street parking and loading spaces.
(9)
Natural features.
Topographic data at a maximum contour interval of two feet,
showing existing and proposed contours, extended at least 20 feet
into adjoining properties.
(1)
(2) Surface features, such as the location of rock outcrops.
Vegetative cover, including the location of existing wooded areas,
all individual trees of 12 inches caliper or greater, both on site or
on adjacent City property, and all other specimen trees.
(3)
The location of all existing watercourses, water bodies,
intermittent streams, wetlands and springs.
(4)
Boundaries of any area subject to flooding or stormwater
overflows, including flood hazard areas as established by the
federal government.
(5)
C.
Existing structures and utilities.
Location of all structures on the premises and approximate location
of all neighboring structures within 100 feet of all lot lines of the
premises.
(1)
D.
§ 267-33 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-33
1:936
Location of all existing adjacent public and private streets, ways
and roads, paved areas and sidewalks. The names and existing
widths of adjacent streets, including curblines and elevations at the
center line of the street and the reference grade at the curb at the
center of the front wall of the building.
(2)
Locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing
sewers, culverts, water lines and other underground utilities within
the property lines and other underground utilities within the
property, to the extent known or relevant.
(3)
(4) Fences, landscaping and screening.
(5) All other existing improvements.
Proposed development.
The location and dimensions (length, width, floor elevations and
height in feet and in stories) of proposed structures, with floor
plans showing all proposed floor space by type of use and floor
level.
(1)
Preliminary architectural plans showing at least three exterior
elevations of the proposed structure and materials to be used.
(2)
The location, width and finished grades of proposed public and
private streets, ways, roads and sidewalks, including pavement
type and profiles.
(3)
The location, layout, finished grade, pavement specifications and
curbing proposed for parking and loading spaces, including access
drives.
(4)
Driveway profiles from the center line of the street to the garage
floor or parking lot, indicating all slopes by percentage of grade.
Elevations at the center line of the street, top of the curb and at
the lot line must also be indicated on the profile. Where there is no
curb, the curb elevation is assumed to be equal to the elevation at
the center line of the street and should be so indicated.
(5)
The location, design and proposed screening of outdoor storage
areas, including proposed provisions for refuse and storage
collection.
(6)
The location, size and design of all proposed water supply, sanitary
sewerage, valves, hydrants and other such utility facilities,
including connections to any existing such facilities, with profiles.
(7)
Stormwater drainage systems with details of catch basins, dry
wells, retention basins and other related facilities; and calculation
of expected storm drain loads and stormwater runoff pattern to be
accommodated by the proposed drainage system.
(8)
E.
§ 267-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-33
1:937
Landscaping plan, to include type, size, quantity and location of
all plants and other landscaping materials to be used, with English
and Latin names. Included in the plan shall be an indication of all
existing vegetation to be retained and the methods to be used to
protect such vegetation during the course of construction.
(9)
The location, height, design and materials of all proposed fences
and walls.
(10)
Type, location, design, shielding and hours of operation of exterior
lighting.
(11)
Location, type, size, wording, design, color and illumination of all
traffic and directional signs.
(12)
Estimate of earthwork, showing the quantity of any material to be
imported to or removed from the site.
(13)
Description of measures planned to assure proper erosion and
sedimentation control both during and after construction, with
reference to Westchester County's Best Management Practices
Manual for Construction Related Activities, Standards and
Specifications.
(14)
A statement from the applicant's licensed design professional
indicating the estimated cost of construction of all new streets and
sidewalks and of the water supply, sanitary sewerage and storm
drainage systems.
(15)
Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan or a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 226 of this Code shall be required for site plan
approval. The stormwater management plan or the SWPPP shall meet
the performance and design criteria and standards of Chapter 226. The
approved site plan shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter
226. [Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
F.
Waivers from site plan requirements. Upon written request by the
applicant to the Planning Board, the Planning Board may waive or
modify performance requirements and standards if it is determined by
Planning Board Staff that the waiver will not have an impact on public
health and public safety, and subject to the findings and establishments
of the general conditions for such waiver as shall be found in Article 3,
§ 27-a5, of the General City Law of the State of New York, as amended.
[Added 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
G.
Other. Any other information determined necessary or appropriate by
the Planning Board or its staff in order to provide for the proper
administration and enforcement of this chapter. [Amended 7-8-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
H.
§ 267-33 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-34
1:938
§ 267-34. Standards.
In considering and approving site plans, the Planning Board shall be guided
by the purposes of this chapter, including the purposes of the applicable
zoning district or districts, and, as a condition of approval, shall require
such modifications of the proposed plans as it deems necessary to comply
with the spirit as well as the letter of this chapter. The Planning Board shall
also specifically take into account the following:
Safe, adequate and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic
circulation both within and without the site. At least the following
aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to determine conformity to
this standard:
The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on
existing streets.
(1)
The number, locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian
entrances, exits, drives and walkways. Vehicular access to state
and county roads must also be approved by the State Department
of Transportation or County Department of Public Works, as
appropriate.
(2)
The visibility in both directions at all exit points of the site. The
driver of an automobile should have an unobstructed view of the
street for that distance necessary to allow safe entrance into the
traffic stream.
(3)
The location, arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking
facilities, which shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of
Article VIII of this chapter.
(4)
Interconnection of parking facilities via access drives within and
between adjacent lots, in order to provide maximum efficiency,
minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and convenient traffic
circulation.
(5)
The location, arrangement and adequacy of loading areas, which
shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of Article VIII of this
chapter.
(6)
Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, both within the
boundaries of the development and in relation to the adjoining
street and sidewalk system. Sidewalk crossings are subject to
approval by the City Commissioner of Public Works.
(7)
The location, arrangement and adequacy of facilities for the
physically handicapped, such as ramps, depressed curbs and
reserved parking spaces.
(8)
The location, arrangement and adequacy of landscaping within and
bordering parking facilities and loading spaces, which shall, at a
minimum, meet the requirements of § 267-40 of this chapter.
(9)
A.
§ 267-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-34
1:939
Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones. The Planning
Board may require the provision of fire zones and may also require
suitable legal agreements for enforcement of any parking and
traffic circulation restrictions.
(10)
The protection of environmental quality and the preservation and
enhancement of property values in the neighboring area. At least the
following aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to determine
conformity to this standard:
The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
plantings so as to ensure harmony with adjacent development,
screen parking facilities and loading spaces, and conceal storage
areas, refuse areas, utility installations and other such features.
Such walls, fences, hedges and plantings shall, at a minimum, meet
the requirements of §§ 267-14B, 267-14I and 267-40 of this chapter.
(1)
The prevention of dust, erosion, and drainage onto adjacent
properties, both during and after construction, through the
planting of ground cover or the installation of other appropriate
protective devices and/or ground surfaces.
(2)
The preservation of natural features of the site, such as wetlands,
unique wildlife habitats, historic structures, major trees and scenic
views, both from the site and onto or over the site.
(3)
The conformity of exterior lighting to the requirements of § 267-14J
of this chapter.
(4)
The design and arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory
facilities (such as air-conditioning systems, public address systems,
etc.) so as to achieve minimum and acceptable noise levels at the
property boundaries.
(5)
The provision of adequate storm- and surface water drainage
facilities so as to properly drain the site, not impede the existing
flow of drainage from neighboring properties and not increase
downstream flooding. Upon completion of development, the control
and retention of stormwater runoff shall be provided as directed
by the Commissioner of Public Works, who may require the
submission of an engineer's report.
(6)
Access to sunlight for present and potential future solar energy
systems, both on and off site, as well as building siting, orientation
and landscaping, meeting at a minimum the requirements of
§ 267-14K of this chapter.
(7)
B.
§ 267-34 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-34
1:940
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 267-35. Purposes.
All structures and uses shall be provided with a sufficient amount of offstreet
parking and loading spaces for employees, residents, visitors, clients,
patrons, deliverers and other persons at such structures or uses, but not
less than the minimum requirements of this chapter. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any structure or use, whether for a new
structure or a change of use of an existing structure, until all required offstreet
parking and loading spaces have been established in accordance with
this chapter. The continued operation of such facilities in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter shall be required as a condition of the
continued validity of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 267-36. Spaces required.
Schedule of Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements. The
Schedule of Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements121
presents the minimum parking space and loading space requirements
of this chapter. Where there is more than one use, the minimum
requirements shall be cumulative for all uses, except where shared use
of parking or loading spaces are permitted by the approving agency
pursuant to § 267-36B thereof. For uses that do not fall within the
categories listed, or for uses where no minimum number of spaces
is specified, the Commissioner of Planning shall recommend to the
approving agency minimum parking and loading space requirements
based upon the specific nature of the proposed facility or use, and
the approving agency shall establish the requirements on that basis.
Required spaces developed for specific structures and uses shall be
reserved at all times to persons who are employed at or make use
of such structures and uses, except where such parking spaces are
dedicated to and accepted by the City of Mount Vernon as public
parking, or where arrangements for shared use are made pursuant to
Subsection B below.
A.
Shared use. The total number of off-street parking and loading spaces
required shall be the sum of the requirements for each individual use,
except that such total may be reduced by the approving agency where
the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of such agency that the
capacity of the facility will satisfy the purposes of this chapter by reason
of variation in the probable time of maximum use by residents, visitors,
patrons, deliverers and/or employees.
B.
Limitations on reserved spaces. No more than 10% of the minimum
required off-street parking spaces designed to serve nonresidential
uses and no more than one space per dwelling unit in multifamily
C.
121. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 267-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-36
1:941
residential developments shall be permitted to be reserved for the
exclusive use of individual dwelling units, persons and/or business
establishments. Limitations on reserved spaces do not apply to parking
spaces provided in excess of the minimum requirements of this chapter.
Effect on existing structures and uses. Structures and uses in existence
or for which building permits have been issued prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall not be subject to the parking or loading space
requirements of this chapter, provided that any parking and loading
facilities existing or approved to serve such structures or uses shall not
in the future be reduced or redesignated to serve other structures or
uses, except to the extent that they exceed such requirements. At the
time of any enlargement, change or expansion of existing structures or
uses in the future, the following requirements shall apply:
Required parking and loading facilities for that part of the
structure or use which constitutes an enlargement or expansion
shall be provided in accordance with all requirements of this
chapter.
(1)
To the maximum extent deemed feasible and reasonable by the
approving agency, parking and loading facilities shall also be
provided to serve the existing portion of such structure or use that
does not conform to all parking and loading space requirements of
this chapter.
(2)
At the time of any change of use in an existing structure which
would result in an increased off-street parking or loading space
requirement, the additional parking and loading spaces so required
shall be provided in accordance with all applicable requirements of
this chapter.
(3)
D.
Alternate methods of complying with parking and loading
requirements.
Alternate locations. Required off-street parking facilities shall be
provided on the same lot with the structure or use which they
serve, except as follows:
The approving agency may allow all or part of the parking
spaces required to serve structures or uses to be located on
any lot entirely within 250 feet of the structures or uses to
be served, provided that such parking is a lawful use in the
district in which it is to be located, and further provided that
the approving agency determines that it is impractical to
provide parking on the same lot with the structures or uses
being served.
(a)
In any H District, the required parking spaces may be provided
on any lot within 450 feet of the structures or uses to be
served.
(b)
(1)
E.
§ 267-36 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-36
1:942
Where the approving agency approves the location of such
parking spaces on a lot different from the lot occupied by the
structure or use served, the approving agency shall require
a legal instrument, in form and filing, satisfactory to the
Corporation Counsel, assuring the continued use of said
parking spaces in connection with the uses or structures
served.
(c)
The construction or expansion of any nonresidential structure
or facility involving less than 4,000 square feet of gross floor
area shall not be required to provide accessory off-street
parking and loading spaces when such use is located within
500 feet of a municipal parking facility operated by the City of
Mount Vernon.
(d)
For the construction or expansion of any nonresidential
structure or facility involving more than 4,000 square feet
of gross floor area, the approving agency may allow all or a
portion of the parking spaces required to serve structures or
uses to be located within a municipal parking facility operated
by the City of Mount Vernon within 500 feet of the structure
or uses to be served, provided that the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the approving agency that the current
capacity of the municipal parking facility will satisfy the
purposes of this chapter.
(e)
Fee in lieu of off-street parking spaces. [Added 7-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009122]
Application for a permit for construction, alteration, addition
or change of use shall not be granted if the minimum required
off-street parking spaces are not provided in accordance with
this chapter, except that:
The applicant shall pay a parking fee for each required
space which is not provided on site, or on another lot
as permitted per Subsection E(1)(a), (b), (c), in lieu of
providing the minimum required off-street parking spaces
upon approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals of an area
variance for off-street parking.
[1]
The applicant shall pay a parking fee for each required
space for which approval from the City Planning Board
has been granted to utilize a municipal parking facility as
permitted in Subsection E(1)(d) and (e).
[2]
Exception for a housing project contracted to provide low
rent or low purchase price for low-income households, the
parking fee shall only be charged if a dwelling unit is
[3]
(a)
(2)
122. Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of Subsection E(2) and (3)
as Subsection E(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 267-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-36
1:943
§ 267-37. Setbacks.
Required off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with the
following setback requirements:
not provided with at least one off-street parking space. In
such case, one parking fee shall be charged for each and
every dwelling unit for which no parking space is provided,
unless City Council approval is granted for waiving the
fee. This exception shall not relieve the applicant to obtain
approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals for an offstreet-
parking variance.
The parking fee shall be paid to the issuing agency prior to
the issuance of the permit, except that the fee may be paid at
any time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
project under construction at the time this amendment takes
effect.
(b)
Loading facilities. Required off-street loading facilities shall be
provided on the same lot with the structure or use which they
serve. However, the approving agency may allow off-street loading
spaces to be located within the building being served, provided
that the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving
agency that such spaces shall be permanently available for their
intended purpose.
(3)
Parking of commercial vehicles. Where commercial vehicles are
proposed to be parked overnight on a nonresidential property, the
following requirements shall apply:
They shall be parked only in spaces specifically designated for
such uses on an approved site plan.
(a)
They shall be vehicles which are customary to and used on a
regular basis in connection with a permitted principal use on
the premises.
(b)
(c) They shall not be used for the storage of goods.
(4)
In R1 and R2 Residence Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces
shall not be provided within the front yard setback requirements.
A.
In RMF Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be
provided within the front, side and rear yard setback requirements,
except that the minimum side and rear yard setbacks for unenclosed
parking shall be only three feet where adjacent to other lots in an RMF
or Nonresidence District and 10 feet where adjacent to an R1 or R2
District. Buffer landscaping within such setback areas shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of § 267-40 of this chapter.
B.
§ 267-36 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-37
1:944
§ 267-38. Design and layout.
In any H or RMF-SC-25 District, off-street parking and loading spaces
shall not be provided within the front, side and rear yard setback
requirements, except that minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks
for unenclosed parking shall be only five feet.
C.
In Nonresidence Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces shall
be required to set back from front, side and rear lot lines only to the
extent necessary to provide landscaped buffer areas in accordance with
the requirements of § 267-141 of this chapter.
D.
Except where located within or adjacent to an R1 or R2 Residence
District, enclosed off-street parking and loading spaces, which are to
be below existing grade and covered with landscaping or a landscaped
terrace, shall not be required to comply with the building setback
requirements of this chapter, provided that their location and design
are approved by the approving agency.
E.
Access. Access to all off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
designed in accordance with the following requirements:
Access driveways. All off-street parking and loading spaces shall
be provided with unobstructed access and shall be designed to
prevent the backing of any vehicle across a sidewalk or into a
street except at locations specifically designed for such purposes
where no reasonable alternative is available and approval has been
granted by the approving agency. Exception: backing of a vehicle
across a sidewalk or into a one-way street shall be permitted from
an access driveway serving one- or two-family dwellings in a one- or
two-family district. Access driveways connecting off-street parking
and loading facilities to the street or streets from which they
derive access shall be designed in accordance with the following
requirements: [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Access driveways serving one- and two-family residences shall
not be less than nine feet in width nor closer than three feet
to any side or rear lot line and shall be connected to the street
with a radius return at each intersection corner of not less than
25% of its width. They shall also not exceed a grade of 10%,
except that a 12% grade may be allowed by the Planning Board
for a driveway serving a single-family residence, provided that
said Board determines that such grade would be appropriate
for the purpose of reducing environmental impact. No more
than one access driveway curb cut shall be permitted to serve
any one- or two-family residence, except that a circular
driveway with two curb cuts shall be permitted on a lot with
150 feet or more of road frontage. No curb cut shall be
permitted within the street intersection area required for sight
visibility pursuant to § 267-13C(2).
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 267-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-38
1:945
Access driveways serving multifamily and nonresidence uses
shall be not less than 20 feet in width for two-way drives and
12 feet in width for one-way drives. Each such drive shall be
connected to the street with a radius return at each corner of
not less than 25% of its width. They shall also not exceed a
grade of 5%, except that a 7% grade may be allowed by the
approving agency, provided that said Board determines that
such grade would be appropriate for the purpose of reducing
environmental impact. Notwithstanding the above, the
approving agency may allow lesser dimensions for a driveway
providing access to fewer than 20 spaces. Similarly, it may
require greater dimensions where determined necessary based
upon the number of spaces served and/or the nature of the
intended use.
(b)
Interconnection of off-street parking facilities. In order to provide
maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and
convenient traffic flow, the agency approving a site plan may
require the interconnection of parking facilities via circulation
drives within and between adjacent lots. To help assure the
accomplishment of this, the approving agency may require a
written instrument in recordable form, such as deed restrictions,
satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel, binding the owner and his
heirs and assigns to permit and maintain such interconnection of
parking facilities.
(2)
Dimensional requirements. All off-street parking and loading facilities
shall comply with at least the following minimum dimensional
requirements:
Parking space dimensions. All off-street parking spaces shall be at
least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length, except that a width
of 8.5 feet may be permitted by the approving agency for long-term
(commuter, worker or residential) use. The approving agency may
also permit a one-foot lesser paved depth where an unobstructed
vehicle overhang area is provided, as in the case of landscaped
traffic islands.
(1)
Loading space dimensions. Off-street loading spaces shall be at
least 15 feet in width, 40 feet in length and 14 feet in height, except
that adjacent loading spaces need each be only 12 feet in width.
(2)
Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall
comply with the dimensional requirements as set forth in the New
York State Building Code.
(3)
Compact car spaces. In any off-street parking facility containing
50 or more spaces, the approving agency may permit up to 1/3 of
such spaces to be specifically designed and limited in their use to
compact cars. The minimum dimensions for such spaces shall be
7.5 feet in width and 15 feet in length.
(4)
B.
§ 267-38 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-38
1:946
§ 267-39. Improvement.
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the approving
agency.
Aisle dimensions. All driveway aisles providing access to-off-street
parking and loading spaces shall be of sufficient width as
determined appropriate by the approving agency to provide safe
and convenient access to such spaces, taking into consideration
the nature of the motor vehicles and uses served, the frequency
of vehicle turnover, the angle of parking and the direction and
amount of traffic flow. Minimum aisle width dimensions shall be
as promulgated by a nationally recognized planning and/or traffic
engineering organization, such as the American Planning
Association, the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and/or the
Urban Land Institute. As an example, the minimum aisle width
serving ninety-degree parking spaces would be 24 feet, except 20
feet for compact car spaces.
(5)
Pavement. All off-street parking and loading facilities, including
driveways, shall be surfaced with asphaltic cement concrete, portland
cement concrete, paving stone or brick.
A.
Grading and drainage. All off-street parking and loading facilities, other
than those serving one- or two-family dwellings, shall be provided with
an interior network of drains. The finished surface shall be pitched to
drain to drywells or drain sumps within property lines in accordance
with plans as may be required and approved by the Commissioner of
Buildings. No parking or loading facility shall be pitched so as to drain
across a sidewalk, into a street or onto any neighboring premises.
B.
Space delineation. For all uses, other than one- or two-family dwellings,
all required parking and loading spaces shall be individually identified
by means of pavement marking with double-striped painted lines.
C.
Signage. Appropriate signs and pavement markings shall be provided
in all off-street parking and loading facilities as necessary to direct
internal traffic flow. Such signs shall generally not exceed two square
feet in area.
D.
Illumination. Illumination of all off-street parking and loading facilities,
other than those accessory to one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
provided such that the lighting level shall not exceed an intensity of
five footcandles, nor shall it be less than 1.5 footcandles at pavement
level. All such lighting shall be of such type and location and have
such shading as will prevent objectionable glare observable from
neighboring properties.
E.
Partial waiver of improvement. Where the agency approving a site plan
determines, in connection with its review of such site plan, that less
F.
§ 267-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-39
1:947
§ 267-40. Landscaping and screening.
Except for off-street parking facilities and spaces accessory to a one- or twofamily
dwelling, all off-street parking and loading facilities shall be curbed,
screened and landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs, ground cover and
other plant materials to assure the establishment of a safe, convenient and
attractive facility. Such landscaping and screening shall be planted and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
than the required number of parking or loading spaces will satisfy
the intent of this chapter because of variations in the probable time
of maximum use by joint users, the approving agency may waive a
portion of the improvement, but not for more than 1/3 of the total
number of spaces required by this chapter. In all cases, it shall be
expressly demonstrated on the site plan that sufficient area remains
for the provision of the total number of spaces required and the site
plan shall bear such designation. Such unimproved portion of the offstreet
parking and loading facility shall, where determined practical by
the approving agency, be used and maintained as additional landscaped
area until and unless required for parking or loading use. Legal
instruments, in form and filing, satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel,
shall be submitted by the applicant, ensuring the improvement of such
spaces within six months of the date of written notice to the property
owner by the agency stating that all or a portion of such spaces have
been determined to be necessary and shall be improved.
Landscaping. In all off-street parking facilities which contain 25 or
more parking spaces and which are not located in parking garages, at
least 6% of the total area within the perimeter of the parking facility
shall be so landscaped, and at least one shade tree, of not less than
three inches caliper, shall be provided for each 12 parking spaces.
Raised planting islands shall be provided as necessary to guide
vehicle movement, to provide adequate space for plant growth
and, where appropriate, to provide for pedestrian circulation and
vehicle overhang. Such raised planting islands and the landscaping
within them shall be designed and arranged so as to provide
vertical definition to major traffic circulation aisles, entrances and
exits, to channel internal traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate
diagonal movement of vehicles and to provide cooling shade and
relief from the visual monotony and summer heat of a large paved
parking area. Curbs of such islands shall be designed so as to
facilitate surface drainage and to prevent vehicles from
overhanging sidewalks and damaging landscaping materials.
(1)
The minimum width of landscaped islands shall be eight feet and
any external corner shall be rounded with a curb radius of not less
than three feet.
(2)
The selection, amount and location of all landscaping materials
shall be subject to approval by the approving agency based upon
(3)
A.
§ 267-39 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-40
1:948
§ 267-41. Operation and maintenance.
considerations of the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to
serve its intended purpose with minimal maintenance, including
plant care, snow plowing, leaf removal and general compatibility
with motor vehicles and pedestrians.
All landscaping shall continue to be maintained in a healthy
growing condition throughout the duration of the structure or use
which it is intended to serve. Any planting not so maintained shall
be replaced with new plants at the beginning of the next
immediately following growing season.
(4)
The design and maintenance of landscaping and screening shall
create no obstruction to driver vision at traffic intersection areas.
(5)
Screening. All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be screened
along their periphery where they abut streets, public spaces and
residence districts. Such screening shall consist of evergreen planting
of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as, in the judgment of
the approving agency, will screen the activity involved from the abovereferenced
abutting uses. The approving agency may allow a wall or
fence of location, height, design and material determined suitable by
such agency to be substituted for or to supplement the required screen
planting.
B.
Permanent maintenance. Required off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be maintained so long as the use or structure exists
which the facilities are designed to serve.
A.
Operation. The operation of off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be conducted in such a manner as to limit their use to licensed
motor vehicles on a transient basis. The servicing, repair, fueling or
storage of motor vehicles or trailers shall not be permitted in such
areas.
B.
§ 267-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-41
1:949

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 267-42. Organization.
§ 267-43. Powers and duties.
Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as heretofore established
by the City Council pursuant to § 81 of the General City Law of the State
of New York, is hereby maintained. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consist of six members.
A.
Meetings and records. The presence of four members of the Board shall
be necessary for a quorum and the concurring vote of four members
shall be necessary to effect any decision before the Board. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
on every question or, if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. Every rule, determination, regulation, amendment or
appeal thereof, and every order, requirement and decision of the Board
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board.
B.
General. The Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties
prescribed by General City Law and by this chapter, which powers and
duties are summarized and more particularly specified in the following,
provided that none of the following sections shall be deemed to any of
tie powers of the Board of Appeals that are conferred by the General
City Law. In passing upon any matter before it, the Board shall take into
specific consideration the goals as well as the specific standards of this
chapter.
A.
Rules and regulations. The Board of Appeals may adopt such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary and proper to the performance of its
powers and duties hereunder and may amend or repeal the same.
B.
Nonconforming uses. As more fully set out in § 267-11 of this chapter,
the Board of Appeals is authorized to extend the permitted period
for discontinuance of a nonconforming use in accordance with the
requirements of § 267-11B(5) of this chapter; to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for reconstruction
of a nonconforming building in accordance with requirements of
§ 267-11B(2) of this chapter; to permit the change of a nonconforming
use to another nonconforming use in accordance with § 267-11E of
this chapter; and to review and approve, approve with modifications
or disapprove a plan for the improvement of a nonconforming use in
accordance with § 267-11F of this chapter.
C.
Variances. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official or agency charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, or on referral of an applicant to
the Board by an approving agency acting pursuant to Article VI or VII
D.
§ 267-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-43
1:951
of this chapter, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify
the strict letter of this chapter, where its literal interpretation would
cause unnecessary hardship, in such manner as to observe the spirit of
the chapter, secure public safety and welfare and do substantial justice.
[Amended 3-10-1999, approved 3-11-1999]
Use variances. Where, because of unnecessary hardship, an
applicant desires to utilize land for a principal or accessory use not
allowed in the district in which the land is located, and where such
applicant presents appropriate proof of such unnecessary hardship
with reference to the standards enumerated below, the Board may
grant a variance of the applicable provisions of this chapter for the
specific case, provided that as a condition to the grant of any such
variance, the Board shall make each and every one of the following
findings:
After considering all permitted uses, that the property in
question cannot yield a reasonable return as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence if used only for a purpose allowed
in that district.
(a)
That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances
affecting only the property which is the subject of the
application and not to general conditions in a substantial
portion of the neighborhood.
(b)
That the use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the
essential character of the locality.
(c)
That the use to be authorized by the variance is in reasonable
harmony with the intent of this chapter.
(d)
That the unnecessary hardship claimed as a ground for the
variance has not been created by the owner.
(e)
That within the intent and purpose of this chapter, the
variance, if granted, is the minimum variance necessary to
afford relief. To this end, the Board may permit a lesser
variance than that applied for.
(f)
(1)
Area variances. Where an applicant requests a variance of lot
area or other dimensional requirements of this chapter, and where
such applicant presents appropriate proof with reference to the
standards enumerated below, the Board may grant a variance of
the applicable provisions of this chapter for the specific case after
weighing the benefit to the applicant against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and community if
such variance is granted. In making this determination, the Board
of Appeals shall consider the following: [Amended 3-10-1999,
approved 3-11-1999]
(a) How substantial the variation is in relation to the requirement.
(2)
§ 267-43 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-43
1:952
§ 267-44. Procedure.
Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district.
(b)
Whether a substantial change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a substantial detriment to
adjoining properties created.
(c)
Whether the difficulty can be alleviated by some method
feasible for the applicant to pursue other than a variance.
(d)
Whether the difficulty alleged by the applicant was selfcreated,
which consideration shall be relevant to the decision
of Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
(e)
Conditions and safeguards. The Board of Appeals may prescribe
such conditions or restrictions applying to the granting of a
variance as it deems necessary in each specific case in order to
minimize the adverse effects of such variance upon other property
in the neighborhood and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. In the case of a use variance, any permits for additional
construction or any change in occupancy or use of the premises
affected shall require reapplication to the Board of Appeals for
modification of said use variance. Such conditions or restrictions
shall be incorporated into the building permit and certificate of
occupancy. Failure to comply with such conditions or restrictions
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may constitute the
basis for denial or revocation of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy and for all other applicable remedies.
(3)
Interpretations. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, or on request from any official, agency
or board of the City, or on the Board of Appeals own initiative, the
Board of Appeals is authorized to decide any question involving the
interpretation of any provision of this chapter. Interpretations shall be
made in accordance with the intent of the particular provision being
interpreted.
E.
Appeal or application. All appeals of any denials and all applications
to the Board shall be made by the owner or agent duly authorized, in
writing, and shall be on forms prescribed by the Board. Each appeal
or application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall
refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved and shall exactly
set forth, as the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the
details of the adjustment that is applied for and the grounds for which
it is claimed that the same should be granted.
A.
§ 267-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-44
1:953
Review by other agencies. Upon a receipt of a completed appeal or
application, the Board of Appeals shall forward copies for review and
report such to the Planning Department, Building Department, Law
Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Department of
Public Works and any other officials and agencies as it deems
appropriate. The Planning Board may submit to the Board of Appeals an
advisory opinion on any appeal or application at any time prior to the
rendering of a decision. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a
notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and
to the clerks of abutting municipalities when required by law.
B.
Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing
on any appeal, application or request made pursuant to this chapter.
The deliberations of the Board shall be conducted publicly and all votes
on any matter before the Board must be taken at a public meeting.
[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Publication in the official newspaper. The applicant shall give
public notice of such hearing and of the substance of the
application shall be given by publication in the City's official
newspaper at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. The
applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting
that such notification was completed.
(1)
Mailing to abutting and adjacent property owners. The applicant
must notify all property owners in an affected area as determined
by the Board, but, at a minimum, the applicant shall notify all
property owners within 250 feet of any boundary of the property
which is the subject of an application for all single-, two- and
three-family properties and must notify any property owners within
500 feet of any boundary of the property which is the subject
of an application for all multifamily, nonresidentially zoned and
nonresidential uses. Such notice shall be given by registered mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to such
property owners whose names appear as the owners of record in
the office of the Assessor of their respective municipality. Such
notice shall be mailed not more than 21 days prior to and not less
than 10 days before the date of the public hearing. The applicant
shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
property owners were so notified. [Amended 5-11-2011,
approved 5-12-2011]
(2)
Sign posting. A sign as prescribed in the Planning Board's Rules
and Regulations shall be posted along all street frontages of the
subject site at least 14 days prior to the hearing date. The applicant
shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
notification was completed.
(3)
Affidavit submission. All required affidavits shall be filed not less
than nine days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(4)
C.
§ 267-44 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-44
1:954
§ 267-45. Expiration.
A variance granted under this chapter shall automatically expire if a
building permit for construction in accordance with the plans for which
such variance was granted has not been issued within one year of the date
of the variance and if all construction is not completed within two years of
the date of issuance of the building permit, or if both have not occurred
within such other time limits as may be established by the Board of Appeals
in connection with its decision. Such time limits shall be tolled by any
judicial proceedings to review the Board's decision.
§ 267-46. Reapplication.
After an application has been decided, no matter presented to the Board of
Appeals shall again be presented to or entertained by said Board within a
period of three years from the date of such decision or determination or, if
renewed by the courts, within the same period after the final adjudication
thereof, except upon a showing by the applicant, to the satisfaction of
the Board of Appeals, that there has been a material change in the
circumstances under consideration in the original proceeding.
Action. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution,
shall be recorded and shall fully set forth the facts of the case and the
findings and conclusions on which it was based. Such resolution and
findings shall be prepared by the Corporation Counsel. Such decision
shall be made within 62 days of the date of the public hearing. The
Board of Appeals shall notify the Planning Board, the Building
Commissioner, the City Clerk's Office, the Assessor's Office, and the
Law Department and each applicant of its decision in each case, in
writing, upon the filing of its decision in the office of the Board.
[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
D.
§ 267-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-46
1:955

ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Administration
§ 267-47. Enforcement.
§ 267-48. Permits. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Except under written authorization of the Board of Appeals, as provided in
Article IX of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for any land,
building or structure where said action would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
General. No board, agency, officer or employee of the City shall issue,
grant or approve any permit, license, certificate or other authorization
for any construction or alteration of any building or structure or for any
use of land, building or structure that would not be in full compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, except as permitted under Article IX
of this chapter.
A.
Enforcing authority. The provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations authorized hereunder shall be enforced by the Building
Commissioner or a designated member of his Department.
The Building Commissioner and his duly authorized assistants shall
maintain files of all applications for building permits and site plans
submitted therewith and for certificates of occupancy, and records
of all building permits and certificates of occupancy issued by
them, which files and records shall be open to public inspection.
(1)
The Building Commissioner shall keep a record of every identifiable
complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and of the action taken consequent on each such complaint, which
records shall be public records.
(2)
B.
Every application for a building permit as required by the Building
Commissioner shall be accompanied by a site plan as required in Article
VII of this chapter. The application shall be made in triplicate. When
site plan approval by the Planning Board is not required by Article
VII of this chapter, the Building Commissioner, in reviewing such site
plan, shall be guided by the standards as set forth in § 267-34 of this
chapter. On issuance of a building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall return one copy of all documents filed to the applicant.
A.
If a permit is denied, the Building Commissioner shall state in writing
to the applicant the reason for such denial.
B.
Permit requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to conspicuously
post the permit and maintain the approved plans at the job site
until the work is completed and the inspections are passed.
(1)
C.
§ 267-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-48
1:957
§ 267-49. Certificates of occupancy and certificates of tenancy.
[Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Except under written authorization of the Board of Appeals, as provided
in Article IX of this chapter, no certificate of occupancy or certificate of
tenancy may be issued unless such occupancy is in complete conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy may continue
in effect as long as such occupancy or use is in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and any requirements made in connection
therewith at the time of the issuance thereof. The details of any detailed
statement or plan approved by the City Council, Planning Board, Building
Commissioner, Board of Appeals or Architectural Review Board, acting
under the terms of this chapter, and any conditions attached to such
approval, shall be deemed to be such requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to request in
writing the required inspections, or required reinspections, at least
72 hours in advance. The permit holder shall not cause any
conditions, and/or proceed with any construction phase, that would
prevent a required inspection to be fully carried out and passed by
the Building Official.
(2)
The Building Official shall advise the permit holder in writing of the
result of a required inspection within 24 hours.
(3)
The requested inspection or reinspection shall not be carried out if
any one of the following conditions exist:
(a) The permit is not conspicuously posted at the work site.
(b) The approved plans are not at the work site.
One or more of the required inspections of preceding
construction phases have not been passed.
(c)
The legalization and/or reinspection fees, or other required
fees, have not been paid.
(d)
(4)
At completion of work, it shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder to submit the documentation required by codes and
conditions of the permit, and apply for the type of compliance
certificate listed on the permit.
(5)
Application. All applications for certificates of occupancy or certificates
of tenancy shall be on forms furnished by the Building Commissioner.
Such certificates shall be issued no less than 30 days after review and
approval by the Building Department, provided that all applicable codes
or ordinances in effect are complied with. In the event that the Building
Commissioner denies a certificate of occupancy, notice of the denial
setting forth the reasons therefor shall be sent to the applicant within
15 days after receipt of the written application.
A.
§ 267-48 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-49
1:958
Conditional temporary certificates of occupancy.
A conditional temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
by the Building Commissioner for a period not to exceed 90 days
during the completion of any alterations that are required under
the provision of any law or ordinance. Conditional temporary
certificates may be renewed by the Building Commissioner for
periods not exceeding 90 days, but in no event shall temporary
certificate renewals exceed a total of six months. Such conditional
temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering
the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or of the
City respective to the use or occupancy of the land or building
or any other matter covered by this section, and such conditional
temporary certificates shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately assure the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants of the building and of adjacent
buildings and land.
(1)
No conditional temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued
when the landscaping, screening and/or lighting required pursuant
to any City Board approval granted in conjunction with approval
of a building permit is not completed, unless the applicant of such
certificate complies with the following requirements:
Submit, prior to the issuance of such certificate, a performance
bond issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of New York, guaranteeing satisfactory
completion of the work required within the limitation of the
certificate, or any extension thereof, in a sum equal to the cost
of the work, as estimated by the Commissioner of Buildings;
and
(a)
Submit a signed and notarized agreement that the work shall
be completed as approved within the time limitation of the
certificate or any extension thereof.
(b)
If the work to be completed is limited to the work required
to be performed within the City's right-of-way, such as, but
not limited to, sidewalk, trees and/or lampposts, the applicant
may choose to submit a certified check made to the order of
the City of Mount Vernon, in a sum equal to the cost of the
work, as estimated by the Commissioner of Buildings, plus 15%
administrative cost, together with the agreement listed above,
which shall additionally authorize the City of Mount Vernon
to perform the work should the applicant exceeds the time
limitation and any extension thereof.
(c)
(2)
For the following regulations, Subsections C through and including
H, unless otherwise specified, the term "certificate of occupancy"
shall be deemed to mean either a "certificate of occupancy" or a
"certificate of tenancy," as the case may be. For a certificate of
(3)
B.
§ 267-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-49
1:959
occupancy, the term building shall be deemed to mean building
and land, or land when no structure exists at the premises. For a
"certificate of tenancy," the owner shall be deemed to mean the
business owner and the building, the tenancy space.
Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building and the use
of the building and/or land complies with all provisions of this chapter
and all other ordinances of the City that pertains to the construction,
occupancy and use of such building or land.
C.
Each certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is
required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of the
building and/or land to which it applies.
D.
Upon written request by the owner, the Building Commissioner shall,
after inspection, issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or
use thereof or of land existing at the time of adoption of this chapter,
certifying such use and whether or not the same and the building
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
E.
It shall be unlawful to occupy and use a land, structure or tenancy
space, other than a one- or two- family dwelling, if the certificate of
occupancy or tenancy is not kept on the premises and made available
for inspection at any time upon request from a Building Official or other
official representing the City of Mount Vernon.
F.
The certificate of occupancy shall become invalid if the building, land or
tenancy, as applicable, is not used or occupied in complete compliance
with all the provisions of the certificate of occupancy. The owner shall
be responsible to obtain all necessary permits to return the premises
to code compliant conditions within the specified time. Failure to do
so shall lead to the revocation of the certificate. The time shall be as
specified by applicable code or as specified on the notice of violation.
The most restrictive time shall take precedence, but in no case shall it
exceed one year.
G.
No occupancy shall be permitted in a building which certificate of
occupancy have been revoked. No occupancy shall be permitted in any
the parts of the building which are used and occupied in noncompliance
with the certificate of occupancy, or/and have been altered so as to
become noncompliant with life, fire and safety code requirements such
as required means of egress, fire separation, fire detection, fire
suppression and structural integrity.
H.
Annual required inspections. Inspections of places of public assembly
and common areas of multiple dwellings shall be annually conducted
by the Building Official as a condition of the certificate of occupancy or
certificate of tenancy.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building, the owner
of the business for a tenancy space, or a duly authorized agent, to
request the annual inspection in due time. The applicant shall be
(1)
I.
§ 267-49 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-49
1:960
§ 267-50. Site work and construction activity.
No site clearing, excavation or other similar activity in preparation for
construction shall be permitted until and unless a permit or approval for
such activity has been issued by the Commissioner of Buildings and/or
the appropriate City agency or official and any required bond has been
posted therefore. Once construction has been started it shall be diligently
prosecuted to completion. In the event that construction is halted or
unreasonably delayed, and, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner,
charged a late fee for failure to apply for an inspection 30 days
prior to the due date.
The Building Commissioner shall keep records of the annual
inspections and issue the appropriate certificate of inspection to
the applicant, or the result of a failed inspection. Such certificate
shall certify that the spaces subject to the inspections are in
compliance with the requirements of the certificate of occupancy
or certificate of tenancy for these spaces.
(2)
No certificate of inspection may be issued if violations of the
certificate of occupancy or tenancy are identified.
(3)
Public assembly spaces:
The maximum number of occupants for each public assembly
space shall be listed in the certificate of occupancy.
(a)
Each assembly space shall be inspected yearly. Each assembly
space shall receive a certificate of inspection issued by the
Building Commissioner. The certificate for assembly space
shall be the occupancy sign, which shall list the use of the
space, the maximum number of occupants, and the dates of
issuance and expiration, in addition to the specific
identification of the premises and the space.
(b)
It shall be unlawful to occupy a public assembly space without
an occupancy sign conspicuously posted.
(c)
(4)
Multiple dwellings:
The common areas of a multiple dwelling shall be inspected
yearly by a Building Official.
(a)
The certificate of multiple dwelling inspection shall list the
date of inspection, the name of the Building Official, the name
of the building owner, the name and phone number of the
building superintendent, the date of any other required
inspections such as sprinkler system, elevators, etc., and the
date of issuance and expiration of the certificate. The
certificate shall be kept on the premises with the certificate of
occupancy.
(b)
(5)
§ 267-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-50
1:961
such halt or delay may create a safety or health hazard or an adverse impact
on the environment or the neighborhood in which it is located, said Building
Commissioner may order a termination of construction activities on the site
and the immediate restoration of the site to a safe, healthful and attractive
condition.
§ 267-51. Fees. [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
For the purpose of defraying the professional and administrative costs
involved in the review of applications and appeals, including the cost of
preparing and publishing legal notices as required by law, all applications
shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City of Mount Vernon in the
amounts prescribed below. This fee shall be waived where the applicant is
an agency of the City:
§ 267-52. Penalties for offenses; stop-work order.
Each application or petition requesting any amendment, supplement,
change, modification or repeal of any provision of this chapter,
including the Zoning Map: $2,000, but not less than $2,000 per acre for
any application requesting a map change.
A.
Each application for site plan approval: $500, plus $20 for each
required off-street parking and loading space.
B.
Each application for a special permit: $500, plus the required site plan
application fee.
C.
Each application for an area variance: $250 for existing one- and twofamily
dwellings, $1,000 for existing uses, other than one- and twofamily
dwellings, $2,000 for new structure or new development of any
use.
D.
E. Each application for a use variance: $2,000.
Five hundred dollars for each lot requiring area variances for
reapportionment.
F.
One thousand dollars for each lot requiring area variances for a
subdivision.
G.
Application for an interpretation of the Zoning Code to the Board of
Appeals: $350 per interpretation.
H.
Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
other regulation made under authority conferred thereby, or who
shall build or alter any structure in violation of any statement or
plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall knowingly
assist therein, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment, or both;
such fine and imprisonment to be in accordance with the following
schedule: [Amended 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(1)
A.
§ 267-50 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-52
1:962
For each conviction, a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or both.
(a)
Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and
additional violation. In addition to the foregoing provisions, the
City shall have such other remedies for any violation or threatened
violation of this chapter as is now or may hereafter be provided
by law. The application of any above penalty shall not be held to
prevent any action under Subsection B below.
(2)
Prevention. In case any land or structure is used, erected, constructed,
altered or maintained in violation of this chapter or of any regulation,
restriction or requirement made pursuant thereto, including any
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, in addition to
other lawful remedies, any appropriate action or proceedings may be
instituted to prevent such unlawful use, erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance; to restrain, correct or abate such violation;
to prevent the occupancy of such structure or land; or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Whenever the Building Commissioner has reasonable grounds to
believe that work on any structure is being conducted in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or not in conformity with any regulation,
restriction or requirement made pursuant thereto, including any
written statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or in an
unsafe or dangerous manner, he shall issue a stop-work order pursuant
to the provisions of Article III of the Mount Vernon Building Code.
B.
§ 267-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-52
1:963

ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 267-53. General.
The City Council may from time to time, on its own motion, on petition
or on recommendation of the Planning Board, and after public notice and
hearing as required by law, act to amend, supplement, repeal or change the
regulations and districts established under this chapter.
§ 267-54. Amendments on petition.
§ 267-55. Initial consideration.
Where petition is made by the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in
any district or of the frontage of the several properties constituting a part
thereof, as provided by § 83 of the General City Law, the City Council shall
hear and vote upon said petition within 90 days of the filing of such petition,
in proper form, with the City Clerk. In the case of all other applications and
petitions submitted to the City requesting an amendment of this chapter,
the City Council may, on its own motion, decide not to formally consider
such amendment.
§ 267-56. Referrals for review and report.
If any amendment is to be considered by the City Council, it shall be
referred for review and report to the Planning Board, the Corporation
Counsel and any other board, agency or official of the City which the
City Council deems appropriate. The Planning Board may confer with the
petitioner and assist such petitioner, where appropriate, to place the
amendment in its most suitable form. Such conference and assistance shall
not be deemed to constitute any commitment by the Planning Board as to
its position on the advisability of the proposed amendment nor to require
the petitioner to make any modification to his application. After said
conference, however, the petitioner shall be allowed to revise his petition
and to provide copies of such revised petition to the City Council and to
any board, agency or official to which the original proposed amendment
was referred. The Corporation Counsel shall report to the City Council
Contents. Any petition for amendment of this chapter shall be made to
the City Clerk and shall describe the proposed changes. For proposed
amendments to the Zoning Map, a copy of the applicable portion of
the official copy of the Zoning Map, as kept by the City Clerk, shall
be included, showing existing and proposed zoning. Also included for
proposed map amendments shall be a map drawn to an appropriate
scale showing all properties and the names of the owners of such
properties located within 200 feet of any land which would be affected
by such change, as shown on the tax assessment rolls.
A.
Notice. The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the
requirements as to notice in § 267-58 below.
B.
§ 267-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-56
1:965
regarding the form of the proposed amendment. The Planning Board shall
report to the City Council regarding the form and the advisability of the
proposed amendment. Its report shall analyze the proposed amendment
and shall state the Board's reasons for its recommendation, describing
any conditions it believes make the amendment advisable or not, and
specifically stating whether the amendment would be in accordance with
the purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 267-1. All boards, agencies and
officials to which such proposed amendments are referred shall have not
less than 30 days from the date of forwarding, or from the date of revision
by the petitioner, whichever is later, to submit their reports. In no case
shall this section restrict the right of an applicant come before the Planning
Board for an informal discussion and review prior to formal submission or a
petition for amendment of this chapter.
§ 267-57. Public hearing.
On receipt of the requested reports and any revised proposed amendment
from an applicant or notification by the applicant that no revision will be
made, the City Council may schedule and hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
§ 267-58. Notice of hearing.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published on at least three different
dates in the City's official newspaper, the first insertion to be not less than
10 nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. For proposed
amendments to the Zoning Map, at least one week prior to the public
hearing a notice of such hearing and a brief description of the proposed
change shall be mailed to all owners of property, as shown by the tax
assessment roll, within 200 feet of any land which would be affected by such
change. A copy of such notice, with proof of such mailing, together with
proof of notice in the official newspaper, shall be filed in the City Clerk's
office on or before the date of the public hearing.
§ 267-59. Referral to Westchester County Planning Board and
adjacent municipalities.
Not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, the City Clerk shall
forward copies of the proposed amendment with the notice of public
hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and to the clerks of any
abutting municipalities when required by law.
§ 267-60. Action.
The action of the City Council to approve any proposed amendment to this
chapter shall be by majority vote, except, however, if a protest is presented
against such amendment, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
20% or more of the area of any land included in such proposed change, or by
the owners of 20% or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent and
extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area
§ 267-56 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-60
1:966
of land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage
of such opposite land, such amendment shall not be passed except by a 3/4
vote of the City Council.
§ 267-61. Records.
The City Clerk shall keep the official record copy of the Zoning Map and
text sections, and shall be responsible for the posting of all changes thereto.
Said Clerk shall also maintain a file of all such Zoning Maps and text
sections which have been superseded by amendment of this chapter.
§ 267-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-61
1:967

ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous
§ 267-62. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or
phrase of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect any other
portion of this chapter.
§ 267-63. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Mount Vernon."
§ 267-64. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 267-65. Effect on building permits and building permit
applications.
Except as provided in this section, nothing herein shall require any
change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building or
structure for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior
to or, under the circumstances noted below, within 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter, provided that the proposed use complies
with the use requirements of this chapter, and further provided that
construction shall begin within six months of the date of such permit;
the foundation, or 15%, of the construction valuation shall be
completed within one year of the date of such permit; and the entire
building or structure shall be completed within two years of the date of
such permit.
A.
In addition, if the Building Commissioner determines that an
application (with accompanying construction plans) for a building
permit filed prior to the effective date of this chapter meets all
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance in existence as of the date
immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter, has received
all necessary conditional or final approvals by the City Council or
the Board of Appeals and complies with the use requirements of this
chapter, then the Building Commissioner shall issue all necessary
permits within a reasonable time, but not longer than 60 days from such
date, provided that the applicant has taken all steps deemed necessary
by the Building Commissioner to obtain such permit.
B.
Any of the above periods may be increased up to 50% by the Building
Commissioner, on showing of good cause.
C.
Notwithstanding the preceding, the Building Commissioner may
require any such plans, construction or use to be subject to the site plan
D.
§ 267-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-65
1:969
approval procedures as set forth in Article VII of this chapter and to be
modified to comply with the requirements of this chapter to the extent
that the site plan approving agency determines such compliance to be
reasonable and practical.
§ 267-65 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-65
1:970
ARTICLE XIII
Signs
[Amended 4-8-1999, approved 4-9-1999]
§ 267-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable regulations for the
design, construction, installation and maintenance of all exterior and
interior signs, banners, awnings and canopies in the City of Mount Vernon
in order to:
§ 267-67. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BILLBOARD — Any sign which is not located on the premises that it
advertises or identifies; billboards are supported by uprights or braces
placed on the ground and not attached to any building.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Buildings, unless otherwise
specified.
FACING or SURFACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
design or outlines illuminated externally by electric lights or internally by
luminous tubes.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Any material winch will not ignite at or
below a temperature of 1,200° F. and will not continue to burn or glow at
that temperature.
INSTALL — Build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the painting of signs.
Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and convey
their messages and the right of the public to be protected against the
unrestricted proliferation of signs;
A.
B. Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City;
C. Protect the public health, safety and welfare;
D. Reduce traffic hazards;
E. Facilitate the creations of an attractive and harmonious community;
F. Protect property values;
G. Promote economic development; and
Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs
containing noncommercial messages.
H.
§ 267-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-67
1:971
OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any marquee, awning, billboard or
street clock as further defined in this chapter.
PERMITTEE — A person receiving an erection permit pursuant to the
provision of this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SIGN — Any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, emblem, symbol,
design or other figure of similar character which is a structure or a part
thereof, or is attached to or in any manner represented on a building or
other structure, and is placed out of doors in view of the general public and
is used for purposes of advertisement, identification or expression.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall be measured as follows:
STRUCTURAL TRIM — The molding, battens, capping, nailing, strips,
latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or banner or pennant designed to advertise or
announce a particular event or series of events, to solicit political support or
to announce the availability for sale of a particular item or items which will
be available or occurring for a limited period of time, and is not permanently
mounted.
§ 267-68. Approval procedure for sign permit; exceptions.
Where such sign is on a panel, within a frame or is outlined, all of
the area of such panel or area within such frame or outline shall be
included.
A.
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, figures or
symbols engraved, painted or in any way attached to a building wall
or window or on a fascia panel that is an integral part of the building
design, the area shall be constructed to be that of the smallest regular
geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters, designs, figures
or symbols.
B.
Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, paint
with a new message, redesign, relocate and reconstruct an existing sign
by making a structural change or a change in the message or cause to
be erected, altered, painted, painted with a new message, redesigned,
relocated and reconstructed within the corporate limits of the City any
sign or signs, without first having obtained and paid for and having in
force a permit therefor from the Commissioner.
A.
The following two operations shall not be considered creating a new
sign and, therefore, shall not require a sign permit:
Replacing copy: the changing of the advertising or message on
an approved sign which is specifically designed for the use of a
replaceable copy.
(1)
B.
§ 267-67 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-68
1:972
Maintenance: painting, cleaning and other normal maintenance
and repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural change
is made or there is a change in the message.
(2)
Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Commissioner, which application shall include:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
The name, address, telephone number and insurance coverage of
the sign maker.
(2)
(3) The location of the building upon which the sign is to be erected.
A color photo of the building upon which the sign is to be erected
and immediately adjacent building(s).
(4)
(5) Size of the sign.
A description of the construction details of the sign, showing the
lettering and/or pictorial matter composing the sign and a
description of the position of lighting or other extraneous devices.
(6)
Sketches drawn to scale and supporting information indicating
location of sign colors, size and types of lettering or other graphic
representation, logos and materials to be used, electrical or other
mechanical equipment, details of its attachment and hanging.
Samples of materials should accompany the application where
required by the Commissioner.
(7)
The written consent of the owner of the property upon which such
sign or signs is or are to be erected and maintained. In addition,
such sign application shall be accompanied by a fee as established
in the Building Code.
(8)
Such other pertinent information as the Commissioner may require
to ensure compliance with this section.
(9)
C.
Following formal submission to the Commissioner, said Commissioner
shall refer all applications for signs to the Department of Planning
and Community Development within three business days for advice on
matters of consistency with the design guidelines and requirements
outlined herein. The Department of Planning and Community
Development shall render an opinion to approve, disapprove or approve
with conditions to the Commissioner within 10 days of receipt of the
application.
D.
The Commissioner shall issue a permit for a sign within seven calendar
days of the receipt of a complete and satisfactory application from the
Department of Planning and Community Development, except as noted
in Subsection F herein.
E.
§ 267-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-68
1:973
§ 267-69. Revocation of permit.
The Commissioner may revoke any permit where there has been a violation
of the provisions of this chapter or a misrepresentation of fact on the permit
application.
§ 267-70. Permit display and voltage.
Every permitted sign or other advertising structure shall display in a
conspicuous place the permit for the sign, including the voltage of any
electrical apparatus used, if appropriate, for at least the period of erection
and for at least 15 days thereafter.
§ 267-71. Maintenance and inspection.
In those cases where an applicant does not wish to implement the
design conditions of approval outlined by the Commissioner, the matter
shall be referred to the Commissioner of the Architectural Review
Board for an advisory opinion. In such cases, the Architectural Review
Board shall recommend approval or disapproval of such sign
application within 30 days from the date of referral. The decision of the
Commissioner, however, will be final.
F.
Appeal from permit denial. Any applicant, feeling aggrieved by the
decision of the Commissioner upon any application for a permit for any
sign, may appeal to the Sign Review Appeals Board from such decision,
and the Sign Review Appeals Board may affirm, reverse or modify such
decision of the Commissioner.
G.
Issuance of sign construction permit. Upon approval of the application
by the Commissioner, or after any conditions for approval established
by the Architectural Review Board are satisfied, the Commissioner shall
issue a permit for construction of such sign.
H.
All signs shall be maintained in good order and a condition similar
to their original or approved condition. No sign or other advertising
structure shall be inadequately maintained so as to show evidence
of deterioration, including peeling, rust, dirt, fading, discoloration or
holes. The Commissioner or someone appointed by the Commissioner
may perform an inspection, whenever deemed necessary, of any sign
or advertising structure in the City of Mount Vernon regulated by this
chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the structure is unsafe,
in need of repair, not in conformance with the permit application or
otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Where indicated by the
Commissioner, signs and other advertising structures shall be designed
and constructed to withstand wind pressure and to receive dead loads
as required in the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code or
other ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon.
B.
§ 267-68 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-72
1:974
§ 267-72. Signs required.
All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises, any part of
which is located on the ground floor, shall be so identified by a permanent
sign, as defined in § 267-67, and shall meet all requirements for application
for same.
§ 267-73. Prohibited signs.
All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises over three
stories in height located on upper floors are prohibited from utilizing
ground-floor level space for the placement of a sign. Building
directories or any listing or identification of upper-floor tenants shall
not be located on the exterior of the building.
A.
All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises located
above ground-floor level are prohibited from displaying signs of paper
construction.
B.
Outdated signs. No signs or other advertising structure shall advertise
a business or product which is no longer in existence at the location
where such sign or advertising structure exists.
Any sign now or hereafter existing, which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or a product available for purchase
by the public on the premises, shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building
or structure upon which such sign may be found within 30 days
after closing of the business or after such business ceases to exist
at that premises.
(1)
The Commissioner is hereby authorized to cause removal of such
sign upon the failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in the order.
The expense of said removal, when certified by said
Commissioner to the City Council, shall be paid by the City and
such amount shall thereupon be and become a lien upon to
premises in question.
(a)
The cost of such removal shall be levied and collected in the
same manner and under the same penalties as an assessment
for a public improvement.
(b)
(2)
All temporary for rent/sale signs, whether residential, business,
commercial or industrial, shall be removed 30 days after the
property is rented or sold. Any sign remaining on the property
for sale or rent after the aforementioned thirty-day period will be
subject to a violation issued by the Building Department.
(3)
C.
Moving signs. Except for temporary holiday season or grand opening
displays as provided for herein, no sign or part thereof may consist of
D.
§ 267-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-73
1:975
pennants, revolving or insulating signs, ribbons, streamers or similar
attached devices.
Nonconforming sign.
For the purpose of this section, a "nonconforming sign" shall be
defined as a sign of a type not permitted, either as listed in this
section or omitted from § 267-74, Permitted signs. Such signs shall
be removed in accordance with the procedure written for outdated
signs.123
(1)
A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged, and the message may
not be altered or repainted in any way. The nonconforming sign
shall be removed if deemed unsafe by the Commissioner. Upon the
issuance of the Commissioner's determination, it shall be removed
immediately.
(2)
Once a nonconforming sign is removed, it is deemed permanently
removed and may be replaced only with a sign that conforms to the
criteria of permitted signs as outlined in this chapter.124
(3)
If the Commissioner elects to cause the removal of such sign, the
expense of such removal, when certified by said Commissioner to
the City Council, shall be paid by the City, and such amount shall
thereupon be and become a lien upon the premises in question and
shall be levied and collected in the same manner and under the
same penalties as an assessment for a public improvement.
(4)
E.
Obstructions to doors, windows or fire exits. No sign or other
advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire exit. No
sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire stair/platform.
F.
Traffic hazards. No sign or other advertising structure shall:
(1) Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection.
Interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position,
shape or color.
(2)
Make use of the words "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger," or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that
interferes with, misleads or confuses traffic.
(3)
G.
Unsafe signs.
No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute a hazard
to safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction,
repair or maintenance.
(1)
H.
123. Editor's Note: See Subsection C.
124. Editor's Note: See § 267-74.
§ 267-73 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-73
1:976
§ 267-74. Permitted signs.
The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which such
sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain
such sign, including its illumination sources, in a neat and orderly
condition and good working order at all times and to prevent the
development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration
in the physical appearance or safety of such sign.
(2)
Illuminated signs.
No sign or other advertising structure shall be illuminated with
lights that glare into or upon any adjacent residential premises or
district, operators of motor vehicles or pedestrians on the public
right-of-way.
(1)
No sign or other advertising structure shall have lights or
illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker vary
in intensity or color or use intermittent electrical pulsations.
(2)
Indirect lighting for signs should not focus on adjacent properties,
but on the lettering or the subject sign. If permitted, this lighting
should be presented in the permitting application in enough details
and drawings so as to show the impact of such lighting on the
facade or face of the building.
(3)
I.
Billboard. Billboards may not hereafter be erected. Existing billboards,
except for roof-mounted billboards, may remain as long as they are
properly maintained as per § 267-71.
J.
Roof sign. No roof signs may hereafter be erected and no sign may
hereafter extend above the roof line, except time and temperature
devices which do not bear advertising of the business. Such devices
shall be in good working order at all times. Existing roof signs may
remain and be maintained in good order for as long as the business
remains in continuous ownership.
K.
Wall signs.
A wall sign, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean all flat signs of
solid face construction, including painted signs, which are placed
against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior
front, rear or side walls of said building or structure so that it is
parallel (not perpendicular) to the building face.
(1)
Construction materials required. All signs shall have a surface
or facing of incombustible materials; provided, however, that
combustible structural trim may be used.
(2)
Location or placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially
any wall opening or project beyond the ends or top of the wall to
which it is attached, or project above or below the articulated sign
(3)
A.
§ 267-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-74
1:977
band (if any) on the building's facade. The thickness of the sign
panel is limited to no more than 12 inches maximum; in the case
of multistory buildings, not above the sill of windows of the second
story nor more than 18 feet above the outside grade, whichever is
lower.
Area. No wall sign shall exceed 300 square feet in area and a height
of 36 inches; maximum letter height on a wall sign or individualmounted-
letters sign shall be 24 inches. Two square feet per linear
foot to the principal frontage of the structure in which the use
is located can be used as a guide to calculate the overall size
of permitted wall signs in acceptable proportions for the facade.
The only exception to the foregoing regulation is for wall signs
in connection with commercial businesses along principal arterial
corridors discussed in Subsection A(5) below.
(4)
Principal arterial corridors. A commercial business along a
principal arterial corridor that is set back from the principal
arterial corridor shall apply to the Sign Review Appeals Board to
increase its wall sign area. The maximum size allowances that may
be approved are as follows:
(a) The height of the sign area to a maximum of 60 inches.
(b) The size of individual lettering to a maximum of 48 inches.
The height of a wall-mounted sign above grade to a maximum
of 30 feet.
(c)
Logos for identifying the business may be a maximum of 72
inches in height.
(d)
(5)
Multitenancy.
Where there are two or more tenants occupying a portion of
the first-floor frontage of a given structure, each tenant shall
be entitled to a sign equivalent in size to portion of the frontage
so occupied.
(a)
In the case of multiple occupants of a multistory building, no
exterior wall signs may be permitted on the exterior upper
floor. Signs are permitted inside windows, provided that said
interior sign does not cover more than 25% of the window area.
(b)
(6)
Permanent interior signs, ground-floor level. The Commissioner shall
review all permanent interior sign applications for conformance with
the intent of this article. Upon this review and at the discretion of
the Commissioner, the applicant may be required to appear before the
Sign Appeals Board for its recommendation. However, in no instance
may a permanent interior sign cover more than 20% of the aggregate
storefront window area of said business and shall be in conformity
with other similarly located permanent interior signs of the neighboring
B.
§ 267-74 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-74
1:978
businesses, unless the aggregate window area is less than 100 square
feet, in which case, 10 square feet of sign will be permitted.
Awnings and canopies.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AWNING — A roof-like covering of canvas, vinyl, acrylic, metal
or duck attached to a frame supported entirely from a building
and projecting over a sidewalk or yard, which may or may not be
retracted to a position virtually flat against the building when not
in use.
CANOPY — A structure, other than an awning, made of canvas,
vinyl, acrylic, metal or duck sheltering an area, on a framework
supported by the ground or sidewalk, which may be attached to a
building at one end. It projects over a sidewalk or yard forming a
covered walk to the entrance of building.
(1)
Location.
Height above sidewalk: awnings. No portion of an awning shall
be less than seven feet above the level of the sidewalk or yard
over which it is erected and shall be no higher than the first
story of the building.
(a)
Height above sidewalk: canopies. No portion of a canopy shall
be less than nine feet above the level of the sidewalk or yard
over which it is erected.
(b)
Extension: awnings. No awning shall be permitted to extend
beyond a point four feet from the face of the building on which
it is erected.
(c)
Setback from curbline: canopies. No canopy shall be permitted
to extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline
(measuring from the street side of the curb toward the
building).
(d)
Width: canopies. No canopy shall be permitted to exceed eight
feet in width.
(e)
(2)
Advertising. No advertising shall be placed on any awning, if a
wall sign for the business located at that premises exists and is to
remain, except that if there is a sign on the building, then the name
and nature only of the business, industry or pursuit conducted
within the premises may be painted or otherwise permanently
placed on the awning in a space not exceeding 14 inches in height
on the front and/or side of said awning. Lettering for said
advertising shall not exceed 14 inches in height for waterfall
awnings and six inches in height for all other type of awnings,
(3)
C.
§ 267-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-74
1:979
subject to design approval by the Department of Planning and
Community Development.
Projecting signs.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
HORIZONTAL PROJECTING SIGN — Any projecting sign which is
greater in width than height.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is attached either parallel or
perpendicular to the face plane of a building or other structure and
extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of that portion of
the building or structure to which it is attached.
VERTICAL PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is greater in
height than in width.
(1)
Construction.
Projecting signs, including frames, braces and supports, shall
be designed by a structural engineer, architect or
manufacturer, constructed of incombustible materials and twofaced.
(a)
Illumination. If projecting signs are to be illuminated,
reflectors shall be provided with the proper glass lenses
concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign and
preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property. No
floodlight or spotlight or reflectors of the goose-neck type shall
be permitted on projecting signs.
(b)
Glass requirements. The lettering or advertising designs to
be illuminated, if any, may be composed of glass or other
transparent or semitransparent incombustible material. Any
glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate
glass at least 1/4 inch thick and, in case any single piece or
pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall
be wired glass.
(c)
Movable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting
sign, such as the cover of a service opening, shall be securely
fastened utilizing hinges or locking devices.
(d)
Area limitations. Except by special permission of the City
Council, projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows:
Horizontal projecting signs shall not exceed 50 square feet
on each side.
[1]
Vertical projecting signs shall not exceed 80 square feet on
each side.
[2]
(e)
(2)
D.
§ 267-74 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-74
1:980
Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the
principal faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed 18
inches.
[3]
Location and projection over public property. Every projecting
sign shall be placed at least eight feet above the public
sidewalk over which it is erected, no more than two feet from
the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the
point of the sign nearest the wall. Every projecting sign shall
be placed at least 15 feet above the public driveway, alley or
thoroughfare over which it is erected.
(f)
Installation and prohibited anchorage's built. No projection
sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails, nor
shall any projection sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
(g)
V-shaped signs prohibited. V-shaped signs consisting of two
single-faced signs erected without a roof or ceiling shall not be
permitted.
(h)
Freestanding signs (not billboards).
Freestanding signs may be permitted only in business, commercial
industrial and residential districts if the building or use served
by the sign is set back at least 20 feet from the front property
line. Only one such sign may be permitted for each street frontage
of business, commercial or industrial structure or to identify a
residential development and may be located at the property line.
(1)
The top of such sign shall be no higher that 12 feet from the
ground nor less than three feet above the grade level or 1/2 of the
allowable front yard setback, and the sign shall be no larger than
48 square feet. The location and illumination of such sign shall not
block the view of, or otherwise interfere with, official traffic signs
and signals.
(2)
A freestanding sign to identify the occupants of a medical or
professional office building may be permitted in any district where
such uses are permitted under this chapter. Said sign shall not
exceed 20 square feet when it abuts a low-density residential
district.
(3)
E.
Marquees.
A marquee, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean any roof
overhang or permanent construction projecting from the wall on
the front of a building which is entirely supported by and covering
an entrance to the building or thoroughfare.
(1)
Construction.
Required materials. Marquees, including the anchors, bolts,
supports, rods and braces, shall be constructed of
(a)
(2)
F.
§ 267-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-74
1:981
incombustible materials, designed by an architect or structural
engineer and may be illuminated.
Drainage. Marquee roofs shall be properly guttered and
connected by downspouts to a sewer or storm drain so that
rainwater will not drip or flow onto public property.
(b)
Use and construction of marquee roofs. Marquee roofs shall be
used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof,
and at least 25% of the area of the roof of every marquee shall
be of glass or other incombustible transparent substance.
(c)
Location.
Height above sidewalk. No portion of a marquee shall be less
than 10 feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public or
private thoroughfare over which it is erected.
(a)
Setback from curbline. No marquee shall be permitted to
extend beyond a point one foot inside the curbline.
(b)
Width. No marquee shall be wider than the entrance or
entrances of the building, plus five feet on each side. However,
where the entrances to a building are not more than 20 feet
apart, a marquee may be made a continuous single structure
between the entrances.
(c)
(3)
Installation.
Bracing, anchorage and supports. Marquees shall be
supported solely by the building to which they are attached,
and no columns or posts shall be used as supports.
(a)
Roof live-load requirement. Marquee roofs, except the glass
area required, shall be designed and constructed to support a
live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot. Marquees
shall be designed to meet the wind pressure requirement of the
New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(b)
Anchorage to wood structure prohibited. No marquee shall be
erected on any building of wood frame construction unless
attached to the masonry, concrete or steel supports of the
building.
(c)
(4)
Signs attached to marquee. Signs attached to or hung from a
marquee shall be completely within the border line of the marquee
outer edge and shall in no instance be lower that 10 feet above the
sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No sign or advertising material
shall exceed three feet in height, inclusive of the name of the
establishment exhibiting such marquee. No advertising material
shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee.
(5)
§ 267-74 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-74
1:982
Illumination required. Marquees projecting over public property,
if illuminated, shall be illuminated by at least 16 candle power of
illumination for each 50 square feet or fraction thereof of area from
sunset to at least 11:00 p.m. every Monday through Saturday night
of each week.
(6)
Temporary signs.
Temporary sign, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean any signs,
banner, pennant or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, vinyl, light fabric cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials with or without frames intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time.
(1)
Permits and fees. Temporary sign permits may be granted by the
Commissioner, and the applicant shall pay an all-inclusive fee of
$30.
(2)
Construction.
Materials and area limitations. No temporary sign of
combustible material shall exceed four feet in one of its
dimensions or 75 square feet in area. Such signs in excess of
60 square feet shall be made of rigid materials such as wall
board or other light materials with frames.
(a)
Weight limitation. Temporary signs weighing in excess of 50
pounds must be approved by the Building Department as
conforming to the safety requirements of the New York State
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(b)
(3)
Location: projection over public property. No temporary sign shall
extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
thoroughfare more than four inches from the wall upon which it is
erected and shall not be placed or project over any wall opening.
(4)
Installation: anchorage and support. Every temporary sign shall
be attached with proper bracing, wire or steel cables. No strings,
ropes or wood slats for anchorage or support purposes shall be
permitted.
(5)
Duration of permits. Permits for temporary signs shall authorize
their erection and maintenance for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(6)
Advertising permitted. The advertisement contained on any
temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or
pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is
erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a
civic, political or religious nature.
(7)
The Commissioner may grant special permission for the
maintenance of a temporary sign or signs to a charitable or
(8)
G.
§ 267-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-74
1:983
nonprofitable organization for a period not to exceed 30 days. No
fee is to be charged for such.
Political or campaign signs may be installed in accordance with the
following provisions:
Any such sign may not be more than 16 square feet in area and
not more than four feet in height.
(a)
(b) No such sign may be a roof sign.
Applications will be made to the Commissioner by the
candidate, the sponsor of a ballot measure or campaign
manager or representative of said candidate or ballot measure,
said application to show the size and location of all proposed
signs. Where the applicant is not the owner of the property
where the sign is to be displayed or installed, the application
shall contain the consent of such owner or lessee. No political
signs shall be erected on public property or rights-of-way.
(c)
All political or campaign signs shall be removed within two
weeks after the election or the event advertised in the sign
has occurred. Any political signs remaining after the event has
occurred will be immediately subject to a violation from the
Building Department.
(d)
(9)
Pennants, banners or signs signifying a grand opening of premises
shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 15 days from the date
of opening. Pennants and banners shall not be hung from public
utility poles, trees or other public property. Pennants shall not be
permitted for any other purposes.
(10)
No signs other than signs placed by agencies of the government
shall be erected on any public property unless consent is first
obtained from the City of Mount Vernon. No sign shall be placed on
any private property without the consent of the owner thereof. No
sign shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. No sign shall be
placed on any utility pole, except for utility identification or similar
purposes.
(11)
Contractor signs. One contractor sign per frontage, with a
maximum size of 48 square feet, shall be permitted, provided that
such signs are located at ground level and shall be erected no more
than five days prior to the beginning of construction for which a
valid permit has been issued and shall be removed within five days
after completion of the project.
(12)
A temporary sign announcing the anticipated occupancy of a site or
building may be permitted for a period not to exceed three months
without the Commissioner's approval. Such a sign shall not exceed
24 square feet if it is affixed to a building or wall and not more than
40% of the window area if an interior sign.
(13)
§ 267-74 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-74
1:984
§ 267-75. Appeals.
Real estate sale and rental signs may be permitted as long as the
size of such signs does not exceed a maximum of five square feet
and no more than one sign per tenancy per frontage at ground
level. Such signs shall be subject to permit renewal at six-month
intervals.
(14)
Barber poles. Barber poles shall not be more than four feet in
height and shall bear no advertising message; any barber pole on
City property will require the approval of the City Council. Barber
poles projecting from the face of a building over or into public or
private property shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet six
inches measured from the bottom of said poles.
(15)
The Mayor shall appoint a Sign Review Appeals Board (Sign Appeals
Board) consisting of three members, including the Commissioner of
Planning and Community Development or designee from the Planning
Department and at least one member who shall have experience in one
of the design professions. The Mayor shall designate a Chair thereof.
In the absence of an appointed chair, the Appeals Board may designate
one of its membership to serve as chair. Members shall serve for a
period of two years and shall have all the appellate powers and duties
as may be deemed necessary to carry out this section.
A.
Any person affected by any provision of this article or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request, by the filing of a
petition and payment of the fee set forth in Section 1, 3.34 of Article I of
the Mount Vernon Building Code,125 and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Sign Appeals Board. Such petition shall set forth
a brief statement of the grounds therefor and shall be filed in the office
of the Planning Department within 10 days after date of notification
of violation or noncompliance. The Sign Appeals Board shall have the
authority to sustain, reverse determinations made by the Commissioner
or to grant variances.
B.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Sign Appeals Board shall set a time
and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity
to be heard and to show why such notice of violation or noncompliance
should be sustained or withdrawn and a variance approved. The
hearing shall be commenced within a reasonable time after the day
on which the petition was filed, provided that upon application of
the petitioner, the Sign Appeals Board may postpone the date of the
hearing if, in the judgment of the Sign Appeals Board, the petitioner has
submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
C.
After such hearing, the Sign Appeals Board shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice of violation or noncompliance, depending upon its
D.
125. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 267-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-75
1:985
findings as to whether the provisions of this article and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been properly addressed. If
the Sign Appeals Board sustains or withdraws such notice of violation
or noncompliance by approving a variance, such action shall be deemed
to be a lawful order.
In all cases where said Sign Appeals Board shall grant a variance of
any provisions or requirements of this article, such Sign Appeals Board
shall find that:
There are special physical conditions, fully described in the
findings of the Sign Appeals Board, applying to the land or building
which is the location of the sign requiring said variance, which
circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building or
sign and do no apply generally to land or buildings or signs in the
neighborhood and have not resulted from any act of the applicant
subsequent to the adoption of this article, whether in violation of
the provisions hereof or not.
(1)
For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the Sign Appeals
Board, the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the
strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive that
applicant of the reasonable use of said sign, and the granting of
the variance(s) is necessary for the reasonable use of said sign and
that the variance(s) as granted by the Sign Appeals Board is the
minimum variance necessary to accomplish this purpose.
(2)
The granting of the variance(s) under such conditions as the Sign
Appeals Board may deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto
will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
(3)
E.
If, as part of an application for site plan, special permit, and/or
subdivision approval to the Planning Board, an applicant requires a
sign variance(s) from this article for any detached or freestanding
sign, then the applicant shall apply to the Sign Appeals Board for said
sign variance(s). The Sign Appeals Board shall forward the application
for sign variance(s) to the Planning Board for Planning Board
recommendation on the location, position and placement of the sign(s)
prior to any decision by the Sign Appeals Board.
F.
In all cases where the Sign Appeals Board grants a variance(s) from the
strict application of the requirements of this article, it shall be the duty
of the Sign Appeals Board to attach such conditions and safeguards as
may be required in order that the result of its action may be as nearly
as possible in accordance with the spirit and intent of this article.
G.
The proceedings at all hearings of the Sign Appeals Board, including
the decisions of the Sign Appeals Board, shall be summarized, reduced
to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of
the Department of Planning and Community Development. Such record
H.
§ 267-75 MOUNT VERNON CODE § 267-75
1:986
§ 267-76. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or
phrase of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect any other
portion of this chapter.
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Sign
Appeals Board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
§ 267-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-76
1:987
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the City
of Mount Vernon adopted since 12-23-2003, indicating its inclusion
in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation
which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be
non-Code material (NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the
2013 republication of the Code was the Bicycles Ordinance, adopted
9-26-2012. Consult municipal records for information regarding
prior legislation not on this list.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. 12-23-2003 Retail and commercial
establishments
Ch. 210
L.L. No.
1-2004
12-23-2003 Charter amendment § 21
L.L. No.
2-2004
12-23-2003 Charter amendment § 21
Ord. 2-25-2004 Personnel amendment Ch. 50
Ord. 6-11-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 237
Ord. 6-25-2004 Vacations, sick leave and
leaves of absence
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
Ord. 11-10-2004 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 149
L.L. No.
1-2005
1-26-2005 Charter amendment § 52
Ord. 2-9-2005 Collection of garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment; littering
amendment; street
openings amendment;
sidewalk cafes
amendment; intersections
amendment
Chs. 140, Arts. I
and II; 191, Art. I;
227, Parts 1 and 4
Ord. 2-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
Ord. 3-23-2005 Hutchinson Field
amendment; Memorial
Field amendment
Ch. 170, Arts. I
and II
§ 267-76 MOUNT VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:988
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. 4-27-2005 Unnecessary noise
amendment
Ch. 178, Art. I
Ord. 9-14-2005 Harassment policy
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. VI
Ord. 9-14-2005 Pawnbrokers amendment Ch. 189
Ord. 9-14-2005 Streets and sidewalks:
use and maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227, Part 2
Ord. 10-26-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. 3-10-2006 Postings Ch. 221, Art. II
Ord. 3-22-2006 Postings amendment Ch. 221, Art. II
Ord. 4-12-2006 Social clubs amendment Ch. 224
Ord. 5-10-2006 Retail and commercial
establishments: hours of
operation amendment
Ch. 210, Art. I
Ord. 6-14-2006 Retail and commercial
establishments: hours of
operation amendment
Ch. 210, Art. I
Ord. 7-18-2006 Hydrants amendment Ch. 153
Ord. 7-18-2006 Penalties amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. 9-13-2006 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 83
Ord. 9-13-2006 Penalties amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. 12-27-2006 Tax abatement for rental
property occupied by
senior citizens
Ch. 234, Art. IV
L.L. No.
1-2007
Empire Zone NCM
L.L. No.
2-2007
1-10-2007 Charter amendment § 21
L.L. No.
3-2007
1-10-2007 Charter amendment § 21
L.L. No.
4-2007
8-8-2007 Personnel policies:
criminal history record
checks and fingerprinting
for Board of Water Supply
employees
Ch. 50, Art. VII
L.L. No.
1-2008
1-25-2008 Charter amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:989
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2008
1-23-2008 Charter amendment § 101
Ord. 2-27-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 131
L.L. No.
3-2008
4-23-2008 Personnel policies:
criminal history record
search and fingerprinting
for Board of Water Supply
employees amendment
Ch. 50, Art. VII
L.L. No.
4-2008
8-13-2008 Charter amendment § 34
Res. 12-23-2008 Ethics: financial
disclosure statement
Ch. 24, Art. II
Ord. 3-11-2009 Item pricing amendment Ch. 156
Ord. 3-25-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 237
Ord. 6-10-2009 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. 6-10-2009 Personnel policies:
harassment policy
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. VI
L.L. No.
1-2009
7-6-2009 Charter amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
L.L. No.
2-2009
7-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
Ord. 7-8-2009 Stormwater management Ch. 226
Ord. 9-9-2009 Appearance tickets:
issuance by Water
Superintendent and
Water Maintenance
Foreman amendment
Ch. 7, Art. IV
Ord. 9-9-2009 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 186
Ord. 9-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
Ord. 11-24-2009 Architectural Review
Board amendment
Ch. 10
Ord. 2-24-2010 Retail and commercial
establishments: hours of
operation amendment
Ch. 210, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2010
4-14-2010 Repeal of L.L. No. 1-2008 Repealer only
§ DL-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:990
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2010
8-20-2010 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
Ord. 10-13-2010 Building Code
amendment (fees)
NCM
Ord. 10-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
L.L. No.
3-2010
11-10-2010 Retirement incentive
program amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
1-2011
11-23-2010 Charter amendment § 73
Ord. 12-22-2010 Property registration:
absentee real property
owners amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2011
1-13-2011 Unsafe buildings
amendment
Ch. 106
Ord. 3-23-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 237
Ord. 5-11-2011 Item pricing amendment Ch. 156
Ord. 5-11-2011 Planning Board
amendment
Superseded by Ch.
53
Ord. 5-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
Ord. 6-22-2011 Street name change NCM
Ord. 7-13-2011 Graffiti amendment Ch. 144
L.L. No.
3-2011
8-10-2011 Ethics: Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 24, Art. I
Ord. 8-10-2011 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 186
Ord. 9-13-2011 Real estate, city-owned:
payment of commissions;
real estate committee
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2012
12-21-2011 Authorization to override
tax levy limit
NCM
Ord. 3-28-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 237
Ord. 3-28-2012 Sale of real property NCM
Ord. 3-28-2012 Extension of on-street
parking meter time limit
NCM
Ord. 3-28-2012 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
Ord. 5-9-2012 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 243
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:991
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. 7-11-2012 Officers and employees:
auxiliary police
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
L.L. No.
2-2012
8-8-2012 Charter amendment § 265
Ord. 8-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
Ord. 9-26-2012 Peddling and soliciting:
canvassing and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 194, Art. II
Ord. 9-26-2012 Fees, deposits and
payments: deposits for
removing plans
amendment
Ch. 126, Art II
Ord. 9-26-2012 Bicycles amendment Ch. 92
L.L. No.
3-2012
11-28-2012 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
1-2013
12-12-2012 Charter amendment § 226-a
Ord. 3-27-2013 Cable Television Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 12
Ord. 9-11-2013 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 243
Ord. 11-13-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 237
Ord. 11-13-2013 Filming amendment Ch. 128
Ord. 11-26-2013 Peddling and soliciting:
peddling amendment
Ch. 194, Art. I
Ord. 12-11-2013 Temporary suspension of
operation and
enforcement of certain
parking meters
NCM
Ord. 12-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
L.L. No.
1-2014
1-8-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
Ord. 3-12-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. 4-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 267
Ord. 5-14-2014 Filming amendment Ch. 128
Ord. 10-8-2014 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 243
L.L. No.
1-2015
12-10-2014 Energy: sustainable
energy loan program
Ch. 122, Art. I
§ DL-1 MOUNT VERNON CODE § DL-1
1:992
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2015
12-23-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
Ord. 2-25-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. 5-13-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 227
Ord. 5-13-2015 Taxation: tax abatement
for rental property owned
by senior citizens
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. IV
Ord. 6-10-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 227
Ord. 6-26-2015 Real estate, City-owned:
payment of commissions;
Real Estate Committee
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. II
Ord. 10-28-2015 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 243
Ord. 12-9-2015 Personnel policies: antinepotism
policy
Ch. 50, Art. VIII
L.L. No.
1-2016
12-30-2015 Tax levy limit override NCM
Ord. 9-16-2016 Filming amendment Ch. 128
Ord. 12-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
physically handicapped
drivers amendment
Ch. 256, Art. II
Ord. 12-14-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 227
Ord. 2-22-2017 Real estate, City-owned:
payment of commissions;
Real Estate Committee
amendment
Ch. 205, Art. II
Ord. 7-14-2017 Filming amendment Ch. 128
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:993

MAR 14 2018
2,
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 267 OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY OF MOUNT VERNON, NEW YORK,
ENTITLED "ZONING".
WHEREAS, by letter dated February 16, 2018, the Planning Commissioner has
requested legislation amending Chapter 267 of the Code of the City ofMount Vernon,
entitled " Zoning"; and
WHEREAS, the amendment of Chapter 267 will include renumbering,
integration of the Mount Vernon West Zoning Code into the existing Zoning Code;
NOW, THEREFORE,
The City of Mount Vernon, in City Council convened, does hereby ordain and
enact:
Article I - Purpose
Article I — Section 1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are the following:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with a wellbalanced and comprehensive plan, which plan is embodied in this chapter.
B. To regulate and limit the height, bulk and location of buildings hereafter erected, to
regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces and to regulate
the density ofpopulation in any given area, and for said purposes, to divide the City into
districts.
C. To regulate each class of buildings uniformly throughout each district, although the
regulations in some districts differ from those in other districts.
D. To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, including, so far as conditions permit, provision for adequate light,
air, convenience of access and the accommodation of solar energy systems and
equipment and the access to sunlight necessary therefor.
E. To regulate, with reasonable regard to the character of buildings erected in each
district, the value of land and the use to which it may be put, to the end that these
regulations are designed to promote public health, safety and welfare and the most
desirable use for which the land ofeach district may be adapted.
F. To conserve the value ofbuildings and enhance the value of land throughout the
City.
G. To regulate and restrict both the location oftrades and industries and the location of
buildings designed for specific uses, and for said purposes, to divide the City into
districts and to prescribe for each such district the trades and industries that shall be
permitted, those subjected to special regulation and the uses for which buildings may
not be erected or altered. Such regulations are designed to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and are made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, to the character of the district, its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the
conservation ofproperty values and the direction of building development, in accord
with a well -considered plan.
H. To protect the character and social and economic stability and to encourage the
orderly and beneficial development of the City and all ofits neighborhoods.
I. To bring about the gradual conformity of the use of land with the Comprehensive
Plan as set forth in this chapter and to minimize conflicts among the uses of land.
1
MAR 14 2018
IS
3/
2. For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the Sign Appeals Board, the aforesaid
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application ofthe provisions of this
article would deprive that applicant ofthe reasonable use of said sign, and the granting of
the variance( s) is necessary for the reasonable use of said sign and that the variance(s) as
granted by the Sign Appeals Board is the minimum variance necessary to accomplish this
purpose.
3. The granting ofthe variance(s) under such conditions as the Sign Appeals Board may
deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent ofthis article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
F. If, as part of an application for site plan, special permit, and/or subdivision approval to the
Planning Board, an applicant requires a sign variance(s) from this article for any detached or
freestanding sign, then the applicant shall apply to the Sign Appeals Board for said sign
variance(s). The Sign Appeals Board shall forward the application for sign variance(s) to the
Planning Board for Planning Board recommendation on the location, position and placement
of the sign(s) prior to any decision by the Sign Appeals Board.
In all cases where the Sign Appeals Board grants a variance(s) from the strict application of
the requirements ofthis article, it shall be the duty of the Sign Appeals Board to attach such
conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the result ofits action may be as
nearly as possible in accordance with the spirit and intent ofthis article.
The proceedings at all hearings of the Sign Appeals Board, including the decisions ofthe
Sign Appeals Board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of
public record in the office ofthe Department ofPlanning and Community Development.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision ofthe Sign Appeals Board may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws ofthis state.
rticle XIII — Section 11. Severabili
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase ofthis chapter
e declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
ecision shall not affect any other portion ofthis chapter.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately.
APP1 OVER AS TO FORM
Assistant Corporation Counsel
Dept.
APPROVED
THIS ORDINAN
ADOPTED BY CITY.COUNCIL
By
APPROVED
ate
Chapter 267. ZONING
HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Mount Vernon 5- 8- 1963, approved 5-
9- 1963; amended in its entirety 8- 14- 1996, approved 8- 15- 1996. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 149.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 157.
Signs — See Ch. 221.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 226.
267a Dimensional Reg Residential in
267b Dimensional Reg Nonresidential In
267c Off -Street Parking and Loading It
267d Zoning Mapfi
Article I - Purpose
Article I – Section 1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are the following:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with a wellbalanced and comprehensive plan, which plan is embodied in this chapter.
B. To regulate and limit the height, bulk and location of buildings hereafter erected, to
regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces and to regulate the
density of population in any given area, and for said purposes, to divide the City into
districts.
C. To regulate each class of buildings uniformly throughout each district, although the
regulations in some districts differ from those in other districts.
D. To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, including, so far as conditions permit, provision for adequate light,
air, convenience of access and the accommodation of solar energy systems and
equipment and the access to sunlight necessary therefor.
E. To regulate, with reasonable regard to the character of buildings erected in each
district, the value of land and the use to which it may be put, to the end that these
regulations are designed to promote public health, safety and welfare and the most
desirable use for which the land of each district may be adapted.
F. To conserve the value of buildings and enhance the value of land throughout the City.
1
G. To regulate and restrict both the location of trades and industries and the location of
buildings designed for specific uses, and for said purposes, to divide the City into districts
and to prescribe for each such district the trades and industries that shall be permitted,
those subjected to special regulation and the uses for which buildings may not be erected
or altered. Such regulations are designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character
of the district, its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the conservation of property
values and the direction of building development, in accord with a well -considered plan.
H. To protect the character and social and economic stability and to encourage the
orderly and beneficial development of the City and all of its neighborhoods.
I. To bring about the gradual conformity of the use of land with the Comprehensive Plan
as set forth in this chapter and to minimize conflicts among the uses of land.
J. To promote the most beneficial relation between the use of land and the circulation of
traffic throughout the City, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
streets and the provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land throughout the City.
K. To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of public
facilities and services and for private enterprise in building development, investment and
other economic activity relating to uses of land throughout the City.
L. To limit development to that which will not exceed the capacity of existing and
programmed public facilities and services to safely and adequately support it.
M. To avoid hazardous conditions and excessive damage resulting from stormwater
runoff and flooding and to encourage the appropriate use and sound management of
natural resources throughout the City.
N. To preserve the natural beauty and historic values of the City; to protect the City
against unsightly, obstructive and obnoxious land uses and operations; to enhance the
aesthetic aspect of the natural and man- made elements of the City; and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to those elements.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are specifically
defined. Where words and terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such as the context may imply.
Article II - Definitions and Word Usage
Article II — Section 1. Definitions and Word Usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are specifically
defined. Where words and terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such as the context may imply.
2
Article II — Section 2. General construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the language of this chapter:
A. The specific shall control the general.
B. All words used in the present tense include the past and the future tense.
C. All words in the singular number include the plural number, and vice -versa, unless the
natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
D. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, and vice -versa,
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
E. The word " shall" is mandatory; the word " may" is permissive.
F. The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples but is intended to
extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.
G. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or
more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction " and,"
or," " either ... or" or " and/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
1. " And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply.
2. " Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply singly or in any combination.
3. " Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events
shall apply singly but not in combination.
4. " And/or" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events
shall apply singly and in any combination.
H. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
I. The words " lot," " plot" and " tract of land" shall one include the other.
J. The word "premises" shall include land and any buildings thereon.
K. The word " occupied" or " used" shall be considered to be followed by the words " or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used," unless the natural construction
of the wording indicates otherwise.
L. References made to officials and official bodies shall mean officials and official
bodies of the City of Mount Vernon, unless the natural construction of the wording
indicates otherwise.
M. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
3
N. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter
and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
Article II — Section 3. Definitions.
ACCESSORY USE
A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use on the same lot
therewith, except that where specifically so provided, accessory off-street parking need
not be located on the same lot.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
A business establishment with any one of the following: adult entertainment store, adult
live entertainment business or adult motion -picture show as defined in this chapter. This
definition shall not include adult massage establishments or adult hotels or motels or
sexual encounter establishments which are expressly prohibited in Mount Vernon, and
which are defined below.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANDISE
Any one of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter;
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact disks or other visual
representations; audio tapes, cassettes, records, compact disks or other audio
representations or any other similar material that are characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT STORE
An establishment that has a significant amount or more than 25% of its stock -in -trade or
more than 20 square feet of public sales space devoted to the sale, distribution, rent or for
any form of consideration adult entertainment merchandise as defined herein. Adult
entertainment merchandise offered for sale, rent or other consideration is not used, read,
viewed or otherwise consumed on the premises.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL
A hotel or motel or similar commercial establishment which offers a sleeping room for
rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours or allows a tenant or occupant of a
sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. These
establishments are prohibited in the City of Mount Vernon because they may encourage
unlawful activity to occur. (See New York State Penal Code, Article 230). This definition
4
shall not be interpreted to include conventional hotels and motels, which are rented on an
overnight basis, normally for a twenty -four-hour period for the convenience of travelers.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
A nightclub, bar, restaurant or any type of business establishment that features live
performances or any employees or subcontractees that are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, whether or not the live
performances are considered incidental to the primary operations of the business, and
whether or not the employee or subcontractee is normally considered an entertainer.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment having a fixed place of business where massages are administered for
pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. These
massages are normally given to provide sexual stimulation or satisfaction to paying
customers. This definition shall not be construed to include such health-related facilities
as a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, health club or the office of any health- care
massage practitioner duly licensed by the State of New York, nor barber shops or beauty
parlors in which massages are administered to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders, nor a
nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court or
other educational athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area. Adult
massage establishments are expressly prohibited in the City of Mount Vernon because
they may encourage unlawful activity to occur. (See New York State Penal Code, Article
230).
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER
Any establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown to patrons that are
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
ADULT RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
A planned residential development for senior citizens, which consists of multifamily
dwelling units or single-family units, in which each individual living unit contains a
kitchen and bathroom, and which include universal design features and are handicap
adaptable, and that may provide social and recreational activities for its residents and may
provide supportive amenities such a dining program, transportation, linen services,
housekeeping services, beauty parlor, library, convenience store or cafe, swimming pool,
computer room, and other similar activities and amenities, with such activities and
amenities being provided within the same structure as the dwelling units or in an
accessory space or building dedicated for those purposes.
ALTER
5
To change, enlarge or rearrange the structural parts, either interior or exterior, or the exit
or entrance facilities of a structure or to move a building from one location or position to
another or to modify the construction of a building or its building equipment.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL
A building for the medical and/ or surgical care of animals.
APPLICATION
The application form and all accompanying documents and exhibits required of an
applicant by an approving agency for review.
APPROVED CONDITIONS
Physical conditions and use of a building, structure, land or part thereof, approved under
a valid permit issued by the Department of Buildings.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
A multiunit residential facility constructed, operated, and providing oversight pursuant to
Article 46-B of New York State Public Health Law (Assisted Living Reform Act of
2004), NYCRR Title 10, Section 4662, Part 1001.
ATTIC
That part of a building between the uppermost story and the roof.
BAR
A business enterprise primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, such as
beer, wine or liquor to patrons seated at a table or counter, served for consumption on the
premises.
BASE HEIGHT
The base height of a building is the permitted height of the facade facing a street,
otherwise known as the front wall or street wall, of a building before any building step -
back is required as specified by certain zoning districts.
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof, self-supporting or supported by columns, walls, air pressure
or similar supports, which is affixed to the ground and intended for the housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY
A building subordinate to the principal building or buildings on the lot and used for
purposes customarily incidental to that of the principal building. When an accessory
building is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof,
such accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building.
BUILDING AREA
6
The maximum horizontal cross- section of a building, including roofed -over porches,
decks and balconies more than three feet above the average adjoining ground elevation,
but excluding cornices, roof overhangs or gutters projecting not more than three feet from
the exterior building wall.
BUILDING COVERAGE
The percentage of lot area covered by the combined building area of all buildings on a
lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance from grade to the level of the highest point of the roof if the roof is
flat or mansard, or to the mean level between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if
the roof is of any other type.
BUILDING LENGTH
The horizontal distance measured between the furthermost exterior of the finished walls
of the building in a generally perpendicular direction.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is
located.
BUILDING, STEP -BACK
A building step -back is the distance, as specified by certain zoning districts, that a portion
of a building is recessed from the facade, rather than a lot line. A building step -back is
required for the portion of a building above the base height, as specified by certain zoning
districts, only when the building height will exceed the specified base height.
CAR WASH
A car wash is an establishment engaged in washing, waxing, and/or polishing of motor
vehicles or in furnishing facilities for the self-service washing of motor vehicles.
CATERING HALL
A business enterprise engaged in preparing and serving food and beverages selected in
advance for a predetermined number of people, often large in number, at a specified time,
including, but not limited to, the provision of live or mechanical entertainment and
dancing.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A Certificate issued by the Commissioner of the Department of Buildings upon
completion of the construction of a new building or addition or upon a change in the use
of a building or use of the land which certifies that all requirements of this chapter the
City Code and the New York State Uniform Code have been complied with and
authorizes the occupancy of the premises in accordance with such certificate and all
applicable codes rules and regulations. When the term " certificate of occupancy" is used
7
in this chapter, it shall be deemed to include the term " certificate of tenancy and " letter of
completion" where such may be appropriate.
CERTIFICATE OF TENANCY
A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Commissioner of the Department of Buildings
for a tenancy space. The certificate of tenancy is issued to the business owner and
authorizes the occupancy of the tenancy space in accordance with such certificate and all
applicable codes rules and regulations.
CHANGE OF USE
Any change in the use of a building or land which results in a different use classification
or use nomenclature in the Lists of Use Regulations listed in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR
A commercial corridor is a concentration of parcels that have commercial, retail and
mixed uses, which serve a common trade area and surround and/ or lie along a single
street.
COMMUNITY PURPOSE BUILDING
A building used and occupied by a not-for-profit religious or membership corporation
providing religious, charitable, recreation, entertainment, guidance, counseling or other
similar amenities and facilities on a nonprofit basis similar to organizations commonly
described as " YM's," " YW's," " Boys and Girls Clubs," " Scout groups" and other fraternal
membership groups.
COMMUNITY CENTER
A structure, lot, room or dedicated space used principally by the community for clubs,
fraternities, organizations and other types of social groups for the purposes of providing a
meeting place.
CONVERSION
See change of use.
COURT or COURTYARD
An open, uncovered and unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of
a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of one or
more buildings. All other courts are outer courts.
COVERAGE
See " Building Coverage" and " Impervious Coverage".
CUSTOMARY PERSONAL SERVICES
Services to the general public for personal or household use such as beauty salon, barber
shop, spa, exercise outfit, tailoring, upholstery repair, household appliances repairs, etc.
8
DAY-CARE CENTER
A program, licensed by the New York State Department of Social Services, which
provides care for three or more children away from their home for more than three hours
per day, excluding those children receiving family day care, or group family day care as
defined in this section.
DENSITY
The number of residential units allowed on a parcel based on the lot area dwelling unit
requirements specified in the zone district.
DENSITY BONUS
A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the
applicable Zoning Ordinance as of the date of application by the developer to the City.
DESIGN EXCEPTIONS
See waivers.
DE MINIMIS
Within the context of land use law, an applicant may obtain an exception to the City' s
zoning ordinance when there is only a minor deviation from the zoning ordinance and
rigid compliance is not necessary to protect the public policy concerns inherent in the
ordinance. A de minimis exception may generally be considered to be 10 percent ( 10%)
or less of what is permitted under the zoning variance.
DWELLING
A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, or a part of a mixed use building
containing three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE -FAMILY
A dwelling containing only one principal dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
A dwelling containing only two principal dwelling units, whether located side by side or
in any other manner.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one family,
including independent cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING UNIT ATTACHED
A dwelling unit sharing one or more common side or rear walls with another dwelling
unit or units, but occupying the entire volume within its portion of the building from the
9
lowest level to the roof and having its own separate entrance or entrances to the outside.
This type of dwelling unit is also sometimes known as a " townhouse."
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED
A dwelling unit located in its own separate building which does not abut any other
dwelling.
ENRICHED HOUSING
Enriched housing is defined in New York State law (NYCRR, Title 18, Chapter II,
Subchapter D) as an Adult Care Facility and is licensed and overseen by the New York
State Department of Health. An enriched housing program is an adult -care facility
established and operated for the purposes of providing long-term residential care to five
or more adults, primarily persons 65 years of age or older, in community -integrated
settings resembling independent housing units. Such a program provides or arranges the
provision of room, and provides board, housekeeping, personal care and supervision.
FAMILY
One or more persons having a common domestic bond who live together in one dwelling
unit as a traditional family or its functional equivalent, headed by one or more resident
persons who have the authority over the care, functioning or management of their
common household.
FLOATING ZONE
A floating zone is a zoning designation that is unmapped on the official zoning map that
at the discretion of the City Council may be superimposed on one or more qualifying
parcels of land to impose supplemental restrictions on uses within the district, permit
specific uses that are otherwise not permitted or implement incentives to foster
development. Floating zones can be affixed to qualifying parcel( s) by the application of
the owner of a parcel or by the City Council initiative. Upon approval, the parcel( s) is
governed by the uses, dimensions and other provisions under the Floating Zone
Ordinance.
FLOATING OVERLAY ZONE
A floating overlay zone is a zoning designation that is unmapped on the official zoning
map that at the discretion of the City Council may be superimposed on one or more
qualifying parcels of land to impose supplemental restrictions on uses within the district,
permit specific uses that are otherwise not permitted or implement incentives while
retaining the underlying zoning to foster development. Floating overlay zones can be
affixed to qualifying parcel( s) by the application of the owner of a parcel or by the City
Council initiative. Upon approval, the parcel( s) is governed by the uses, dimensions and
other provisions under the Floating Overlay Zone Ordinance.
FLOOR AREA
The horizontal area of a story of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the center line of
10
such common walls, but excluding unroofed porches, balconies, raised platforms, roof
overhangs, gutters and chimneys.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS
The sum of the floor areas of all stories of all principal buildings on a lot, excluding floor
area used for accessory off-street parking purposes.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.)
The gross floor area divided by the lot area.
GRADE
The average level of the ground surrounding and 10 feet distant from the exterior walls of
the building, but within the property.
GROUND FLOOR
The floor of a building at or nearest street level.
HEALTH CLUB
Membership facilities designed and used for body conditioning and rehabilitation,
including activities such as aerobic and related class exercises. Health clubs may contain
equipment such as whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, showers, locker facilities and, as an
accessory use, a health food bar.
HOME OCCUPATION, CUSTOMARY
An occupation of a service character accessory to and customarily incidental to the use of
a dwelling unit by a resident thereof, the conduct of which is clearly secondary to the use
of the dwelling unit for living purposes, does not change the character thereof or have any
exterior evidence of such secondary use and does not involve the keeping of stock of
merchandise for sale in connection therewith. Tutoring and instruction, including art,
music, voice, violin or other musical instrument, limited to a single pupil at a time shall
be deemed a customary home occupation. Group instruction in dancing, vocal or
instrumental music, tea rooms, barber shops, beauty parlors, real estate offices, insurance
offices and tourist homes are not customary home occupations.
HOTEL/MOTEL
Any building or group of buildings containing rooms occupied by transient guests who
are lodged with or without meals, in facilities also commonly referred as inns, motor
lodges and other such similar designations.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
The percentage of the land area covered by the combined area of all buildings, structures,
paved areas and other impervious surfaces on the lot.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
11
Any surface or material through which water will not flow under ordinary hydrostatic
pressure and including structures, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, terraces and
paved areas.
LEGAL CONDITIONS
Conditions of a building structure land or part thereof sanctioned by a certificate of
occupancy or tenancy or a letter of completion.
LEGALIZATION
The type of permit application and/or work required from the owner to bring a building
structure land or portion thereof which use or physical conditions have been changed or
altered without a permit issued by the Department of Buildings to approved and legal
conditions.
LETTER OF COMPLETION
A certificate issued by the Commissioner of the Department of Buildings indicating the
satisfactory completion of alterations in accordance with the permit issued thereof.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) DISTRIBUTION FACILITY
A business enterprise engaged in the distribution of LGP, received by truck transport, and
having on-site bulk storage of more than 2,000 gallons of LPG and usually having
container -filling and truck -loading facilities.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) DISTRIBUTION POINT
A business enterprise engaged in the retail sale and distribution of LPG in small portable
tanks, cylinders or containers and having on- site storage facilities of 100 gallons or more.
Notwithstanding the above, the incidental retail sale of LPG in small portable tanks,
cylinders or containers of fess than 20 pounds or as prescribed by National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 58, Chapter 5, whichever is more restrictive, shall not be
considered a liquefied petroleum gas distribution point.
LOADING SPACE
An off-street space available for the loading or unloading of goods and having direct
usable access to a street.
LOT
A recorded piece, plot or parcel of land or assemblage of recorded contiguous parcels of
land, all in common ownership, occupied or to be occupied by principal and accessory
buildings and uses and having its principal frontage on a street or on such other means of
access as may be deemed, in accordance with the provisions of law, to be adequate as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit for a building or buildings on such land.
LOT AREA
The total horizontal area included within the lot boundaries.
LOT, CORNER
12
A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets where the interior angle formed by
the intersection of the streets is 135° or less; all corner lots are presumed to have two
front yards, one primary and one secondary.
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 1999]
LOT, THROUGH
A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT DEPTH
The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the general
direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE
The continuous extent of a lot along a street.
LOT LINE
A property line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT
In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the lot line separating the lot from the
street. In the case of a corner lot, the owner may elect any street line as the front lot line,
except that where the majority of lots in any block are developed, the front lot line shall
be the same as that used by such other lots. In the case of a through lot having frontage on
two streets, the front yard setbacks and other requirements of this chapter applicable to
front yards shall apply for both streets. For a lot with less than 70% of the minimum
frontage required for the district in which it is located, the front lot line shall be deemed
to be a line within the lot and which is parallel to the street and at least equal in length to
the minimum frontage requirement.
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot line and most distant therefrom. If
the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet
long, lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line other than the front lot line and the rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH
The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured perpendicular to the
lot depth.
MEDICAL OFFICE
A medical office is generally an office use which provides medical and allied health
services to the individual by physicians, surgeons, dentists, podiatrists, psychologists,
psychiatrists, chiropractors, or any other health-care professionals when licensed by a
13
State -sanctioned Board overseeing the provision of medically oriented services. It
includes a clinic, primarily providing outpatient care in medical, psychiatric or other
health services, and not part of a residential health care facility, as defined in this Code.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR SHOP
An establishment engaged in the repair of automotive tops, bodies and interiors or in
automotive painting, detailing and refinishing.
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERSHIP
An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of new automobiles and which may
include, as an accessory use, the sale of used automobiles, parts and accessories for said
automobiles, including minor service and repair work.
MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL AGENCY
Establishments primarily engaged in the short-term rental of vehicles without drivers and
including the on- site storage of such vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR FACILITIES
An establishment engaged in the installation, repair, and/ or sale of automotive exhaust
systems, front-end wheel alignment, glass, tires, electrical components, transmissions and
similar types of functions.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION
An establishment engaged in the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and lubricating oils and
the sale of parts, accessories and services for motor vehicles, excluding body repair.
NIGHTCLUB
A business enterprise which provides live or mechanical music or theatrical
entertainment and permits dancing in connection with the service of food or beverage.
The term " nightclub" shall include cabarets, dance halls, discotheques or other similar
establishment.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION
A corporation formed or existing under the Not -For -Profit Corporation Law of New York
state.
NURSERY SCHOOL
A social and educational program for children, operated for less than three hours per
session, two to five times a week, often following a school -year schedule, and registered
with the New York State Education Department.
OVERLAY ZONE
A mapped overlay district superimposed on one or more established underlying zoning
districts which may be used to impose supplemental restrictions on uses in these districts,
permit uses otherwise disallowed, or implement some form of density bonus or incentive
bonus program
14
PARKING FACILITY
An off-street area for the parking of licensed motor vehicles on a transient basis. This
does not include any motor vehicle storage areas.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street space available for the parking of one licensed motor vehicle on a transient
basis and having direct usable access to a street.
PERMIT HOLDER
The contractor listed on the permit.
PERSON
Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any other
entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
PRIVATE SCHOOL
An institution conducting a regularly scheduled academic curriculum of study similar to
that of public schools and operated in accordance with the Education Law of the State of
New York.
PROFESSIONAL PERSON
An attorney admitted to practice in the State of New York; or a certified public
accountant, a professional engineer, an architect, a landscape architect, a physician, a
dentist, a speech pathologist, an audiologist, a chiropractor, a podiatrist, a physical
therapist, an optometrist or an individual licensed to practice psychology and all others as
defined and regulated in the Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC AMENITIES
Areas provided and maintained by a private property owner and designated for public
access, public traffic, and/or public accommodation within private or public development
projects, including but not limited to public plazas, public art, public parks, urban green
spaces and public parking.
PUBLIC ART
Original works of art open and accessible to the public and conceived in any discipline or
medium, including visual, performance, literary, media and temporary works.
PUBLIC PLAZA
A public square or area designed as a gathering place for the public and designated by the
City Council as a privately owned open area adjacent to buildings and accessible to the
public which is generally at grade with the adjoining sidewalk.
PUBLIC SCHOOL
15
An educational institution operated by a public school district in accordance with the
Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC UTILITY
Any person duly authorized to furnish to the public, under public regulation, electricity,
gas, water, sewage treatment, steam, cable TV or telephone, cellular telephone or
telegraph service.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY
Residential facilities providing rooms, supportive assistance, health care, skilled nursing
care, and therapies. Commonly referred to as nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, or
Green Houses, these facilities are constructed, operated, and overseen pursuant to Article
28 of New York State Public Health Law, NYCRR Title 10, Section 86.2.
RESTAURANT
A business enterprise primarily engaged in preparing and serving food selected from a
full menu by patrons seated at a table or counter, served by a waiter or waitress and
consumed on the premises.
RESTAURANT, CARRY -OUT
A business enterprise primarily engaged in the retail sale of food products for
consumption off the premises but which may also include the incidental sale of ready -to -
consume food and beverages from a counter -type installation for consumption on the
premises where patrons usually select their orders from a posted menu and service and
cleanup is generally performed by the customer, provided that the area devoted to
customer seating represents less than 25% of the gross floor area of the establishment.
The term carry -out restaurant shall not include bakeries, delicatessens, grocery stores or
other food sales establishments not providing customer seating on the premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD
A business enterprise primarily engaged in the retail sale of ready -to -consume food
served in disposable containers and selected by patrons from a limited number of
specialized items, such as, but not limited to, hamburgers, chicken, fish and chips, pizza,
tacos and hot dogs, which are prepared according to standardized procedures for
consumption either on or off the premises. The term fast-food restaurant shall include,
but not be limited to, facilities where a substantial portion of the sales to the public is by
stand-up service.
RETAIL
The selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household use.
RETAIL DRY CLEANERS
A business enterprise having facilities for the cleaning and pressing of clothing which
deals directly with ultimate consumers, does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor
area, uses only solvents with a flash point of not less than 138. 2° F. and has a total
aggregate dry load capacity of machines not exceeding 60 pounds.
16
RETAIL LAUNDRY
A business enterprise with facilities for the washing of clothing which deals directly with
ultimate consumers and does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
ROOMER
An occupant of a rooming unit. The term shall also include boarder.
ROOMING UNIT
A portion of a dwelling unit, including access to cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities,
which is leased for occupancy by no more than one person.
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 1999]
SATELLITE EARTH STATION OR DISH ANTENNA
A combination of antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or
other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources; a low -noise
amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and
whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; a coaxial cable whose purpose is to
carry the signals into the interior of the buildings.
SENIOR CITIZEN
The term " senior citizen" is defined as any person 55 years and older. Age eligibility
requirements may vary depending upon the type of project and/or the source of funding
requested.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING
Housing which is designed and constructed for occupancy by at least one senior citizen
per Dwelling Unit and which is limited in occupancy to those meeting the definition of
senior citizen, age 55 years and older, unless specified otherwise in the law establishing
the development' s construction funding source or other applicable law or regulation and
which may be constructed with federal, state, or local subsidies, or constructed with
conventional funding sources.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT
An establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment, offering
accommodations which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or
more persons may congregate, associate or consort in any connection with specified
sexual activities. This definition shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State
of New York engages in sexual therapy. Sexual encounter establishments are expressly
prohibited in the City of Mount Vernon because they may encourage unlawful activity to
occur. (See New York State Penal Code Article 230).
Added 2- 3- 1999]
17
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Includes any of the following: less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the aureole; human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Includes any of the following: the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or bestiality; masturbation,
actual or simulated; or excretory functions as part or in connection with any of the
activities set forth above in this definition.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
SITE PLAN
A map showing the layout, arrangement and use of buildings and land, including
accessory uses, structures, facilities and services and meeting the informational
requirements of this chapter.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR
A device or combination of devices which relies upon solar radiation as an energy source
and that is employed for the purpose of heating or cooling a building, the heating of water
or the generation of electricity.
STORY
That portion of a building which is between one floor level and the next higher floor level
or the roof. Any floor of a building used for purposes other than storage or other
mechanical equipment shall be counted as a story.
STREET
An existing state, county or city highway or road, or a road on a subdivision plat
approved by the Planning Board or on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to approve subdivision plats, including all of the land within the right-ofway.
STREET LINE
Any line dividing a lot from a street.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attachment to something having location on the ground. Included are swimming pools,
parking garages, decks not attached to a building, tents, basketball, tennis and paddle
18
tennis courts, tents, but not anything requiring only simple paving or surfacing of the
ground, such as parking lots, driveways or sidewalks.
STRUCTURE, MINOR ACCESSORY
A building containing less than 500 cubic feet of volume, not exceeding 15 feet in height
and customarily found accessory to dwelling units, including dog houses, tree houses,
playhouses, pigeon coops, storage sheds and greenhouses.
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 1999]
SWIMMING POOL
A man-made body of water or receptacle for water having a depth of more than 24 inches
and a water surface area of more than 80 square feet and constructed, installed or
maintained in or above ground outside any building.
TENANCY SPACE
A building or portion thereof owned or leased by a business owner to conduct such
business. The term tenancy space shall be limited to space with residential use only.
UNIVERSITY OR COLLEGE
An institution of higher education operated in accordance with the Education Law of the
State of New York.
USABLE OPEN SPACE, AREA OF
Usable open space is the portion of a lot which is unoccupied by driveways, drive aisles,
service drives, off-street parking spaces and/ or loading berths, principal buildings, and
accessory buildings. This area of usable open space shall be available and accessible to
all occupants of the building for use for recreation and other leisure activities normally
carried on outdoors.
USE
The specific purpose for which property is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is
or may be occupied or maintained.
UNDERLYING ZONING
The original zoning designation given to a parcel( s) of land within the City prior to a
Overlay Zoning or a Floating Overlay Zone superimposed on the parcel( s). Please refer
to Zoning District.
WAIVER
Permission to depart from the requirements of this chapter with respect to the submission
of required information or documents.
YARD
The open space on a lot separating the lot line from the nearest building or, where there is
no building, the minimum required yard for the district in which it is located.
19
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot line and
the nearest building on the lot.
YARD, MINIMUM
The minimum yard as required in accordance with the applicable Schedule of
Dimensional Regulations, Editor's Note: The Schedule ofDimensional Regulations is
included at the end of this chapter; which yard shall be measured from the front, side or
rear lot line, whichever the case may be.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and
the nearest building on the lot.
YARD, SIDE
A yard between a side lot line( s) and the nearest building on the lot, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front and rear
lot line, as the case may be.
ZONING DISTRICT
A designation given to parcel( s) within the City to govern the use of land and bulk of
buildings.
Article III - Establishment of Districts
Article III — Section 1. District Classification.
The City of Mount Vernon is hereby divided into the following classes of districts:
A. Residence
R1- 7
R1- 4.5
R1- 3. 6
R2-4.5
RMF -6.75
RMF -10
RMF -15
H
Districts.
One -Family Residence
One -Family Residence
One -Family Residence
Two -Family Residence
Multifamily Residence
Multifamily Residence
Multifamily Residence
Hospital
B. Mixed -Use Districts.
MVW Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zone
C. Nonresidence Districts.
NB Neighborhood Business
OB Office Business
20
DB Downtown Business
CB Commercial Business
LI -15 Landscaped Industrial
LI -7.5 Landscaped Industrial
I
Industry
D. Special Zoning Districts.
R1- TH One -Family Townhouse Residence
RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone
UR -PUD Urban Renewal Planned Development
PUD -2 Planned Unit Development
UR -PUD -S4 South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Planned Unit
Development Overlay Zone
Article III — Section 2. Zoning Map establishment.
The boundaries of all districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Zoning
Map, City of Mount Vernon, New York, dated October 16, 1997, and as may be amended
from time to time and certified by the City Clerk, which map accompanies and with all
explanatory matter thereon is made part of this chapter. The official copy of this map is
kept by the City Clerk, with copies thereof kept by the Department of Planning and
Department of Buildings. Unofficial copies at a reduced scale are included with copies of
this chapter. Whenever the City Council amends the Zoning Map, the City Clerk shall
notify the Commissioner of Planning, who shall cause the amendment to be made to the
official copy of the Zoning Map and to the copies kept by the Department of Planning
and Department of Buildings.
Article III — Section 3. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines follow lot lines, streets, municipal boundaries, rights-of-way,
railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, or are parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless
such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions, as shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where district boundaries as shown approximately following streets, rights-of-way,
railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, the center lines thereof shall be such
boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are shown approximately following municipal boundaries
or lot lines, such municipal boundaries or lot lines shall be the district boundaries.
21
D. Where district boundary lines divide a lot, the location of any such boundary, if not
indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the map scale appearing
thereon.
E. If the district classification of any property is in question, it shall be deemed to be in
the most restrictive adjoining district.
Article III — Section 4. Order of restrictiveness.
Where zoning districts are referred to as " more restrictive" or "less restrictive," the
designations shall refer to the order in which the districts are named in Chapter 267 -
Article III, the first named being the most restrictive.
Article 111— Section 5. Lot in two or more districts or municipalities.
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more district boundary lines,
the following shall apply:
A. Uses permitted in one district may not extend into another district where they would
not otherwise be permitted.
B. Dimensional requirements shall be measured from the lot lines and not zoning district
lines.
Article IV - Regulations
Article IV — Section 1. Application of regulations.
A. Conformity required. No building shall be erected, constructed, moved, altered,
rebuilt or enlarged, nor shall any land, water or building be used, designed or arranged to
be used for any purpose except in conformity with this chapter.
B. Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary for the
protection and promotion of the public, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general
welfare.
C. Conflicting standards. This chapter shall not be deemed to affect in any manner
whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater or lesser restriction upon the use of
buildings or land, or upon the erection, construction, establishment, movement, alteration
or enlargement of buildings than are imposed by other ordinances, rules, regulations,
licenses, certificates or other authorizations, or by easements, covenants or agreements,
the more restrictive requirements shall prevail. Where any standard or provision of this
22
chapter is found to be inconsistent or in conflict with any other standard or provision, the
more restrictive requirement shall apply.
Article IV — Section 2. Nonconforming uses and other nonconformities.
A. Continuing existing uses, buildings and structures.
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawfully permitted use of lands or
buildings and the lawfully permitted existence of buildings and structures at the
time of adoption of this chapter may be continued although such use, building or
structure does not conform to the standards specified in this chapter for the district
in which such lands, buildings or structures are located. Similarly, whenever a
zoning classification or the restrictions affecting property within a district shall be
changed hereafter so as to render nonconforming a use, building or structure then
presently lawfully existing, such use, building or structure may nevertheless
continue subject to the conditions set forth below. Said uses shall be deemed
nonconforming uses and said buildings and structures shall be deemed
dimensionally nonconforming.
2. Any use in existence as of the effective date of this chapter which is by this
chapter made a special permit use in the district in which it is located shall be
presumed to have a special permit to the extent such use is legally conforming as
of the effective date of this chapter.
B. Nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures.
1. The nonconforming use of land may be continued; provided, however, that no
such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or intensified, nor shall it be extended to
occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, nor shall the lot area be reduced, unless specifically
allowed by other provisions in this chapter, nor shall any such nonconforming use
be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land
occupied by such nonconforming use at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
2. A building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the use regulations
for the district in which it is situated, shall not be enlarged, extended or altered
structurally unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use, or except to
conform to an order of the Building Commissioner to either correct an unsafe
condition or to conform to the requirements of applicable laws or ordinances.
3. No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be enlarged or extended,
except that any such nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
the building or structure which were obviously or manifestly arranged or designed
only for such use at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter.
23
4. No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use, except as
provided in Chapter 267 - Article IV - 2E.
5. If a nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a period of one year, or is
changed to a conforming use, any future use of the land, building or structure shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Substantial discontinuance of
activities consistent with or required for the operation of such nonconforming use
or substantial vacancy of the building or structure in which the nonconforming use
was conducted, together with substantial discontinuance of activities consistent
with or required for the operation of such nonconforming use shall be deemed to
constitute a cessation thereof within the meaning of this chapter, irrespective of
whether an intention to abandon the nonconforming use may exist.
6. If any building or structure in which any nonconforming use is conducted or
maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on which such
building or structure was located and the subsequent use of any building or
structure thereon shall be in conformity with the standards specified by this chapter
for the district in which such land is located.
C. Dimensional nonconformity. A building or structure that is conforming in use but
does not conform to the lot dimension, yard dimension, height, building coverage, floor
area ratio, off-street parking, loading or similar dimensional requirements of this chapter
shall be deemed to be dimensionally nonconforming. No building permit shall be issued
that will result in the increase of any such dimensional nonconformity, but any building
or structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its dimensional nonconformity.
D. Reconstruction.
1. Should a building or structure, the use of which, or the use of a portion of which,
is nonconforming, or which is dimensionally nonconforming, be destroyed or
damaged by any means to an extent greater than 50% of the replacement cost of the
entire building or structure used in connection therewith at the time of the
reconstruction, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or used except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Should a building or structure, the use of which, or the use of a portion of which,
is nonconforming or which is dimensionally nonconforming, be destroyed or
damaged by any means to an extent of 50% or less of the replacement cost of the
entire building or structure used in connection therewith at the time of the
reconstruction, it may be reconstructed and any accompanying nonconforming use
continued, provided that the reconstruction is commenced within one year of the date
of such damage and completed within two years of said date, and further provided
that it shall be reconstructed in accordance with a plan approved by the Board of
Appeals on Zoning so as to result, where reasonable, in greater conformity with this
chapter.
24
E. Change to other nonconforming use. On application, any nonconforming use of land,
buildings or structures may be changed to another nonconforming use upon approval by
the Zoning Board of Appeals based upon a finding that the proposed use is more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such
change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary or appropriate to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. Improvement of nonconforming uses. In order that nonconforming uses may gradually
be brought into greater conformity with this chapter and the adverse external effects of
such uses may be reduced, the owner of the land, building or structure so used may be
permitted to make limited changes to such building, structure or use in conjunction with a
site plan whereby through landscaped screening and buffer areas, control of noise,
smoke, odors, lighting, architectural changes, location and layout of parking lots and
access drives, or by any other appropriate means, these purposes may be achieved. Such
plan shall be presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which may then grant approval
or approval with modifications, provided that said agency finds that the purposes of this
section would be furthered by such action.
Article IV — Section 3. Provisions governing lots.
Any change of lot line, except where only the dimensions of two existing lots are
changed and additional building lots are not created, shall be considered to be a
subdivision and shall be subject to Planning Board review and approval. A plat indicating
such change shall be filed with the office of the Westchester County Clerk prior to such
change taking effect. A copy of the filed plat shall also be submitted to the City Assessor.
No building permit shall be issued for the use or development of any lot which has not
been so created subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
A. Lot for every building. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot and
there shall be no more than one principal building and its accessory buildings on one lot,
except for multifamily and nonresidential buildings in districts where such uses are
permitted.
B. Subdivision of a lot. Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot already
occupied by a building, such separation shall be effected in a manner which will not
impair conformity with any of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the
existing building and all yards and other required spaces in connection therewith. No
permit shall be issued for the erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless it
complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
C. Irregularly shaped lots. Where a question exists as to the proper application of any of
the requirements of this chapter to a particular lot because of its peculiar or irregular
shape, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine how the requirements of this chapter
apply.
25
D. New building on lots smaller than required. A permit may be issued for the erection
of a building for a permitted use on a lot for which a valid conveyance has been recorded
prior to July 1, 1963, notwithstanding that the area or dimensions of such lot are less than
that required for the district in which such lot is located, provided that:
1. The lot met the zoning requirements at the time the deed to the lot was created.
2. All yard setbacks and other building related requirements which are in effect at the
time of the obtaining of the building permit are complied with; provided, however,
that in a one- or two-family residence district, the required side and rear yard
setbacks may be reduced in proportion to the dimensional nonconformity of the lot
to allow for the construction of a one- or two-family dwelling.
3. The ownership of such lot was not the same as any other lot or lots contiguous
thereto on July 1, 1963. If that is not the case, such other lot or lots, or so much
thereof as may be necessary, shall be combined with the first -named lot to make
one or more conforming lots, whereupon a permit may be issued, but only for such
combined lots. Where the required area or dimensions of lots are changed by an
amendment to this chapter, any lot legally in existence on that date and made
nonconforming by such amendment may be built upon as provided in this section.
E. Minimum distance between buildings on the same lot.
1. Minimum distance between principal buildings in residence districts. In all
residence districts, the minimum distance between principal buildings shall equal
at least the average height of such buildings at the points where such buildings are
closest to one another.
Article IV — Section 4. Provisions governing yards.
A. Use of yards.
1) Buildings and structures. No building shall be constructed on any
portion of a lot which is less in width than the minimum required for the
district in which it is located. No building or structure shall be permitted
within any minimum required yard except:
a) Decks or terraces not exceeding 18 inches above the level of the
ground beneath them and not extending into a side or rear yard
closer than three feet of any side or rear lot line.
b) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 — Article IV -Section 5.
c) Fences as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV -Section 5.
d) Other minor accessory structures in a side or rear yard but no closer
than three feet from any property line.
e) Ground floor steps and entrance porches.
2) Parking.
26
a) No parking shall be permitted within any required yard except as
provided in Chapter 267 - Article VIII.
b) No parking or storage of means of conveyance, other than passenger
motor vehicles, is permitted in residence district.
c) No parking or storage of commercial vehicles, trucks, and other
means of conveyance, other than passenger vehicles, is permitted
in non -residence districts except as otherwise permitted in this
chapter.
3) Structural projections.
a) Open one- story porches, roof overhangs, canopies and other similar
architectural features may extend to within a minimum distance
of the front lot line as follows:
1] R1- 7 District: 20 feet.
2] R1- 4.5, R1- 3. 6, R2-4. 5 and RMF -6.75 Districts: 15 feet.
3] RMF -10 and RMF -15 Districts: 10 feet.
b) The ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, chimneys,
cornices, eaves and other similar architectural features shall not
project more than two feet into any side or rear yard.
B. Front on corner lots.
1) The owner of a corner lot in a residence district may elect either yard
fronting on a street as the required front yard, with the secondary front yard
being equal to at least the following:
a) R1 -TH: 30 feet.
b) R1- 7: 18 feet.
c) R1 - 4.5: 12 feet
d) R1- 3. 6, R2-4.5: eight feet.
e) RMF -6.75: 10 feet.
f) RMF -10: 15 feet.
g) RMF -15: 20 feet.
2) The owner of a corner lot in a landscaped industrial district may elect either
yard fronting on a street as the required front yard, with the secondary
front yard equal to at least the following:
27
a) LI -15: 18 feet.
b) LI -7.5: 12 feet.
C. Obstruction to visibility at intersections. The following requirements with respect
to obstruction to visibility at intersections shall apply to one- and two-family properties
in residence districts only. Standards with regard to visibility affecting other properties
shall be as determined adequate by the Planning Board as set forth in Article VII of
this chapter.
1) Driveway intersections. Obstructions to visibility which exceed 2 1/ 2 feet in
height shall be prohibited in the triangles formed by the edge of the paved
street, the edge of the driveway and a line joining points located along the
street pavement edge 30 feet therefrom and the driveway edge 15 feet
therefrom.
2) Street intersections. Obstructions to visibility which exceed 2 1/ 2 feet in
height shall be prohibited in the triangleformed by intersecting street
pavement edges and a line joining points located along said street
pavement edges which are 40 feet from the theoretical point of
intersection of such lines, as extended.
Article IV — Section 5. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Height limitations. Spires, cupolas, belfries, flagpoles, radio towers, masts, antennas
and other similar structures covering a total of not more than 10% of the horizontal area
of the roof on which they are located shall be permitted to exceed the otherwise
maximum permitted building height by not more than 10 feet unless a special permit
therefor is obtained from the Planning Board.
B. Fences.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. Residence districts:
a. Front yard. Wrought iron or aluminum fences and masonry walls of at least
25% open construction, or any combination thereof, not exceeding four feet in
height, are permitted within required front yards. Solid masonry walls, whether
used on their own or in combination with other types of fences, shall not exceed
three feet in height.
b. Side and rear yards. Fences and masonry walls not exceeding six feet in height
are permitted in side and rear yards, except that where the lot area exceeds
7,000 square feet and lot frontage exceeds 75 feet, a fence of at least 75% open
construction, located in side or rear yard, may have a maximum height of eight
feet.
2. Nonresidence districts:
a. Business districts. Wrought iron or aluminum fences and masonry walls of at
least 25% open construction, or any combination thereof, not exceeding six feet
28
in height, are permitted within a street -facing yard. Solid masonry walls,
whether used on their own or in combination, shall not exceed four feet in
height when facing a street. Fences and masonry walls not exceeding eight feet
are permitted in other yards.
b. Industrial districts. Fences and masonry walls of at least 25% open construction
not exceeding eight feet are permitted in any yard, except that the front yard
fence shall be as permitted in a business districts when facing a residence
district.
3. Additional regulations for all districts:
a. All fences and walls must be completely inside lot lines.
b. If any fence or wall has a finished or a more attractive side, such side shall face
the neighboring property or street.
c. Any fence or wall separating a lot for residence use from a lot for nonresidence
use may have a maximum height of eight feet.
d. Any fence or masonry wall surrounding a public utility use or a use of a
governmental agency in any district may have a maximum height of eight feet,
except that a fence within a yard facing a street shall comply with the street -
facing fence regulations for the business and industrial districts.
e. A fence of at least 75% open construction and a maximum of 10 feet in height
shall be permitted to enclose tennis courts.
f. Electrically charged fences, barbed- wire fences and other fences constructed of
sharp materials are not permitted. Barbed wire or razor is permitted as part of a
fence in an I -Industrial District, provided such barbed wire is located at least
eight feet above the ground and is not visible from any residence district within
250 feet thereof and approval has been granted by the City Council.
C. Swimming pools. All permanent, portable or movable swimming pools shall not be
located, installed, constructed or maintained on any lot except when in compliance with
the following requirements:
1. Swimming pools installed above the ground shall have a height no greater than 48
inches as measured from the mean ground level at the base of the pool to the rim of
the pool. The exposed sides of such swimming pool shall be screened by evergreen
landscaping whose height at the time of installation shall be at least equal to the
height of the exposed portion of the swimming pool, exclusive of deck rails. Such
swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence of at least six feet in height which
shall be in compliance with all other applicable laws and regulations.
2. Swimming pools installed in the ground; where the rim of the pool is flush with
the ground or with an on -ground deck, shall be required to be surrounded with sixfoot -high fencing which shall be in compliance with all other applicable laws and
regulations. In addition, an evergreen screen which shall have a minimum height
of four feet shall be provided around the swimming pool, outside of the fence, and
shall be adequate to screen the view of the pool area from adjacent properties and
from the street.
29
3. Any lights illuminating swimming pools shall be so directed as to eliminate direct
rays and minimize reflected rays of light on neighboring streets and properties.
4. All swimming pools shall be located no less than five feet from all lot lines and
shall not be located within any front yard.
5. All swimming pools shall be limited to the exclusive use of the occupants of the
premises and their nonpaying guests.
6. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner
that the proposed swimming pool will comply with all other applicable codes and
regulations.
7. The emptying of swimming pools shall comply with all other applicable codes and
regulations.
8. All swimming pool fences shall be located on a line not more than 20 feet parallel
to the edge of the swimming pool.
9. The filter pump and electrical switch shall be secured and at a location where
noise will not emanate beyond the perimeter of the property and shall not be
located in any required yard.
10. Where the construction of a lake or pond, which otherwise meets the definition of
a swimming pool, is reviewed as part of a site plan or special permit application,
that review shall suffice and a separate permit under this section need not be
obtained.
D. Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts. All such courts shall not be
located, installed, constructed or maintained on any lot except when in compliance with
the following requirements:
1. All such courts shall be located in the side or rear yard only.
2. All such courts shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any side or rear lot
line.
3. Any lights illuminating such a court shall be so directed as to eliminate direct rays
and minimize reflected rays of light on neighboring streets and properties.
4. All such courts shall cease operation at 10:00 p. m.
5. No fence shall be constructed without prior approval of the Board of Architectural
Review.
30
E. Land underwater. No land which is located below the high-water line or beyond the
bulkhead line or land elsewhere which is underwater may be claimed as available for
building development or for compliance with any requirement contained in this chapter,
other than yard setbacks, unless plans for filling such land in a manner satisfactory to the
Planning Board and other responsible governmental agencies are made a part of the
application for which the permit is requested. Notwithstanding the above, such
underwater areas may be used to comply with yard setback requirements, provided that
the resultant building setback is equal to the average setback of other existing principal
buildings on properties within 200 feet.
F. Wetlands setbacks. No building or structure shall be erected within 25 feet of the
boundary of any tidal or freshwater wetlands, other than piers, docks, marinas or boat
launching, storage, repair or service facilities for which approval is granted by the
appropriate approving agency.
G. Floodplains. No structure shall be erected in a designated floodplain without
compliance with flood hazard protection requirements.
H. Security grilles.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. Roll -up, folding or sliding grilles of noncombustible construction may be installed
in nonresidence districts only, provided that:
a. Security grilles and accompanying devices, motor and housing shall be installed
on the interior side of the building and shall unfold or roll down on the interior
side of the window or door.
b. Security grilles shall be open -mesh construction, with no openings smaller than
two inches in any direction and shall provide complete transparency and
visibility into the interior space.
c. Security grilles shall be completely in open position during business hours. The
enclosure which houses the grille during business hours shall not be visible
from either the inside or the outside of the building.
d. Security grilles and accompanying devices, motor and housing shall be installed
so that they may be removed at any time without endangering the structural and
fire safety of the building.
2. Upon written notification by the Commissioner of Buildings, existing security
grilles which are rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this amendment,
shall be removed within six months of written notification. The area where the
security grille housing and tracks were attached shall be restored to proper
conditions and good maintenance.
3. Security grilles shall be installed or removed in accordance with this chapter under
a sign permit.
31
4. It shall be a violation of this chapter to maintain in place an existing
nonconforming security grille beyond six months of written notification or to
install a new security grille in nonconformity of this chapter.
I. Landscaping, screening and buffer areas.
1. All portions of lots which are not used for locations for buildings, structures,
parking and loading facilities, sidewalks or similar purposes shall be suitably
landscaped and permanently maintained with planting of groundcover, grass, trees
and/or shrubbery. Such planting shall be provided and permanently maintained in
accordance with specifications approved as part of the site plan for properties that
are, or have been, subject to site plan approval.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
2. Any application to construct or alter any building or structure or to establish any
use in any nonresidence district or any nonresidential use in any district shall
include provisions for a buffer screening area at least 10 feet in width along any lot
line abutting a privately owned lot in a residence district. Any application to
construct a development of multifamily dwellings requiring more than 10 parking
spaces shall include provisions for a buffer screening area at least 10 feet in width
along any lot line abutting a privately owned lot in a one -family or two-family
residence district. These requirements may be waived by the approving agency in
situations where it determines that adjoining land uses, topographic features or
existing vegetation satisfy the same purpose. The approving agency may allow the
substitution of a wall or fence of location, height, design and materials approved
by it, and meeting the requirements of Chapter 267 - Article IV, for part or all of
the required planting. Where such a buffer screening area is required, it shall be of
evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as in the
judgment of the approving agency will screen the activity involved from the
neighboring residential area. Non -evergreen planting may seasonally supplement
evergreen planting but not take its place. The plan and specifications for such
planting shall be filed with the plans for the use of the lot.
3. All required landscaping shall be properly trimmed and maintained in healthy
growing condition at all times.
4. Fee in lieu of landscaping. Application for a permit for construction, alteration,
addition or change of use shall not be granted if the maximum permitted
impervious surface coverage for the district is exceeded, or if the required
landscaped buffer and screening area are not provided, except as otherwise
provided in this subsection. The applicant shall pay a landscaping fee in lieu of
providing the minimum required landscaped pervious surfaces upon approval from
the Zoning Board of Appeals of an area variance for impervious surface coverage
in excess of the permitted coverage. The landscaping fee shall be paid to the
issuing agency prior to the issuance of the permit, except that the fee may be paid
32
at any time prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for project under
construction at the time this amendment takes effect.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
J. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting accessories on private property, including the
lighting of signs, shall be of such type and location and have such shading as will prevent
the source of light from being seen from any adjoining streets and residential properties
and which shall prevent objectionable glare observable from such streets or properties.
K. Solar energy collectors.
1. Installation of solar energy collectors, other than for one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board, which shall take into
account the needs of energy conservation.
2. Access to sunlight for present and potential solar energy systems, both on- and offsite, as well as building siting, orientation and landscaping, shall be considered by
all approving agencies as part of their review of any application.
3. New construction on any lot which would block access to sunlight between the
hours of 9: 00 a. m. and 3: 00 p.m., Eastern standard time, for existing approved
solar energy collectors or for solar energy collectors for which a permit has been
issued is prohibited except by permission from the Board of Appeals on a showing
that other arrangements are infeasible or impractical or that the degree of blocking
is negligible.
L. Sale of adult entertainment merchandise in a non -adult entertainment store. The sale,
rental or offer for any consideration of adult entertainment merchandise as defined by
Chapter 267 - Article VI may be permitted in any otherwise legally established store or
shop subject to the following conditions:
Added 2- 3- 1999]
1. The total floor space used for display of the adult entertainment merchandise shall
not exceed 20 square feet or 25% of the total stock of merchandise offered for sale,
rental or other consideration to the public, whichever is less.
2. All adult entertainment merchandise shall be displayed out of view from persons
under the age of 18, and access by persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited
at all times.
3. No displays of adult entertainment merchandise shall be permitted to be visible
from any public right-of-way.
4. All adult entertainment merchandise shall be sold, rented or otherwise offered for
consideration for off-site use only. Any on-site viewing, reading or listening areas
for adult entertainment merchandise or live performances shall classify the
33
business as an adult entertainment business as defined by Chapter 267 - Article II,
which business shall then be regulated in accordance with all provisions in this
chapter as an adult entertainment business, regardless of the amount of floor space
used for the adult entertainment business.
M. Accessory buildings and structures. The height of an accessory building in any
districts shall be limited to one story with a maximum building height of 12 feet.
Exception: The maximum height of an accessory structure used solely as an accessory
parking facility in a district other than a one-, two- or three-family dwelling district, shall
be permitted to be the same as the permitted height for the district in which it is located if
the structure setbacks comply with the required setbacks of a principal building in such
district.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
N. Exterior walls located three feet or closer from property lines:
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. Exterior wall located three feet or closer from property lines shall be finished on
the exterior side with any type of masonry or concrete materials that does not
require periodical maintenance.
2. Exterior wall located at property line shall be constructed of masonry or concrete
that has at least one finished side on the exterior side of the wall.
O. Storefront obstructions.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. Transparency. Storefront glass shall be transparent. No visual obstruction of a
temporary or permanent nature shall be placed behind a storefront window or door
to obstruct the view of the entire interior space from the public street, or to obstruct
egress. The following features shall constitute a storefront obstruction:
a. Painting, decal, blinds, curtains, etc., placed onto or behind the storefront glass
to make it opaque, translucent or obscured, shall be prohibited.
b. Storage of merchandise, shelves, counters, refrigerators, and other features shall
not be placed within three feet of the storefront. The side of appliances or
display furniture, if facing the storefront, shall be attractively finished.
c. Exception. Window display such as fashion or furniture display shall not be
considered an obstruction when they are attractively and professionally arranged
and do not obstruct the view.
2. Removal of obstructions.
a. Obstructions in existence at the time of adoption of this amendment. Storefront
obstructions which are in existence at the time of adoption of this subsection
34
shall be removed upon written notification by the Commissioner. The
obstructions shall be removed within the time period prescribed below:
1. Temporary obstructions, such as window signs, or movable obstructions,
such as shelved storage of merchandise, shall be removed immediately upon
receipt of written notification.
2. Fixed obstructions, such as appliances with water and waste connection, or
such as fixed counters, shall be removed within six months of written notice.
Fixed obstructions shall be removed under the applicable permit(s).
b. Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the business owner to maintain
the storefront at his/her place of business free of obstruction. A business owner
who fails to maintain the storefront free of obstruction or who fails to comply to
the Commissioner's written notification within the prescribed time shall be in
violation of this chapter.
P. Encroachments.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. No person shall erect, construct or place any building, appurtenance, fixture or
structure connected therewith, in whole or in part, underground, overhead or upon
any street, highway, public lane, alley, public street or right-of-way. Exceptions:
a. Decorative architectural components such as window sills and cornices are
permitted to encroach no more than 18 inches if located more than seven feet
above the adjacent ground.
b. Structures permitted to encroach in accordance with other sections of the City
Code.
2. Existing encroachments. Existing buildings or structures, or parts thereof,
encroaching into the City's right-of-way and constructed under a valid permit
allowing such encroachment, shall be permitted to remain in place as long as they
are in good maintenance and/ or structurally safe and provided that the owner
execute an indemnification agreement with the City. Failure to execute said
indemnification agreement shall be grounds for the removal of the structure( s).
3. Reconstruction and maintenance.
a. Reconstruction of a building or structure, or part thereof, which encroaches into
the City's right-of-way, shall be prohibited.
b. Minor repairs and maintenance of a building or structure, or part thereof, which
encroaches into the City' s right-of-way shall be permitted in accordance with
applicable codes, laws and regulations. Any person seeking such minor repairs
and/or maintenance of an encroaching building or structure, or part thereof, shall
indemnify the City or remove the building or structure or part thereof from
within the City's right-of-way.
35
c. Relief and interpretation. Any application to reconstruct any portion of a
building and/or structure which encroaches within the City's right-of-way shall
be denied in writing by the Department of Buildings. Upon such denial, the
applicant may seek relief of the denial from the City Council.
Article V - Districts
Article V — Section 1. Purposes.
In addition to the general purposes of this chapter as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article I,
the following specific purposes are set forth for residence and nonresidence districts:
A. Residence Districts.
1) To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where safe streets,
wide yards and quiet neighborhoods are of paramount importance.
2) To avoid, as far as possible, commercial traffic and through traffic of all kinds in
residential areas.
3) To encourage a balanced variety of housing types, sizes and densities, consistent with
the character of existing neighborhoods and the provision of adequate open space,
sunlight and air.
4) For the RMF -6. 75 Multifamily Residence District, to provide a medium -density
housing environment that promotes the development of one- and two-family dwellings,
also, for the conversion of large existing dwellings to multifamily use, and encourages
the construction of new multifamily dwellings, not to exceed three units, on sites where
adequate on-site parking and open space can be provided.
5) For all RMF Multifamily Residence Districts, to encourage the development of
dwelling units suitable for a variety of household sizes at higher densities which will
allow for the construction of such housing at a relatively more moderate cost. Such
districts are generally intended to be located in convenient proximity to employment,
shopping, transportation and community facilities. Adequate on- site parking and open
space must be provided.
6) For the H Hospital District, to ensure the development and continuation of hospital
and medical -related facilities needed to serve the City's health care needs.
B. Mix -Used districts.
1) For the MVW Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Form -Based District, to provide
a diverse array of uses in a compatible manner, with higher densities oriented around the
Mount Vernon West train station while employing form -based zoning techniques, to
repair, stabilize and revitalize the areas urban fabric which will position the area for
36
concentrated investment, minimize auto -dependency, enhance pedestrian movement and
establish a vibrant streetscape.
C. Nonresidence districts.
1) For the NB Neighborhood Business District, to serve the retail and service
convenience shopping needs of residential areas and to provide the opportunity for
the continuation of pedestrian -oriented retail and service business uses in the City's
residential neighborhoods.
2) For the OB Office Business District, to provide a medium -density office district
which is intended to encourage the development of modern office buildings within
the downtown area of the City.
3) For the DB Downtown Business District, to allow the future growth and orderly
development of the major downtown area in the City with a wide variety of retail,
office and service business uses.
4) For the CB Commercial Business Districts, to provide a wide variety of retail, office
and service business uses in character and scale with existing and planned future
development along some of the major arterial commercial streets of the City.
5) For the LI Landscaped Industrial District, to promote a combination of
manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale storage and other industrial type uses in
areas with good highway access and which have already developed an industrial
character.
6) For the I Industry District, to provide appropriate location and development
standards for more intensive types of industrial development.
D. Special Zoning Districts
1) For the Rl- TH Townhouse Residence District, to promote the development of one -
family attached or detached dwellings on sites where topographic features, landscape
resources, locational characteristics and acreage suggest clustering of buildings as the
most appropriate building type.
2) For the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zoning
District, to provide housing opportunities for senior citizens in locations convenient to
shopping, transportation and community facilities which comprise of superior functional
design, quality of construction, appearance and operational standards.
3) For the Urban Renewal Planned Development, to encourage a predominately
residential mixed use planned unit development of a large tract of land in such manner as
to permit a variety of compatible land uses, encourage flexibility of design and
37
development, to expand the city's tax base and to otherwise promote development in
connection with the stated goals and objectives of the City.
4) For the PUD -2 Planned Unit Development, to encourage flexibility of design and
development of land in such a manner as to minimize negative environmental impacts,
provide for excellence in architectural design of buildings, maximize fiscal benefits for
the City and otherwise promote the most environmentally desirable form of future
development.
5) For the UR -PUD -S4 South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Planned
Unit Development Overlay Zone, to preserve the special character of architecturally and
culturally significant structures while fostering the development of high-rise mixed use
structures within the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Area.
Article V — Section 2. List of use regulations and Schedule of Dimensional
Regulations.
The accompanying list of use regulations (Chapter 267 - Article V) and Schedule of
Dimensional Regulations Editor's Note: The Schedule ofDimensional Regulations is
included at the end of this chapter. list and define the permitted uses of land, buildings
and structures, and the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements to be met in
connection with such uses. All permitted uses are set forth in the list of use regulations by
district. Any use not specifically listed as being permitted shall be deemed to be
prohibited. Only in multifamily and nonresidence districts is more than one permitted
principal use allowed on a single lot.
Article V — Section 3. List of Residence District uses.
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 1999] Residential
A. District R l -7 One -Family Residence. Editor's Note: Former District R- 1 a.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings.
b) Public schools.
c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are
located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
38
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated
by Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
f) Minor accessory structures.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
c) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
d) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
e) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
0 Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
B. District R1- 4. 5 One -Family Residence.[ Editor's Note: Former District R- 11)3
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings.
b) Public schools.
c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are
located.
39
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated
by Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
f) Minor accessory structures.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267
Article VI.
c) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
d) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
e) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
f) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
C. District Rl -3. 6 One -Family Residence. Editor's Note: Former District R- 1 c.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings.
b) Public schools.
c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
40
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are
located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated
by Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
f) Minor accessory structures.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267
Article VI.
c) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
d) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
e) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
f) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
D. District R2-4. 5 Two -Family Residence. Editor's Note: Former District R- 2.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings as regulated in the R1- 4.5 Residence District.
b) Attached dwelling units.
c) Two-family dwellings.
41
d) Public schools.
e) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are
located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated
by Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
f) Minor accessory structures.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Day-care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
e) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
f) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
g) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
h) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
42
E. District RMF -6.75 Multifamily Residence. Editor's Note: Former District R-3.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings as regulated in the R1- 4. 5 Residence District.
b) Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated in the
R2- 4.5 District.
c) Multifamily dwellings, not to exceed three units per building.
d) Public schools.
e) Community purpose buildings.
0 Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are
located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated
by Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
f) Minor accessory structures.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Day-care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
43
e) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
0 Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the
lot on which it is located.
g) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
h) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
F. District RMF -10 Multifamily Residence. Editor's Note: Former District A- 1.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings as regulated in the R1- 4.5 Residence District.
b) Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated in the
R2-4.5 District.
c) Multifamily dwellings containing no more than three units per building
as regulated in the R-6.75 Residence District.
d) Multifamily dwellings.
e) Public schools.
t) Community purpose buildings.
g) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory
to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
44
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Day- care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
e) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
f) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
g) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
h) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by Chapter
267 - Article VI.
i) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
VI.
G. District RMF -15 Multifamily Residence. Editor's Note: Formerly District A- 2.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings as regulated in the R 1- 4. 5 Residence District.
b) Attached dwelling units and two-family dwellings as regulated in the R2-
4.5 Residence District.
c) Multifamily dwellings containing no more than three units per building as
regulated in the R- 6.75 Residence District.
d) Multifamily dwellings.
e) Public schools.
45
f) Community purpose buildings.
g) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory
to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Day- care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
e) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
VI.
0 Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
g) Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by Chapter
267 - Article VI.
h) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
i) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
46
H. District H Hospital. Editor's Note: Former District P-1.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Hospital and related facilities, including nursing schools and housing for
staff members, nurses and interns, resident physicians, researchers,
employees, faculty members, students and their immediate families;
sanitariums for noncontagious diseases; private proprietary nursing
homes; and private proprietary convalescent homes.
b) Medical and dental offices.
c) Medical -care facilities.
d) Medical laboratories.
e) One -family dwellings as regulated in the RI -4.5 Residence District.
f) Attached dwelling units, two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings
as permitted and regulated in the RMF -10 Residence District.
g) Public schools.
h) Community purpose buildings.
i) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory
to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home
occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
47
b) Day-care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
e) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot
on which it is located.
f) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
g) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
h) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
VI.
Article V — Section 3. Additional regulations for Residence Districts.
A. Office in residence of a professional person and customary home occupations. In
districts where permitted, one office of a professional person or a customary home
occupation may be established in a dwelling unit subject to the following:
1) Any such use must be located entirely within the dwelling unit of its practitioner and
not elsewhere on the lot or in any accessory building or structure.
2) No signs shall be permitted for a customary home occupation. For the office of a
professional person, one sign meeting the requirements of Chapter 267 - Article
XIII, Sign Ordinance shall be permitted.
3) The individual involved in such use must be domiciled in the dwelling unit.
4) One nonresident partner, associate or employee shall be permitted to work on the
premises, provided that site plan approval in accordance with Article VII of this
chapter has been obtained or, in the case of an existing structure, such use has been
registered with the Building Department.
5) No more than 25% of the floor area of one story of the dwelling unit or 500 square
feet, whichever is less, shall be used for such purposes.
6) There may be only one patient, client, customer or any other kind of visitor being
served at any one time.
48
Article V - Section 4. List of Mix -Used District.
A. Mount Vernon West TOD
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
a. Overview:
The Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zone ( designated as MVW) has been established
to implement the vision for the area realized during the development of the Mount Vernon
Comprehensive Plan, and through the efforts of the Technical Committee for Mount Vernon West and the
Vision Plan process facilitated by the Pace University Law School, Land Use Law Center.
b. Applicability:
The Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zone applies to property designated as MVW on
the City of Mount Vernon Zoning Map, which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Parcels located in the
zone are more specifically known and designated as:
TOD - Hub
164.68- 1056-12
164.68- 1056-11
164. 68- 1056-10
164.67- 1057- 16
164. 67-1057- 13
164. 75- 1057- 1
164. 75- 1057- 2
164. 75- 1057-3
164. 75- 1057-4
164. 75- 1057- 12
164. 75- 1057- 14
164.75- 1057- 5
164. 75- 1057- 6
164. 75- 1057- 7
164. 75-1057- 11
164. 68-1056- 18
164. 68- 1056- 1
164. 68- 1056- 2
164. 68- 1056- 4
164. 68- 1056- 5
164. 68- 1056-6
164. 68- 1056-7
164. 68- 1056-8
164. 68- 1056- 9
164.68- 1058- 10
164. 68- 1058- 1
164. 68- 1058- 2. 1
164. 68- 1058- 2. 2
164. 68-1058-3
164. 75- 1058- 5
164. 75- 1058- 6
164. 75- 1058- 7
164. 75- 1058- 9
164. 68-1073- 1
164. 68- 1073- 2
164. 68- 1073- 3
164.68-1073- 4
164.68- 1073- 28
164.68- 1073- 27
164.68- 1073- 26
164. 68- 1073- 25
164. 68- 1073- 24
TOD - Corridor
164. 60- 1074- 33
164. 60- 1074- 32
164. 60- 1074- 31
164. 60- 1074- 30
164. 60- 1074- 29
164. 60- 1074-35
164. 60- 1074- 28
164. 60- 1074- 27
164. 60- 1074- 26
164. 60- 1074- 25
164. 60- 1074- 24
164. 68- 1074- 23
164. 68- 1074- 21
164. 68- 1074- 22
164. 68- 1074- 20
164. 68- 1074- 19
164. 68- 1074- 18
164. 68- 1074- 17
164. 76- 1061- 1
164. 76- 1061- 23
164. 76- 1061- 24
164. 76- 1061- 25
164. 76- 1061- 26
164. 76- 1062- 1
164.76- 1071- 12
164. 76- 1071- 11
164. 76- 1071- 10
164. 76- 1071-9
164. 76- 1071- 8
164. 76- 1071- 20
164. 76- 1065- 1
164. 76- 1065- 37
164. 76- 1065- 2
164. 76- 1065- 3
164. 76- 1065- 4
164. 76- 1065- 5
164. 76- 1065- 6
TOD - Transition
164. 68- 1072- 1
164. 68- 1072- 27
164. 68- 1072- 26
164. 68- 1072- 25
164. 68- 1072- 24
164. 68- 1072- 23
164. 68- 1072- 22
164. 68- 1072- 21
164. 68- 1072- 20
164. 68- 1072- 19
164. 68- 1072- 18
164. 68- 1072- 17
164. 68- 1072- 29
164. 68- 1072- 16
164. 68- 1072- 30
164. 68- 1072- 2
164. 68- 1072- 3
164. 68- 1072- 4
164. 68- 1072- 5
164. 68- 1072- 6
164. 68- 1072- 7
164. 68- 1072- 8
164. 68- 1072- 9
164. 68- 1072- 10
164. 68- 1072- 11
164.68- 1072- 12
164.76- 1064- 39
164.76- 1064- 38
164.76- 1064- 37
164.76- 1064- 36
164.76- 1064- 35
164. 76- 1064-34
164. 76- 1064- 33
164. 76- 1064- 32
164. 76- 1064- 31
164. 76- 1064- 30
164. 76- 1064- 29
49
164.68- 1073-23
164.68- 1073- 22
164.68- 1073- 21
164.68-1073- 20
164.68-1073- 29
164.68- 1073- 34
164.68-1073-
5
164.68-1073-
6
164.68- 1073-
7
164.68- 1073-
8
164.68-1073-
9
164.68-1073- 10
164.68-1073- 11
164.68-1073- 12
164.68-1073- 13
164.68-1073- 14
164.68- 1073- 15
164.68- 1073-16
164.68- 1073-17
164.68- 1073- 18
164.68-1073- 19
164.68-1072- 15
164.68-1072- 28
164.68-1072- 14
164.68-1072- 13
164.76- 1064-
1
164.76- 1064-
2
164.68- 1063-
1
164.76- 1063-26
164.76- 1063-25
164.76- 1063-24
164.76- 1063-23
164.76- 1063- 22
164.76- 1063- 15
164.76- 1063- 18
164.68-1063-
2
164. 68-1063-
3
164.68-1063-
4
164.68- 1063- 29
164.68- 1063-
5
164.76- 1063-
6
164.76- 1063-
7
164.76-1063- 30
164.76- 1063-
8
164.76-1063-
9
164.76-1063- 10
164.76-1063- 11
164.76-1063-31
164.76- 1063-12
164.76- 1063- 13
164.76- 1063- 14
164.76- 1063- 16
164.76- 1063- 17
164.75- 1060-29
164.75- 1060-
1
164.75- 1060-
2
164.75- 1060-
3
164. 75- 1060-
6
164.76-1065-
7
164.76- 1065-
8
164.76- 1070-21
164.76- 1070- 19
164.76- 1070- 18
164.76- 1066-
1
164.76- 1066-
2
164.76- 1066-
3
164.76- 1066-
4
164.76- 1066-
5
164.76-1066-
6
164.76- 1066-
7
164.76- 1069- 15
164.76- 1069- 14
164. 76- 1069- 13
164. 76- 1069- 11
165. 69- 1069- 10
165. 69-1069-
8
165. 69- 1069-
7
164.76- 1067-
1
164.76- 1067-
3
164.76- 1067-
4
164.76- 1067-
5
164.76- 1067-
6
165.69- 1068-
1
165.69- 1068-
2
165.69- 1068-
3
165. 69- 1068-
4
165. 69- 1068-
5
165. 69- 1068-
6
164.76- 1064- 28
164.76- 1064-27
164.76- 1064- 26
164.76- 1064- 25
164.76- 1064- 24
164.76- 1064- 23
164.76- 1064- 22
164.76- 1064- 21
164.76- 1064- 20
164.76- 1064- 19
164.76- 1064- 17
164.76- 1064-
3
164.76- 1064-
4
164.76- 1064-
5
164. 76- 1064-
6
164. 76- 1064-
7
164. 76-1064-
8
164.76-1064-
9
164.76- 1064- 10
164.76- 1064- 11
164.76- 1064- 12
164.76- 1064- 13
164.76- 1064- 14
164.76- 1064- 15
164.76- 1064- 16
164.76- 1064- 44
164. 68- 1071-
1
164. 68- 1071- 17
164.68- 1071- 16
164.68- 1071- 15
164.68- 1071- 14
164. 68- 1071- 13
164. 76- 1065- 36
164. 76- 1065- 35
164. 76-1065- 34
164. 76-1065- 33
164.76- 1065- 32
164.76- 1065- 31
164.76- 1065- 30
164.76- 1065- 29
164.76- 1065- 28
164. 76- 1065- 27
164. 76- 1065- 26
50
c. Purpose & Intent:
The MVW zoning district provides for a diverse array of uses ( industrial, commercial and residential) in a
compatible manner, oriented around the Mount Vernon West train station. Specifically, the MVW zone
provides for:
i. Higher density residential development in close proximity to the Mount Vernon West train
station and other modes of public transit.
ii. The physical integration and coordination of diverse land uses.
iii. Development that is maximally transit supportive.
iv. The creation of a pedestrian -friendly environment.
v. The provision of an alternative to traditional development that emphasizes mixed -uses.
vi. Reduction of auto dependency and roadway congestion by locating multiple destinations and
trip ends within walking distance of one another.
vii. Reduce total vehicle miles traveled and regional greenhouse gas emissions.
viii. Repair, stabilize and revitalize the areas urban fabric.
ix. Facilitate new development and redevelopment that will create new jobs.
x. Position the area as a concentrated investment area.
xi. Strengthen the Mount Vernon gateway to Mount Vernon from Yonkers.
xii. Emphasize, support and facilitate high quality building design, streetscape and public realm
improvements.
d. Organization:
The MVW zone utilizes the concept of a Form Based Code to set guidelines for development. A form -based
code creates a predictable public realm by establishing guidelines and regulations that focus primarily on
the physical form of the environment, with a lesser focus on specific land -use requirements.
Form based codes address the relationships between building facades and the public realm, the form and
mass of buildings in relation to one another, and the scale and types of streets and blocks. The guidelines
and standards in this form -based code are presented in the narrative language of the code, but also
graphically, to describe the character of anticipated development. This is in contrast to conventional
zoning' s focus on the management and segregation of land uses.
Section 2 presents the Regulating Plan, which defines development areas within the MVW boundaries,
Section 3 identifies the 8 allowable building types in the MVW district and Section 4 indicates where the
51
building types are and are not permitted. Section 5 identifies the standards for building design,
configuration and placement. Section 6 presents the table of permitted uses. Section 7 identifies the
parking requirements for the MVW district. Section 8 presents design guidelines, in which all projects are
expected to comply. Finally, Section 9 sets forth the administrative procedures in which all projects in the
MVW district must comply.
e. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
The long range planning vision and strategy of the City of Mount Vernon has identified the Mount Vernon
West area as a " Higher Intensity Planning Area." This designation signifies a district where higher
development density is targeted and encouraged. Through the efforts of the Technical Committee for
Mount Vernon West, a Vision Plan was developed that provided the foundation upon which the Mount
Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zoning Ordinance is constructed.
The Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zoning Ordinance is therefore fully consistent with
long range planning vision and strategy for the Mount Vernon West area, and represents the
implementation of that vision.
f. Planning Principles
The Mount Vernon West Transit Oriented Development Zoning Ordinance establishes an efficient,
effective and equitable regulatory and procedural code for the use of land in the Mount Vernon West area,
subject to the following policies:
i. The area should include a framework of transit, pedestrian and bicycle systems that provide
alternatives to the automobile.
ii. Development in the area should be compact, pedestrian oriented and contain a mix of uses.
iii. The development of isolated, single -use buildings and sites should be avoided.
iv. The ordinary activities of daily living should be provided within walking distance of residential
uses, allowing for independence from the automobile.
v. The layout and configuration of development should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce
the length of automobile trips.
vi. Within the area, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate
diverse ages and incomes.
vii. Appropriate land uses and densities should be provided within walking distance to the train
station.
viii. Civic, institutional and commercial activity should be embedded throughout the area, and not
isolated into remote single -use complexes.
ix. A range of open space, including parks, squares, plazas, and playgrounds, should be distributed
throughout the area.
x. Buildings, landscaping and other amenities should contribute to the physical definition of
thoroughfares as public places.
xi. Development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting pedestrians and
the spatial form of public areas.
52
xii. The design of buildings and sites should reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of
accessibility.
xiii. Architecture and landscape design should reflect the history and traditions, topography,
climate and building practices of the City of Mount Vernon.
xiv. Public gathering places should be provided as locations that reinforce community identity and
support self-government.
xv. The preservation and renewal of historic buildings, or the incorporation of historical
architectural elements characteristic of the City of Mount Vernon, should be facilitated, to
affirm the continuity and evolution of society.
Non -Conforming Uses and Buildings
The MVW district replaces zoning that was predominantly industrial. While many of the industrial uses
have left the area, and a number of properties in the area are underutilized, viable industrial uses do
remain in places.
The MVW zoning provides for the addition of a broad array of uses, including high- density residential uses.
Facilitating the coexistence of diverse land uses represents one of the challenges in the MVW district.
The regulations governing non -conforming uses set forth in Section 267- 10 remain applicable to uses and
buildings in the MVW district. However, all legal pre-existing, non -conforming uses are encouraged to
comply with the design guidelines established herein, to assure that the area evolves in a manner that is
consistent with the goals and objectives of the City
53
2. REGULATING PLAN
The Regulating Plan divides the MVW zone into five separate areas of development intensity. This approach
differs from conventional zoning that typically divides a city into zones that rigidly segregate residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional uses, thereby emphasizing a dependence on automobiles to
functionally connect uses. The use of zones based on development intensity ( instead of land uses) provides a
new spatial basis for regulating development that recognizes the interrelationships between uses. The three
zones also provide an effective vehicle to implement the City' s urban design objectives while fostering
attractive and sympathetic interfaces between zones.
The following zones are established within the MVW district:
MVW- H MVW Hub
MVW- H( NC) MVW Hub — Non -Commercial
MVW-C MVW Corridor
MVW-T MVW Transition
MVW-T( NC) MVW Transition — Non -Commercial
a. MVW Hub (MVW-H)
The MVW Hub zone is designed to accommodate the highest intensity of development within the MVW
district. Development in this zone shall require building entrances to be located within 1, 500 feet of the
Mount Vernon West train station, and shall rely on the public transit opportunities available at the station,
to minimize reliance on individual passenger vehicles, parking demands and associated traffic impacts. The
MVW- H zone also allows for the greatest diversity of land uses. As a result, building design and
architectural quality is a priority. Integrating diverse land uses requires careful attention to the interface
between buildings and uses, pedestrian connections, the provision of parking, building services and the
operational requirements of various uses.
b. MVW Hub — Non -Commercial ( MVW- H( NC))
The MVW Hub — Non -Commercial zone is located along north side of North Terrace Avenue, between
Mount Vernon Avenue and Grove Street. It includes all of the attributes of the MVW- H zone, except
commercial uses are prohibited. This allows for an appropriate juxtaposition between the existing
residential uses on the east side of North Terrace Avenue with potential new development in the MVW-H
zone.
c. MVW Corridor (MVW-C)
The MVW Corridor zone provides the physical link between the MVW Hub and the downtown. This
corridor provides the gateway into the Mount Vernon from Yonkers and anchors the western edge of the
downtown at West Lincoln Avenue.
The emphasis in this area is on retail, retail service and restaurant uses along the ground floor of the
buildings lining the corridor, to create an economically vibrant and bustling commercial and mixed- use
area that will unite the MVW Hub with the downtown.
d. MVW Transition ( MVW-T)
The MVW Transition zone lies to the east of the MVW Hub and flanks the MVW Corridor zones. This area
offers the potential for residential redevelopment at increased densities. Redevelopment will likely require
the assembly of parcels. The MVW-T zone will provide for a logical and gradual transition from the higher
densities of development permitted in the MVW Hub, and the existing lower density development situated
to the east.
e. MVW Transition — Non -Commercial ( MVW-T( NC))
The MVW Transition — Non -Commercial zone is located on the west side of North Terrace Avenue,
between Mount Vernon Avenue and Oak Street. It includes all of the attributes of the MVW- T zone, but it
extends into the MVW- H area to create a broader non- commercial buffer between new development in
the MVW- H and the existing residences located to the east.
54
Mount Vernon
Troin Stork)
1
Elm 17
7i
t —
Feet
125 250 500 750 1, 000
I
I I
1
Legend
MVW- H - Hub
MVW-H - Density Bonus Area
MVW- H( NC) - Hub - Non- Commercial
MVW- C - Corridor
MVW- T - Transition
MVW- T(NC) Transition -Non -Commercial
55
3. ALLOWABLE BUILDING TYPES
This section establishes and defines the building types permitted in the MVW Zoning District to ensure that
proposed development is consistent with the goals for building form, physical character, land use and aesthetic
quality.
UIQ:'' 11111
Mixed -Use Building One -Story Commercial
General Commercial
A building that supports ground floor A one - story, large format building A building type that accommodates
commercial use, with upper story that accommodates a variety of retail, office or other commercial
residential or office uses. commercial uses
uses.
p,
j0
Tower on Podium
Civic Building Multi -Family Apartment Multi -story apartment building
A building that accommodates civic,
institutional or public uses
Three or more dwelling units
vertically and horizontally integrated constructed containing off- atopstreeta podium parking
wrapped by ground level
commercial uses
r
1.4,• k4, 4" A
Townhouse Detached Dwelling
Three or more dwelling units where Single or two-family dwelling units
each unit is separated vertically by a
party wall
on an individual lot with yards on all
sides
56
4. PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES BY DISTRICT
Building types are allowed by district, as set forth below:
Permitted Building Types by District
Building Type MVW- H MVW- H( NC) MVW- C MVW-T MVW-T( NC)
Mixed Use Building
P N P N N
1< il
One Story Commercial
N N P N N
5.--
General Commercial
P N P N N
Civic Building
P N P N N
Multi -Family Apartment
N P N F
Tower on Podium
P P N N P
4itr, ,,,,fio
1 own house
N N N F.' P
Detached Dwelling
N N N P 2
57
Section 5 - Building Type Regulations
5. BUILDING TYPE REGULATIONS
A. Mixed -Use Building
A. Lot
RMF 10; 15
A B
1
E
c
D
Building Setbacks
i
B
A
C
Lot Dimensions
D — Building along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
Parking Setbacks
A - Lot area ( min)
F — Side street 10'
5, 000 SF
B — Lot width ( min)
H — Building ( max) 60%
50'
Usable Open Space
D - Usable open space 200 SF/ DU
B. Building Placement
RMF 10; 15
A B
1
E
c
D
Building Setbacks
A — Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
B — Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 30'
Build To Line
C — Building along primary street 70%
Buildings in TOD- C 100%
min % of lot width)
D — Building along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
Parking Setbacks
E — Primary street 30'
F — Side street 10'
G — Parking location Behind building
Coverage
H — Building ( max) 60%
I — Impervious surface (max) 75%
58
A. Mixed Use Building
C. Height and Mass
t
F
E
A
G
D
0
B
Building Height
A— Building height 5 stories/ 60'
Story Height
Transparency
B — Ground story height
floor to ceiling (min)
13'
C — Upper story height
floor to ceiling ( min)
9'
Building Mass
C — Blank wall length,
primary street ( max)
D — Max length of upper story
street -facing wall without offset
75'
E — Upper story street -facing wall
offset depth (min)
4'
F — Upper story street facing wall
offset length (min)
8'
G — Building length, street facing
facade ( max)
175'
D. Activation
fir. t
t
E 44, '
Transparency
A — Ground story, primary street
facade ( min)
60%
B — Ground story, side street
facade (min)
40%
C — Blank wall length,
primary street ( max)
30'
D — Blank wall length,
side street (max)
40'
Functional Entries
E — Functional entries ( min) 70'
F — Area of garage or service bay
openings along street -wall ( max)
20%
Permitted Building Elements
Porch No
Stoop No
Balcony Yes
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
59
B. General Commercial
B. General Commerci
5
B
A
c
A - Lot area ( min) 5, 000 SF
B — Lot width (min) 50'
E
C
A g
D
RMF - 10; 1s
F
A— Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
B — Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 30'
C — Building along primary street 70%
Buildings in TOD- C 100%
min % of lot width)
D — Building along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
E — Primary street 30'
F — Side street 10'
G — Parking location Behind building
H — Building ( max) 60%
I — Impervious surface (max) 80%
60
B. General Commercial
A — Building height 4 stories/ 50'
Story',
B — Ground story height
floor to ceiling (min)
10'
C — Upper story height
floor to ceiling (min)
9'
D — Max length of upper story 75'
street -facing wall without offset
E — Upper story street -facing wall
offset depth (min)
4'
F — Upper story street facing wall
offset length (min)
8'
G — Building length, street facing
facade (max)
175'
A — Ground story, primary street 60%
facade ( min)
B — Ground story, side street
facade (min)
20%
C — Blank wall length,
primary street (max)
35'
D — Blank wall length,
side street ( max)
Tonal Entries
E — Functional entries ( min)
40'
80'
F — Area of garage or service bay 20%
openings along street -wall ( max)
Porch No
Stoop No
Balcony Yes
Gallery No
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
61
C. One -Story Commercial
A. Lot
A
B C
Lot Dimensions
A - Lot area ( min) 5, 000 SF
B — Lot width (min) 50'
8. Building Placement
A R RMF - 10715
F
Building Setbacks
A — Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
B — Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 20'
Build To Line
C — Building along primary street 70%
Buildings in TOD- C
min % of lot width)
100%
D — Building along side street
min % of lot depth)
35%
Parking Setbacks
E — Primary street 30'
F — Side street 10'
G — Parking location Behind building
Coverage
H — Building ( max) 75%
I — Impervious surface ( max) 90%
62
C. One -Story Commercial
C. Height and Mass
e
c 11100, c
Building Height
A — Building height 1 story/ 25'
Story Height
B — Ground story height
floor to ceiling (min)
Building Mass
C — Max length of street -facing
wall without offset
13'
65'
D — Street -facing wall offset
depth ( min)
4'
F — Street facing wall offset
length (min)
8'
G — Building length, street facing 175'
facade (max)
D. Activation
Transparency
A — Primary street facade min) 60%
B — Side street facade ( min) 20%
C — Blank wall length,
primary street (max)
30'
D — Blank wall length,
side street (max)
Functional Entries
E — Functional entries ( min)
40'
70'
F — Area of garage or service bay 20%
openings along street -wall ( max)
Permitted Building Elements
Porch No
Stoop No
Balcony No
Gallery Yes
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
63
D. Tower on Podium
A. Lot
RMF - 10; 15
A B
E
H F
C
D
Building Setbacks
B
A
D
c
Lot Dimensions
Build To Line
C - Podium along primary street 70%
min % of lot width)
A - Lot area ( min)
D - Podium along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
15, 000 SF
B- Lot width (min)
E - Primary street 30'
100'
Usable Open Space
G - Surface parking location Behind building
H - Parking Garage Same as
podium
D - Usable open space
Coverage
130 SF/ DU
B. Building Placement
RMF - 10; 15
A B
E
H F
C
D
Building Setbacks
A - Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
B - Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 20'
Build To Line
C - Podium along primary street 70%
min % of lot width)
D - Podium along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
Parking Setbacks
E - Primary street 30'
F - Side street 10'
G - Surface parking location Behind building
H - Parking Garage Same as
podium
Coverage
H - Principal Building ( max) 85%
Impervious surface (max) 100 %
provided open space is
provided on podium)
64
D. Tower on Podium
C. Height and Mass
A
E
D
c
B
Building Height
A—Building height (+ podium) 15 stories/ 150' a)
Story Height
B — Ground story height 11'
floor to ceiling (min)
C — Upper story height 7' 6"
floor to ceiling (min)
Building Mass
D — Max length of ground floor 75'
street -facing wall without offset
E — Ground floor street -facing wall 5'
Offset depth ( min)
F — Ground floor street -facing wall 10'
offset width
G — Max length of upper floor 45'
Street -facing wall without offset or J
H — Upper story street -facing wall 4'
offset depth ( min)
I — Upper story street facing wall 8'
offset width (min)
1 — If G is not met, provide an architectural element that
changes the facade plane, a minimum of 10' in width.
Parking Garage Storefront Wrap
K — Ground floor primary street Required
D. Activation
Transparency
A — Ground story, primary street
facade ( min length)
60%
8 — Ground story, side street
facade ( min)
20%
E — Podium blank wall length,
primary street (max)
30'
F — Podium blank wall length,
side street (max)
40'
Functional Entries
G — Functional entries (min) 90'
H — Area of garage or service bay
openings along street -wall ( max)
20%
Permitted Building Elements
Porch Yes
Stoop Yes
Balcony Yes
Gallery Yes
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
1) Maximum building height may be extended to 20
stories per density bonus provision of Section 7.
65
E. Civic Building
A. Lot
B RMF 10/ 15
C
D
F E
G
n
B
A
C
D — Building along primary street 50%
Buildings in TOD- C 100%
min % of lot width)
E — Building along side street 30%
min % of lot depth)
A - Lot area ( min)
G — Side street 10'
5, 000 SF
B — Lot width (min)
I — Building ( max) 60%
50'
B. Building Placement
B RMF 10/ 15
C
D
F E
G
A — Front yard 25'
B — Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
C — Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 30'
D — Building along primary street 50%
Buildings in TOD- C 100%
min % of lot width)
E — Building along side street 30%
min % of lot depth)
P *} R!!!
F — Primary street 10'
G — Side street 10'
H — Parking location Behind building
I — Building ( max) 60%
1 — Impervious surface (max) 80%
66
E. Civic Building
Vii0
A
Building
A — Building height 3 stories/ 40'
A — Ground story, primary street 60%
facade (min)
B — Ground story, side street 40%
facade ( min)
C — Blank wall length, 30'
primary street (max)
D — Blank wall length, 40'
side street (max)
E — Functional entries (min) 70'
F — Area of garage or service bay 20%
openings along street -wall ( max)
Permitted Building Elements ,;
Porch Yes
Stoop Yes
Balcony Yes
Gallery Yes
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
67
F. Multi -Family Apartment
A. Lot
4 iv.
A
B C
Lot Dimensions
A - Lot area ( min) 7, 500 SF
B — Lot width (min) 75'
Usable Open Space
D — Usable open space 200 SF/ DU
B. Building Placement
B MI u; :.
C
4
1
D `.
E
F
Building Setbacks
A — Front yard 20'
B — Common lot line 0' or 10' ( if provided)
C — Lot line abutting RMF -10/ 15 30'
Build To Line
D — Building along primary street 70%
min % of lot width)
E — Building along side street 35%
min % of lot depth)
Otieldhitithadis
F — Primary street 30'
G — Side street 10'
H — Surface parking location Behind building
I — Parking Garage Same as
principal bldg
Coverage
J — Building ( max) 60%
K — Impervious surface ( max) 70%
68
F. Multi -Family Apartment
C. Height and Mass
i
F
lc ..
E
D ' B
G
Building Height
A — Building height 6 stones/ 70'
Story Height
B — Ground story height 10'
floor to ceiling ( min)
C — Upper story height 9'
floor to ceiling (min)
Building Mass
D — Max length of upper story 75'
street -facing wall without offset
E — Upper story street -facing wall 4'
offset depth ( min)
F — Upper story street facing wall 8'
offset length ( min)
G — Building length, street facing 175'
facade (max)
D. Activation
f
C
a* f.
i
it 1
0.a :
Oy® 3n
Transparency
H
A — Ground story, primary street 20%
facade ( min)
B — Ground story, side street 20%
facade (min)
C — Upper story, primary street 35%
facade (min)
D — Upper story, side street 45%
facade ( min)
E — Blank wall length, 40'
primary street (max)
F — Blank wall length, 50'
side street ( max)
Functional Entries
G — Functional entries (min) 100'
H — Area of garage or service bay 20%
openings along street -wall ( max)
Permitted Building Elements
Porch Yes
Stoop Yes
Balcony Yes
Gallery No
Awning/ Canopy Yes
Forecourt Yes
69
G. Townhouse
A. Lot
s , 44A
6 c
Lot Dimensions
A - Lot area ( min) 40, 000 SF
B — Lot width (min) 150'
Usable Open Space
D — Usable open space 200 SF/ DU
B. Building Placement
C
c, A
G
E \.
B
Building Setbacks
A — Front yard 25'
B — Side yard 15'
C — Rear yard 30'
D — Spacing between buildings / 2 height
of end wall
Build To Line
E — Building along primary street 70%
min % of lot width)
Parking Setbacks
F — Parking location Behind building
and garages.
Coverage
G — Building ( max) 40%
H — Impervious surface (max) 60%
70
G. Townhouse
C. Height and Mass
a
8 '`'.
r ' „ ,'` P ', .
C
4,:-
S';
fi,,vi
B
x-'
D
Building Height
Functional Entries
A — Principal building height 3 stories/ 40'
B — Accessory building height 1 story/ 15'
Story Height
Gallery No
C — Ground story height
floor to ceiling ( min)
9'
D — Upper story height
floor to ceiling ( min)
9'
Unit Size
E — Width ( min.) 30'
D. Activation
a
8 '`'.
r ' „ ,'` P ', .
C
Transparency
A — Ground story, primary street 20%
facade (min)
B — Blank wall length, 35'
primary street (max)
Functional Entries
C — Functional entries On primary street
Permitted Building Elements
Porch Yes
Stoop Yes
Balcony Yes
Gallery No
Awning/ Canopy No
Forecourt No
71
H. Detached Dwelling
A. Lot
D
5
A 1- A
B
A
D
c
Lot Dimensions
B — Side yard ( one) 2'
A - Lot area ( min)
C — Side yard ( both) 5'
4, 500 SF
B — Lot width (min) 50'
Usable Open Space
E — Parking location Driveway or garage
D — Usable open space 500 SF/ DU
B. Building Placement
D
5
A 1-
B
Building Setbacks
A — Front yard 25'
B — Side yard ( one) 2'
C — Side yard ( both) 5'
0 — Rear yard 20'
Parking Setbacks
E — Parking location Driveway or garage
Coverage
F — Building ( max) 40%
G — Impervious surface ( max) 70%
72
H. Detached Dwelling
C. Height and Mass
A
F
A
Building Height
Porch Yes
A— Principal building height 3 stories/ 35'
B — Accessory building height 1 story/ 15'
D. Activation
A
Functional Entries
A - Functional entries On primary street
Permitted Building Elements
Porch Yes
Stoop Yes
Balcony Yes
Gallery No
Awning/ Canopy No
Forecourt No
73
6. PERMITTED USE TABLE
MVW Zone Permitted Uses
Residential Uses
Use MVW- H MVW-H( NC) MVW-C MVW-T MVW-T( NC)
One Family Dwelling X X P P P
Attached Dwelling& 2- Family Dwellings X X P P P
Multi -Family Dwellings P P P P P
Public/ Civic Uses
Public Schools P P P P P
Community Purpose Building P P P P P
Municipal Uses for Mt Vernon P P P P P
Places of Worship SP SP SP SP SP
Public Utility SP 5P SP SP SP
Use of Government Agencies P P P P P
Parking Garage P P P P P
Commercial Uses
Day Care Center P P P SP SP
Nursery School P P P 5P SP
Domiciliary Care Facility P P P SP 5P
University, College & Private School SP SP SP SP SP
Off -Street Parking Facility 5P SP SP SP X
Business, Professional Offices P X P X X
Retail P X P X X
Personal Services P X P X X
Museums & Art Galleries P X P X X
Medical & Dental Offices P X P X X
Medical Laboratories P X P X X
Business & Trade Schools P X P X X
Retail Laundries & Dry Cleaners P X P X X
Hotels & Motels P X P X X
Motor Vehicle Dealerships 5P X P X X
Bars, Nightclubs, Catering Halls SP X SP X X
Bakeries, Retail P X P X X
Restaurants P X P X X
Restaurants, Carry -Out P X P X X
Restaurants, Fast Food P X P X X
Funeral Parlor X X SP X X
Banks P X P X X
Motor Vehicle Service Stations X X SP X X
Motor Vehicle Rental Agencies X X SP X X
Social Clubs SP X SP X X
Storage of Commercial Vehicles SP X SP X X
Theater & Concert Halls P X P X X
Animal Hospital P X P X X
Wholesale Business SP X X X X
Industrial SP X X X X
Wireless Telecommunications Facility 5P SP SP SP 5P
Accessory Uses
Incidental Customary Accessory Uses P P P P P
P = Permitted
SP = Special Permit
X = Prohibited
74
7. MVW HUB — DENSITY BONUS
For property located in the MVW — Hub area, bounded by the MetroNorth railroad to the west, West Street to
the east and Oak Street to the north, as depicted on the following map, a density bonus may be applied.
i
Density Bonus Area
The City Council may, at its discretion and subject to the standards and considerations set forth below, grant a
density bonus of up to a maximum of 5 stories (for a maximum height of 20 stories) for buildings located in that
portion of the MVW — Hub area described above. A density bonus may be granted in exchange for an applicant
providing one or more of the following off-site civic improvements, amenities or development actions above
and beyond those that are directly or indirectly necessitated by the proposed project itself.
A. Provision, Renovation or Rehabilitation of a Public Open Space Amenity:
By contributing a significant provision, renovation donation and/ or or rehabilitation of a public open
space amenity, to include but not limited to a public park and/ or other public open space, a density
bonus may be granted. The usable open space required for a development, as set forth in the Building
Type Regulations shall not count towards this amenity.
B. Historic Preservation:
Preserving a significant portion of a building( s) or structure( s) identified by the Commissioner of
Planning & Community Development and agreed to by the Planning Board as having historical, cultural
and/ or architectural significance.
C. Brownfield or Derelict Property Remediation: 
Applicants may apply for a density bonus for providing brownfield or derelict property ( as defined in
the City Code) remediation on lots other than those currently before the City for development within
the MVW district, to prepare the property(ies) for either dedication for public use for redevelopment
by a public or private owner. The Building Department shall provide a list of preferred properties for
rehabilitation.
D. Contribution to Non -Site Related Infrastructure Improvements:
Non -site related improvements are considered significant improvements that are not directly needed,
required or related to the subject site development, but may indirectly improve the area.
Infrastructure improvements may include, but are not limited to significant provisions, renovations,
creation, donation, installation and/ or rehabilitation of public solid waste and recycling receptacles,
traffic calming measures, public seating, wider than required sidewalks, specialty pavers or utility
covers as part of district " branding", repaving of a street( s), intersection upgrades ( including street
lights and crosswalks), bus shelters, and storm or sanitary sewer improvements. The City Department
of Public Works may provide recommendations to the Planning Board.
E. Provision of Creating Alternative Off -Site Parking Facilities:
By contributing to the creation of an off-site parking facility, above and beyond the off-street parking
requirements for the proposed development included in this district, which may include, but is not
limited to creation the of a public off-street parking garage, dedicating land for the creation of a public
off-street parking facility or the creation of a privately operated parking facility, a density bonus may
be granted, that would provide additional parking proportionate to the size and scope of the project.
F. Provision of Public Artwork:
Incorporation of publicly accessible artwork including but not limited to sculpture( s), monument( s), or
other permanent aesthetic structure(s) on a site or at a designated off-site location as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board.
G. Provision of Housing for Persons with Disabilities:
For developments with public financing the provision of housing for persons with disabilities must go
above and beyond the requirements set forth in the applicable public financing source, setting aside a
minimum of 10 percent of units for persons with physical disabilities with 2 percent for persons with
sight or hearing disabilities inclusive. Developments with no public financing shall make its best effort
to meet the United States Housing and Urban Development Section 504 minimum requirements for
accessibility or demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board the inability to do so.
In granting the density bonus for the amenities listed above, the City Council shall consider the following
criteria:
The incentives being proposed and the degree to which the proposed amenity is compatible with the
goals and objectives for the MVW Zoning District, and the City' s long range planning strategy.
Set forth in the public record, in detail, the amenities to be provided by the applicant, how those
amenities further the purposes of the MVW Zoning District and the City' s long range planning
strategies, how they preserve and enhance the aesthetic, environmental and/ or historical qualities
and features of this district for the benefit and enjoyment of the entire community and otherwise
promote the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
The associated maintenance schedule and ownership of the proposed amenity( ies).
The density bonus can be successfully integrated into the overall building/ site design without
negatively impacting, detracting and/ or severely departing from an appropriate height, scale, mass,
size, and shape of the proposed structure( s).
76
The density bonus can be successfully integrated into the overall building/ site design without
negatively impacting, detracting and/ or severely departing from an appropriate height, scale, mass
and/ or size of the surrounding area.
Set forth in the public record, in detail, the relationship between the amenities being provided and the
bonus being awarded and shall specify the rationale supporting the proportionality of the amenities to
the bonus. The public benefit improvements provided shall be roughly proportional in nature and
extent to the bonus granted, and their proportionality shall be demonstrated by the applicant and
agreed to by the City Council. The City Council shall make its determination concerning the density
bonus after receipt and consideration of a written recommendation from the Architectural Review
Board and any other department or consultants the City Council deems appropriate given the
additional improvements proposed in seeking a density bonus. Within 30 days of the City Council' s
written request, the Architectural Review Board and any other department or consultant whose input
is requested by the City Council, shall provide their comments as to the advisability and
appropriateness of architecture and/ or aesthetics of the requested density bonus and the proposed
civic improvement( s), amenity(ies) or development action( s). The recommendation of the
Architecture Review Board and any other department or consultant whose input is requested by the
City Council, shall assist the City Council in determining the whether the density bonus is warranted in
that instance and the proportionality of the civic improvements to that of the density bonus
requested. The cost of the improvements need not equal the value of the benefits granted. The
granting or denial of any density bonus shall be solely within the discretion of the City Council using
the criteria set forth in this section.
In the event an application for a zoning variance is made to the Zoning Board of Appeals to increase
the number of stories in excess of the 15 stories permitted via the density bonus, the Zoning Board of
Appeals should, in balancing the equities, consider whether it is practical for the applicant to provide
any of the listed amenities in order to obtain a density bonus in lieu of a variance.
77
8. PARKING REGULATIONS
The MVW district is designed as a " park once" area, wherein people driving to the district are encouraged to
park in one location, and then travel by foot within the area to various other destinations, rather than driving
from one location to another. Design emphasis and priority is given to pedestrian circulation. As a result, the
required parking in the MVW district reflects reduced off-street parking ratios for certain uses. The use of
shared parking is also permitted and encouraged.
The off-street parking requirements established in the Table of Off -Street Parking and Loading Requirements,
set forth in Section 267 — Attachment 3, shall apply, unless modified below, in which case the requirements of
this section shall apply.
a. Off -Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking
Residential Uses
Attached One Family Dwelling Units 1. 75 per dwelling unit
Multifamily Dwellings in TOD- H 0. 7 per dwelling unit containing no more than 2
bedrooms. 0.9 per dwelling unit containing more
than 2 bedrooms
Multifamily Dwellings in TOD- C 1. 0 per dwelling unit containing no more than 2
bedrooms. 1. 25 per dwelling unit containing more
than 2 bedrooms
Multifamily Dwellings in TOD-T 1. 5 per dwelling unit containing no more than 2
bedrooms. 2. 0 per dwelling unit containing more
than 2 bedrooms
Non -Residential Uses
Business, professional or governmental offices 1 per 650 square feet GFA
Retail stores, shops and personal service
establishments
1 per 450 square feet GFA
Restaurants 1 per 5 seats or 1 per 300 square feet of GFA,
whichever is greater
b. Shared Parking
The concept of shared parking, whereby land uses that have different parking demand patterns are
able to use the same parking spaces throughout the day, is particularly useful in a transit oriented
development district, where a large percentage of trips are accommodated via public transit. Public
transit reduces the overall demand for individual passenger vehicle trips and the related demand for
parking.
Shared parking is permitted and encouraged in the MVW district. The City Council, if the application is
subject to review by the City Council or Planning Board, in all other instances, may consider the use of
shared parking, according to the following provisions:
The uses proposing to share parking spaces are different land uses as set forth in the
Permitted Use Table. 
All new development that relies on shared parking must demonstrate the adequacy of the
proposed parking as a result of a capacity being provided that will substantially meet the
intent of the parking requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of maximum
use by residents, patrons, visitors or employees among residences and establishments
sharing such parking, and provided that said approval of such joint use shall be
automatically terminated upon the termination of the operation of any use on which the
shared parking analysis has been based. The analysis of shared parking must be based on
established standards/ methodology.
In cases where shared parking is proposed between adjacent parcels under separate
ownership, irrevocable cross -easements shall be required, to assure the perpetual right to
share the parking spaces.
No more than 50% of the required parking for a particular use shall be provided in a shared
parking arrangement.
79
c. Design and Layout
The design and layout of off-street parking spaces shall comply with the provisions of Section 267- 38,
except as modified herein:
To minimize curb cuts on the roadways in the MVW district, the use of shared driveways are
encouraged, where feasible.
No curb cuts shall be permitted on lots in the TOD- C zone fronting on Mount Vernon Avenue,
Grove Street or Oak Street.
Where feasible, driveways shall front on streets that are less pedestrian intensive.
Off-street parking is encouraged to be as inconspicuous as possible and to incorporate
landscaping and screening to the greatest extent possible to minimize its physical and visual
impact.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be coordinated with the public street system
serving the MVW district in order to avoid conflicts with through -traffic, obstruction to
pedestrian walks and vehicular thoroughfares.
All parking structures shall be designed using compatible or complementary materials to the
principal buildings so that they blend in architecturally. All voids in the structures shall be
architecturally treated or screened, so that lights and vehicles are not individually visible.
Parking structures fronting on MacQuesten Avenue and Mount Vernon Avenue shall be
wrapped by first floor non- residential uses.
Surface parking shall include street lighting that adequately provides for safe vehicle
circulation and public safety, but shall not be excessive. Light poles shall be as low as possible
to achieve the desired purpose, and fixtures shall be shielded and downward directed. The
use of energy efficient luminaries is encouraged.
All pedestrian pathways across and along parking areas shall be appropriately lit with
pedestrian scaled lighting fixtures.
Vehicular access to internal parking structures shall be designed so as not to negatively
impact upon major pedestrian routes. If necessary, provide " fish eye" mirrors or alarms to
manage the interaction between pedestrians and vehicles.
The potential conflicts between truck delivery, vehicular traffic, and pedestrian circulation
shall be considered when designing service entries, roadways, walkways, and pedestrian
entrances. 
To the extent possible, service entrances and loading areas between adjacent buildings shall
be consolidated. Such service entrances shall be separated from walkways and pedestrian
entrances.
In each parking lot containing over 150 parking spaces, at least two of the parking spaces
must be provided with an electric vehicle charging station.
Spaces for handicapped car and van parking must be provided as required by law.
Within a structured parking garage, up to 30% of the total parking spaces provided may be
compact spaces. No more than six compact parking spaces may abut each other. Compact
spaces may be reduced to 7. 5 feet in width. All compact parking spaces must be clearly and
visibly striped and labeled for compact car use only.
All surface parking lots with frontage on a street, shall be screened as follows:
o A minimum 10 -foot wide landscaped area with a continuous row of shrubs must be
provided between the street and the parking lot.
o Shrubs must be a minimum of 18 inches in height when planted and must reach a
minimum size of 36 inches in height within three years of planting.
o Plantings adjacent to driveways shall be designed so as to prevent sight distance
impediments, and therefore may be lower in height then specified above.
o A 36 -inch wall within a minimum five-foot planting strip may be substituted for a
continuous row of shrubs. The design and physical appearance of the wall shall be
subject to the approval of the City.
o Breaks for pedestrian and vehicle access are allowed.
81
To minimize the extent of impervious surfaces and the " heat-island" effect, and to enhance
the aesthetic appearance of surface parking lots, the following landscaping requirements
shall apply:
PenrneW Screening
Terminal Island
Median Island
InWrier Island
Alt
Interior Islands:
o A landscaped interior island shall be provided every 10 parking spaces. Interior
islands shall be distributed evenly throughout the parking area.
o An interior or terminal island shall be a minimum of 8. 5 feet in width and 300
square feet in area.
o All rows of parking must terminate with a landscaped terminal island. No more than
30 parking spaces may located between drive aisles.
o Interior islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to
preserve existing trees.
82
o Interior islands must be installed below the level of the parking lot surface to allow
for runoff capture.
Median Islands:
c A landscape median island shall be provided between every six single parking rows.
o A landscape median island shall be a minimum of five feet wide.
o A median island may also serve as the location for a sidewalk. In such case, the
sidewalk shall be a minimum of six feet wide, and the remaining planting area shall
be no less than five feet wide.
o Median islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to
preserve existing trees.
o Median islands must be installed below the level of the parking lot surface to allow
for runoff capture.
Tree Coverage:
o Each interior island ( and terminal interior island) must include at least one shade
tree.
o In no case can there be less than one tree for every 3, 000 square feet of parking
area.
Off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt bituminous, concrete or other type of
dustless material in accordance with the City of Mount Vernon standards and specifications
and maintained in a smooth, well -graded condition.
83
Pervious or semi -pervious parking area surfacing materials may be provided in accordance
with the City of Mount Vernon standards and specifications. Permitted materials may include
but are not limited to " grasscrete", ring and grid systems used in porous or grid pavers, or
recycled materials such as glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block and concrete. Once
installed, all pervious or semi -pervious parking areas shall be maintained in accordance with
the manufactures specifications.
84
9. DESIGN GUIDELINES
This section of the MVW form based code describes recommended design practices that have been established
to create a high- quality, pedestrian friendly urban environment oriented around the Mount Vernon West train
station. The principles described in this section are not considered mandatory development standards.
However, all projects are strongly encouraged to utilize this section to design projects that meet the purpose
and intent of these guidelines. The ultimate approval of projects will be judged in accordance with these design
practices.
Ground Floor Facades
In the context of a transit oriented district
where pedestrian activity is emphasized, the
design and activation of the ground floor
base is imperative.
The concept of " build -to -lines" assures that
new buildings will front on the public
streetscape. Creating visual interest along
the base of the building, by assuring a high
percentage of transparency in storefront
windows is a design goal. Facade details are
encouraged to vary the building texture,
highlight facade articulation and break- up
the building mass.
The provision of security grates, air
conditioning units or other similar fixtures
on the principal facade must be avoided. 
Architectural Details
Building architecture creates an interesting visual
environment and provides a basis for the overall
character of an area.
Architectural details are those elements that do not
contribute structurally to a building' s construction, but
add visual interest, identify building styles, and often
display superior craftsmanship. They should not be
used however, as a substitute for genuine building
massing and articulation.
New construction should emphasize the use and
application of a high degree of architectural detailing.
Building renovations should strive to preserve unique
or native vernacular details.
86
Corner Building Wraps
Structures located on corner lots should be
designed with multiple front facades to create
a continuous pedestrian friendly and attractive
public realm.
While one side of the building may support the
primary entrance, both sides of the building on
a corner lot must be functionally activated.
Service areas and building mechanical
equipment should not be located along either
building frontage on a corner lot.
87
Functional Entries
To improve the pedestrian experience and to
facilitate the activation of the public realm
surrounding individual buildings, pedestrian
access points ( functional entries) should be
easily identifiable, inviting and accessible and
located along the public frontage as often as
practical. Maximizing the number of functional
entries also helps to create interesting and
diverse street level architecture.
Access ways into the buildings may be into
lobbies, commercial spaces or common areas.
All functional entries should meet ADA
requirements, and be adequately lit.
EBI
1888
11as
rccyccr. Acan
hnm o. Ix+F.' h
88
Building Off -Sets
Building off -sets serve to break- up large
monotonous building facades and increase the
amount of light and openness at the street level.
The MVW Building Type Regulations establish
specific building mass requirements, which
include building off -set provisions. These are
established as minimum requirements. Further
variations to facades are encouraged.
In instances when physical off -sets are
impractical, an architectural element that alters
the buildings facade plane can be utilized.
89
Building Transitions
The transitional edge of the MVW district
requires careful attention to assure appropriate
bulk and height of structures adjacent to lower
density residential neighborhoods.
The massing of taller structures should be
organized in a way that minimizes the apparent
bulk and height of new buildings. This can be
accomplished in three ways — by careful
selection of building types at the zone' s edges,
providing landscape buffers or setbacks and
providing off -sets in taller buildings.
90
Building Materials
The choice of materials used for construction or
renovating buildings affects the way a building
relates to its neighborhood context. When
designed well, a building can contribute to the
continuity of street elevation, as well as
emphasize a site' s unique characteristics.
Buildings constructed with complementary
materials contribute to the interest of a
streetscape. Consequently, a building' s design —
particularly the facade — and exterior materials
can have a significant impact on how the
structure is perceived.
Exterior walls shall be clad in materials that are
durable and are appropriate to the visual
environment and climate. Design flexibility and
creativity is encouraged using ornamentation
that is consistent with the overall character of
the City of Mount Vernon. The use of materials
such as stone, brick and wood is preferred.
91
Windows & Doors
Building windows and doors are not only simply
utilitarian elements, but also provide ornament,
adding materially to the regularity and elegance
of the building.
The dimensions and style of windows and doors
and patterns of fenestration should have a
relationship to the surrounding neighborhood to
create a visual rhythm along the street and a
sense of continuity among structures.
92
Signs
The provision of high quality signage, both as a
communication tool and as a component of
building form is a goal in the MVW district.
Creative and unique sign designs are encouraged
while cluttered and unattractive streetscapes must
be prevented.
In general, effectively designed signs should
respond to the site, landscape, and architectural
design context within which they are located. Signs
should be compatible in scale, proportion, and
design with the building' s facade and its
surroundings. Painted window signs should not be
too large or obscure transparency. Internally
illuminated " sign boxes" should be avoided, as
should excessive lighting of all varieties. Projecting
signs, perpendicular to the sidewalk are effective
when properly scaled for pedestrian use. Graphics
should be well-designed and legible. The use of
neon can be acceptable, when employed properly.
The signage requirements established in Article XIII
shall apply.
BIG STELLA'S
VER N_E
93
Site Lighting
Effective exterior site lighting is an important
element in the overall appearance and operation
of a project.
The quality of light, level of light as measured in
footcandles, and the type of bulb or source
should be carefully addressed. Lighting levels
should not be so intense as to draw attention to
the glow or glare of the project site. The lighting
plan should incorporate current energy-efficient
fixtures such as LED and similar technologies.
Spotlighting or glare from any site lighting should
be shielded from adjacent properties and
directed at a specific object or target area to
prevent light trespass. Exposed bulbs should not
be used.
Building light fixtures should be designed or
selected to be architecturally compatible with the
main structure. The height of Tight poles should
be appropriately scaled to the project.
94
Building Services
To create a more attractive pedestrian friendly
environment, utilitarian features, such as trash
facilities, loading docks, HVAC equipment and
above ground utility infrastructure, should be
out of the public' s view. Ground level services
should be located at the rear of the building, if
possible. A screen wall should be used to
camouflage the service features if optimal
placement does not adequately screen the
features from the public realm. Landscape
treatments may be appropriate to soften the
interface of the equipment.
The location, design and visibility of vehicular
drive-thru facilities should respect the
pedestrian environment, the desired urban
density and the aesthetics of the facility. Drivethru entrance and exit lanes should not be
located on the primary pedestrian
thoroughfares of MacQuesten Parkway or
Mount Vernon Avenue. Drive-thu bays, stacking
areas and queues should be screened from the
public realm.
95
Project Open Spaces
Residential developments and mixed- use
projects require the provision of usable open
space for residents. These amenities increase
light and air to dwelling units, enhance the
aesthetics of projects and the environmental
quality of neighborhoods, promote physical
activity, afford stormwater management
opportunities, increase social interaction
opportunities with neighbors and increase safety
by providing " eyes on the space."
Usable open space can be provided in outdoor
spaces such as courtyards, walkways, rooftops,
balconies and terraces and garden plots. Indoor
facilities such as fitness centers or swimming
pools can also be used to meet the usable open
space requirements of a project.
Unique features such as green roofs and green
or " living" walls are also beneficial open space
amenities.
96
Streetscape
Great streetscapes are the center of public life. They
brand a neighborhood, giving it a cultural identity
and shaping the perceptions of the area. The
elements of the streetscape can create a place of
vitality and activity.
The streetscape is composed of 3 zones; the
Pedestrian Zone, Public Amenity Zone and Frontage
Zone
Sidewalks, a minimum of 15' wide are required
throughout the district. Curb cuts should be
minimized and clearly marked. Street trees with
grates should be provided at 30' intervals. Planters
are encouraged containing seasonal plantings and
flowers. Wayfinding signage should be provided to
assist pedestrian navigation through the area.
Banners and flags can be used to announce special
events and to help brand the district, as can public
art. Street and pedestrian lighting should illuminate
at a level consistent with pedestrian activity.
Benches, seating and other street furniture should
be selectively sited to take advantage of sunshine in
winter and shade in summer. The provision of bus
stops is an essential component to the MVW
district, as are bicycle racks that should be located
at regular intervals.
Pontarhzone
Pc aeon tar Zone
u D t S PwJ.k
PubticAtnenty Zone
97
Traffic Calming
The safety of pedestrians and cyclists in a transit
oriented district is imperative. Traffic calming is
an effective method to minimize conflicts
between motorists and pedestrians.
Traffic calming involves changes in street
alignment, installation of barriers, and other
physical measures to reduce traffic speeds
and/ or cut -through volumes, in the interest of
street safety, livability, and other public
purposes.
Traffic calming measures include speed humps,
speed tables, raised crosswalks, raised
intersections, textured pavement, traffic circles,
roandabouts, chicanes, neck -downs, chokers
among other measures.
98
Pedestrian & Bicycle Circulation
In order to facilitate pedestrian movement
throughout the district, Sidewalks, a minimum of
15' wide are required.
Pedestrian crosswalks across streets should have
pedestrian controls ( walk/ don' t walk signals)
and improved with a different pavement
treatment to differentiate it from the street
paving. Corner clearances should be minimized
neck -downs) so that the distance a pedestrian
must cross the road is reduced. Larger surface
parking lots should provide separate pedestrian
connects through the parking lot.
Bicycle circulation should be accommodated via
the provision of defined bike lanes ( 4' in width)
and signed bike routes. Short-term bike parking
bike racks) in retail areas and long-term bike
parking ( lockers, covered corrals, etc) at
commutation points and businesses, are
necessary. Businesses should provide on- site
shower and changing facilities for employees.
99
Landscaping
Landscaping enhances the visual image of the City,
preserves natural features, improves property
values, and alleviates the impact of noise, traffic,
and visual distraction associated with certain uses.
It aids in energy conservation and promotes urban
wildlife habitats.
Trees and shrubs should be located and spaced to
allow for long-term growth. Evergreen and
deciduous or flowering trees should be used in
combination to create visual interest and to create
a dynamic landscape. Accent planting should be
used around entries and key activity hubs.
Screening should be used to protect less intensive
uses from the impacts of more intrusive uses and to
block views of less desirable features from public
view (trash enclosures, etc.)
The use of native plants is preferred. Xeriscaping is
encouraged to promote water conservation, reduce
maintenance requirements, and decrease flooding.
Recycled grey water should be used for irrigation.
Landscaping should be coordinated with
stormwater management plans, and features
such as rain gardens and planted infiltration
basins should be considered.
100
Sustainability & Green Building
Sustainability and green building refers to the
practice of creating structures using a process
that is environmentally responsible and
resource -efficient throughout a building' s lifecycle; from siting to design, construction,
operation, maintenance, renovation, and
demolition.
Elements include the construction of buildings
that are energy efficient ( high levels of
insulation, high- performance windows) and that
use renewable resources ( passive solar heating,
daylighting), are designed for durability, future
reuse and adaptability, use low maintenance
building materials with low embodied energy.
Building materials should be locally sourced,
with a high percentage of salvaged and recycled
materials. Install high efficiency heating and
cooling equipment, high efficient lights and
appliances and water efficient equipment.
101
Bird Friendly Building Design
Bird collisions with tall buildings have been
identified as a significant issue, particularly
during the spring and fall migrations. Reducing
bird mortality can be accomplished by
employing bird -friendly building techniques.
Three basic design techniques exist to minimize
bird collisions:
Minimize the use of glass
Place glass behind screening
Use glass with properties that reduce
collisions
Design techniques include the use of netting,
screens, grilles shutters and exterior shades;
employing awnings and overhangs; using angled
glass; using patterned glass; using UV patterned
glass; using opaque or translucent glass; using
window films; applying decals or tape or
installing interior shades or blinds. Reference
should be made to the New York City Audubon
Society publication " Bird Friendly Building
Design."
g 4
d. r4 11441
I .,.
A .
t al g
illo.NOMPVII 4
102
10. Administration
The transit oriented, pedestrian friendly zoning standards and requirements set forth herein are designed to provide
specific guidance for the development of property and street enhancements within the MVW district while allowing for
flexibility and creativity in project design in order to foster the appropriate growth of the area in an orderly and desirable
fashion.
A. Project Review & Approval
Three approval tracks are available in the MVW district:
1. No Review:
Under this track, if a project is classified as a Type 11 Action pursuant to the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (" SEQRA"), site plan approval from the Planning Board or the issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the Architectural Review Board is not required. While formal approval is not
required, the Architectural Review Board shall be provided the opportunity to review and comment on the
application. Upon the acceptance of a complete application by the Department of Planning and
Community Development, the application shall be referred to the Architectural Review Board. Within 35
days of its receipt, the Architectural Review Board shall forward their review comments back to the
Department of Planning and Community Development.
In order to effectuate the No Review track, the City must adopt the Type II list contained in Part 617. 5 of
the SEQRA Regulations and must also add to this list the following:
Any single use permitted in the MVW District that is proposed for a single existing lot, with
frontage on and direct access to a street improved to City standards, access to all utilities, is below
all Type 1 thresholds, is not adjacent to any Critical Environmental Area or parkland, is not within
500 feet of any municipal boundary and meets all bulk, design and other requirements of the
MVW District and the zone within which the proposed development is located, without any waiver
or exception (" MVW Type 11").
The City Council may adopt or periodically amend its own Type 11 list, following a public hearing. The list
must then be filed with the Commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, who will maintain the list to serve as a resource for agencies and interested persons. The
Commissioner will provide notice in the Environmental Notice Bulletin of such procedures upon filing. The
City' s Type 11 list may not be less protective of the environment than the statewide Type 11 list established
in Section 617.5 of the SEQRA regulations. Any activities added to the City' s Type 11 list shall only apply in
the City of Mount Vernon, and do not apply to any agencies in other jurisdictions.
2. Expedited Review:
Under this review track, an Expedited Review Committee consisting of the Commissioner of Planning and
Community Development, Commissioner of Buildings and Commissioner of Public Works shall review an
eligible application and shall within 30 days of the receipt of a complete application, provide a
recommendation of approval or denial to the City Council and Architectural Review Board. If the
Committee recommends approval, the application then goes to the City Council and Architectural Review
Board, which shall grant approval, approval with modifications or denial within 35 days, or 65 days in the
event the Applicant is also seeking a density bonus, unless more time is needed due to scheduling conflicts
or in order to comply with other provisions of state or local law, in which case the City Council and
Architectural Review Board shall act as soon as practicable, without the need for a public hearing.
This track is for projects larger than those described in Section 1. above that also fully comply with the
provisions of the MVW zone.
In order for a project to be eligible for Expedited Review, the following conditions shall be met:
103
The development must be wholly located within the MVW- H, MVW- H( NC), MVW- C, MVW-T,
MVW-T( NC) zones.
No waivers or variances are required.
The applicant must document that the project complies with all Findings of the SEQRA
Generic Environmental Impact Statement adopted for the MVW rezoning, and will not result
in any impacts that exceed the thresholds established therein.
The proposed action is classified as either a Type II ( other than an MVW Type 11) or Unlisted
Action pursuant to SEQRA, 6 NYCRR, Part 617. Type I Actions are not eligible for Expedited
Review.
The project does not exceed 249 dwelling units or 99, 000 square feet of non- residential
gross floor area.
3. Full Review:
The Full Review track would be required for all projects that are not eligible for Expedited Review or No
Review, have received a recommendation of a denial by the Expedited Review Committee.
Projects following the Full Review track shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 267 Article VII — Site
Plan Approval and Chapter 10 of the City Charter.
In all instances, applications for full review approval in the MVW district, shall follow the following process:
a. Pre -Application Conference
1. Prior to completion of project design and formal submittal of the required application, an
applicant must schedule a pre -application conference with representatives of the City of Mount
Vernon Department of Planning & Community Development, Building Department and
Department of Public Works to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations.
2. A request for a pre -application conference by a potential applicant must be accompanied by
preliminary project plans and designs and the required filing fee.
3. The representatives of the Department Planning & Community Development, Building
Department and Department of Public Works will inform the applicant of the requirements as
they apply to the proposed project, provide a preliminary list of issues that
will likely be of concern during formal application review, suggest possible modifications to the
project, and identify any technical studies that may be necessary for the review process when a
formal application is submitted.
4. The representatives of the Department of Planning & Community Development, Building
Department and Department of Public Works shall determine which of the three project review
tracks the project must follow, No Review, Expedited Review or Full Review.
104
b. Application Requirements
1. All site plan applications shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 267-
33.
2. In addition to the requirement to submit an Environmental Assessment Form with the application
whether a short or full EAF is required shall be determined at the pre -application conference),
the applicant shall also submit a report documenting whether the project complies with all
Findings of the SEQRA Generic Environmental Impact Statement adopted for the MVW rezoning,
and will not result in any impacts that exceed the thresholds established therein, or in the
alternative, shall specifically identify areas where the project is inconsistent or non -conforming.
c. Completeness Review
1. All applications must be sufficient for processing before the Department of Planning and
Community Development shall accept the application for review.
2. Within 15 calendar days of the receipt of the application, the Department of Planning and
Community Development must notify the applicant in writing whether or not the application is
complete or whether additional information is required.
3. An application for site plan approval and/ or certificate of appropriateness shall be sufficient for
processing when it contains all of the information necessary to decide whether or not the
development as proposed will comply with all of the requirements of the Code.
4. If the Department of Planning and Community Development determines that the application is
not complete and additional information is required, then the applicant shall provide any and all
additional information requested.
5. If the applicant does not submit the additional requested information in a form deemed to be
satisfactory or otherwise complete the application within 45 days after the Department of
Planning and Development has notified the applicant in writing that additional information is
required, the application shall be deemed to be abandoned and the application fee and any other
fee submitted shall be forfeited.
6. This does not prevent any applicant from resubmitting an application if the same has been
abandoned, so long as all of the above -steps are completed.
d. Required Public Hearing
105
1. A duly noticed public hearing shall be held for all applications processed under the Full Review
track.
2. The Expedited Review Committee may require that a public hearing be held for a Site Plan and/ or
Certificate of Appropriateness processed under the Expedited Review track, if community input is
determined to be necessary to allow for a well-informed approval decision to be rendered.
B. Decision Making:
In rendering a decision, the Expedited Review Committee, City Council and/ or Architectural Review Board shall
take into consideration the following criteria:
Compatibility with the City' s long range goals and planning strategy;
The project does not adversely change the neighborhood character;
The project fosters mixed use development patterns within appropriate areas;
The project conceals density through building design where appropriate;
The project will encourage appropriate use of the land in accordance with general purposes, intent and
spirit of this chapter and not detrimental to surrounding property values;
The safety, health, welfare or the order of the City shall not be adversely affected by the proposed use and
its location;
The site is suitable for the location of such use in the City;
That the proposed project is consistent with all Findings of the SEQRA Generic Environmental Impact
Statement adopted for the MVW rezoning.
That there is sufficient roadway access to provide for emergency services while reducing transportation
needs;
106
That proposed landscaping and buffer areas have natural and attractive plantings that are compatible with
the adjacent area and terrain;
That the applicant exhibits the wherewithal to complete the project;
That the project provides for innovative and imaginative approaches to transit oriented development that
does not detract from the existing neighborhood character;
That the proposed project has appropriate height, scale, mass, size, shape and density in relationship to its
location, and consistent with the MVW zoning provisions.
The historical, architectural and/ or cultural significance of the existing site or existing structures is assesses
to address local significance.
That there is the consideration of the staff recommendation.
C. Supplemental Standards:
1. Merging Tax Lots.
A property owner who owns two or more contiguous parcels of land that are subject to the same
mortgages, liens or encumbrances within the MVW Zoning District shall merge all directly or indirectly
associated tax lots for municipal regulation and tax purposes through the Office of the City Tax Assessor.
2. Utility Location.
Utilities shall be installed underground and any above ground equipment shall be located away from
pedestrian street corners. Equipment boxes and vaults should be placed in back of the sidewalk and where
landscaping can minimize or screen their impact. Relocation of provisions for private and public
underground utility systems shall be made, as needed. These requirements may be waived by the Planning
Board in situations where it is determined that the underground installation of utilities is not appropriate
and/ or that adjoining land uses, topographic features or existing vegetation satisfy the same purpose in
terms of minimizing or screening equipment boxes and/ or vaults. The costs of relocating the underground
utility lines shall, where appropriate, be borne by the utility companies and/ or private developers,
pursuant to the appropriate laws, regulations and ordinances.
107
3. Historic Commemoration
Applicants are required to commemorate any/ all historically, culturally, architecturally and/ or
archaeologically significant site( s), as identified by the Department of Planning & Community Development
staff. This commemoration shall include at least, but not limited to one of the following: a monument;
memorial, marker; plaque; mural and/ or other method acceptable to the City. Such commemoration shall
be approved by the Planning Board during site plan approval. The Planning Board shall consider the
following items when rendering its decision regarding historic commemoration:
Location of commemoration;
Ownership of commemoration;
Appropriateness of commemoration;
Maintenance of commemoration;
Durability of materials;
Scale of commemoration; and
Level of design/ craftsmanship incorporated.
4. Interior Construction.
To foster and encourage larger total commercial floor area along the ground floor of structure( s) within the
MVW Zoning District, interior commercial space along the ground floor shall be constructed and/ or
designed to maximize the total amount of usable commercial ground floor area. Accordingly, structural
supports and/ or beams shall be located, placed, installed, constructed and/ or designed to allow the
flexibility of ground floor commercial spaces to be temporarily internally subdivided without affecting the
structural integrity of the overall structure( s) in the event the internal ground floor commercial space must
be recombined for greater marketability purposes.
5. Affordable Housing Unit Location.
In instances where a development includes affordable or workforce housing units, said units shall be fully
integrated into and dispersed throughout the project so as to be indistinguishable from other market rate
units. Affordable or workforce units shall not be isolated, clustered or grouped. Additionally, access to
affordable and workforce housing units shall be provided in a manner similar to all other market rate units,
and shall not be physically segregated. Affordable and workforce housing units shall be designed,
constructed and finished in a manner similar to the other market rate units within the project.
Article V — Section 5. List of Nonresidence District uses.
108
A. District NB Neighborhood Business. Editor's Note: Formerly District B-2.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Public schools.
b) Business, professional or governmental offices.
c) Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail or the performance of customary
personal services.
d) Museums and/or art galleries.
e) Medical and/or dental offices.
f) Medical laboratories.
g) Business and/ or trade schools.
h) Retail laundries or retail dry cleaners.
i) Hotels and motels.
j) Motor vehicle dealerships.
k) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
1) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
m) Bakeries, retail.
n) Restaurants.
o) Restaurants, carry -out.
p) Restaurants, fast-food ( excluding drive -up window service).
q) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
109
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Day-care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Funeral parlors.
e) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
f) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
VI.
g) Banks.
h) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
i) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
j) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
k) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
1) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
m) Social clubs as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
B. District OB Office Business. Editor's Note: Formerly District B- 1.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
b) Medical and/ or dental offices.
c) Hotels.
d) Banks.
e) Restaurants.
f) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
110
g) Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail or the performance of customary
personal services.
h) Medical laboratories.
i) Public schools.
j) Museums and art galleries.
k) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Day- care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
e) Funeral parlors.
f) Theaters and/ or concert halls.
g) Off-street parking facilities.
h) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
i) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
j) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
C. District DB Downtown Business. Editor's Note: Formerly District B-3.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
b) Stores and shops for sales at retail or the performance of customary personal
services.
111
c) Hotels.
d) Bakeries, retail.
e) Restaurants.
f) Restaurants, carry -out.
g) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive -up window service).
h) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
i) Medical and dental offices.
j) Theaters and/ or concert halls.
k) Museums and/or art galleries.
1) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
m) Motor vehicle dealerships.
n) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Day- care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Banks.
e) Funeral parlors.
f) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
g) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
h) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
112
i) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
j) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
k) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
1) Multifamily dwellings regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
D. District CB Commercial Business. Editor's Note: Formerly District B-4.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Hotels and/ or motels.
b) Community purpose buildings.
c) Business, professional or governmental offices.
d) Stores and shops for sales at retail or the performance of customary personal
services.
e) Manufacture and/ or assembly of products for retail sale on the premises only,
provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of any establishment be
so used.
f) Retail laundries or retail dry cleaners.
g) Banks.
h) Bakeries, retail.
i) Restaurants.
j) Restaurants, carry -out.
k) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive -up window service).
I) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
m) The storage of commercial vehicles within fully enclosed buildings.
n) Funeral parlors.
o) Beverage bottling and distribution as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
p) Bowling alleys and billiard halls.
113
q) Printing plants.
r) Medical and/ or dental offices.
s) Medical and/ or dental laboratories.
t) Car washes as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
u) Theaters and/or concert halls.
v) Animal hospitals.
w) Motor vehicle dealerships.
x) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Restaurants, fast-food, with drive -up window service as regulated by Chapter 267
Article VI.
c) Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
d) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
e) Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and distribution in fully
enclosed buildings.
f) Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products, in fully enclosed
buildings, as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Off-street parking facilities. (See Article VIII.)
h) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
i) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
j) Social clubs as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
114
E. District LI -7. 5, LI -15 Landscaped Industrial. Editor's Note: Formerly Districts L -a and L -b.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
b) Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products, in fully enclosed
buildings.
c) Motor vehicle dealerships.
d) Banks.
e) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive -up window service).
f) Restaurants.
g) Funeral parlors.
h) Retail dry cleaning.
i) Animal hospitals.
j) Printing plants.
k) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory to the
permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) Stores and shops for sales at retail, provided that such products are manufactured
or assembled on the premises.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Restaurants, fast-food, with drive -up window service as regulated by Chapter 267
Article VI.
115
c) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
d) Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and distribution, in fully
enclosed buildings.
e) Liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG) distribution points as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article V.
f) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
F. District I Industry.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Business, professional or governmental offices.
b) Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products, in fully enclosed
buildings.
c) Animal hospitals.
d) Car washes.
e) Motor vehicle rental agencies.
f) Motor vehicle dealerships.
g) Banks.
h) Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive -up window service).
i) Restaurants.
j) Printing plants.
k) Beverage bottling and distribution.
1) Wholesale businesses, including storage, warehousing and distribution, in fully
enclosed buildings.
m) Storage of motor vehicles.
n) Storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment and/ or
supplies.
116
o) Trucking terminals and truck trailer storage as regulated by Section 267 - Article
V.
p) Fuel distribution businesses and/ or facilities.
q) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses. Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily
accessory to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth station or dish antennas as regulated by Section 267 - Article VI,
but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Cemeteries.
c) Restaurants, fast-food, with drive -up window service as regulated by Section 267
Article VI.
d) Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
e) Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
f) Motor vehicle body repair shops as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
g) Outdoor storage.
h) LPG distribution points and/or facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
i) Asphalt heating and/or mixing facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
j) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VL
k) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
1) Adult entertainment store, subject to all conditions listed in Chapter 267 - Article
VI.
Added 2- 3- 19991
m) Adult live entertainment business, subject to all conditions listed in Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
Added 2-3- 1999]
117
n) Adult motion picture theater, subject to all conditions listed in Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
Article V — Section 6. Additional regulations for Nonresidence Districts.
A. Bars, nightclubs and catering halls. No bar, nightclub and/or catering establishment shall be
permitted to be established within 200 feet of a building occupied exclusively as a public
school, public housing project, church or other place of worship measured along street lines
between their closest entrances.
B. Nonresidential uses prohibited adjacent to residence districts. Notwithstanding any other
requirements of this chapter, the following nonresidential uses are prohibited on any lot
directly adjoining and/or opposite a residence district:
1) Beverage bottling and/or distribution.
2) Car wash.
3) LPG distribution points and/or facilities.
4) Trucking terminals and truck trailer storage.
Article V — Section 7. List of Special Zoning District uses.
A. District Rl- TH One -Family Townhouse Residence. [ Editor's Note: Formerly District R 4. as
regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V].
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings and attached dwelling units
b) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory to
the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
c) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
d) Customary home occupations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
118
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
b) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
c) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
B. District RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Zone. Editor's Note: Formerly
District A-3 and RMF -SC -25.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Senior Citizen Housing.
a) Senior Residential Health -Care Facility.
b) Assisted Living Residence.
c) Adult Retirement Community.
d) Enriched Housing.
e) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which directly serve the residents of the principal use such as
pharmacies, kitchens, personal services, parking facilities and offices.
b) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory to the
permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by Chapter 267
Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Community Center.
f) Medical and dental offices.
g) Medical -care facilities.
119
h) Public schools.
i) Business, professional or governmental offices.
j) Medical supply stores.
k) Museums and/ or art galleries.
1) Medical laboratories.
m) Business and/or trade schools.
n) Retail laundries and retail dry cleaners.
o) Shops for the performance of customary personal services.
p) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
q) Senior citizen oriented adult day care.
C. District UR -PUD Urban Renewal Planned Unit Development as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article V.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) One -family dwellings and attached dwelling units.
b) Two-family dwellings.
c) Multifamily dwellings.
d) Public schools.
e) Community purpose buildings.
f) Office space for physicians, surgeons and dentists, located within the lobby or
lowest residential story of a multifamily dwelling, limited to not more than 30%
of the total rentable floor area of that story, and subject to all the off-street parking
requirements as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article VIII of this chapter.
g) Business, professional or governmental offices.
h) Hotels.
120
i) Banks.
j) Restaurants.
k) Museums and art galleries.
1) Theaters and/or concert halls.
m) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon.
2) Permitted accessory uses.
a) Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory to
the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
b) The keeping of not more than one roomer in one rooming unit.
c) Swimming pools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
d) Basketball courts, tennis courts and paddle tennis courts as regulated by
Chapter 267 - Article IV, but not in required yard areas.
e) Office in residence of a professional person and customary home occupations
as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
3) Uses allowed by special permit.
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship.
b) Day- care centers.
c) Nursery schools.
d) Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
e) Universities, colleges and private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
f) Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article
VI, but only when accessory to a permitted principal use on the lot on which it is
located.
g) Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
h) Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
121
D. District PUD -2 Planned Unit Development as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
1) Permitted principal uses.
a) Multifamily dwellings
b) Community purpose buildings
c) Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon
d) Business, professional or governmental offices
e) Business incubator space
f) Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail for the performance of
customary personal services
g) Restaurants
h) Universities, colleges and private schools
Permitted Accessory Uses
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory
to the permitted principal use on the lot on which they are located.
Uses Allowed By Special Permit
a) Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship
b) Day- care centers
c) Nursery schools
Article V —Section S. R1 -TM Districts.
A. Eligibility. The minimum parcel size shall be no less than four acres and the maximum parcel
size shall be no greater than 20 acres. Eligible parcels must abut a street with a paved roadway
of such width as shall be deemed appropriate by the City Council after recommendation by the
Planning Board.
B. Size of dwellings. All buildings may have up to four attached dwelling units. No more than
50% of the permitted dwelling units shall be in buildings with a maximum length of 120 feet.
The balance of the permitted units shall be in buildings with a maximum permitted length of
100 feet. Where special topographical and/or environmental conditions, such as steep slopes,
rock out croppings, wetlands, a stand of major trees or a unique ecological resource, would be
122
better protected, the Planning Board may permit an increase in the number of dwelling units
which may be in buildings of four attached units with a maximum length of 120 feet.
C. Recreation facilities. The use of any recreation buildings and structures shall be limited to the
residents of the dwellings in the development and their nonpaying guests. No entertainment,
live or mechanical, or the use of outdoor public address systems shall be permitted.
Article V — Section 9. RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District.
A. Purpose. The City Council determined that due to the rising population of senior citizens
within the City, a provision for such housing is necessary to accommodate this growing
segment of the population while retaining the City' s existing character.
B. Creation of sub areas. In order to effectively carry out the provisions of this section, there are
hereby created and established certain " development intensity areas" which distinguishes the
inclusion of senior citizen housing in the residential areas from the inclusion of senior citizen
housing in the City' s commercial areas. These areas are the Residential Area and Commercial
Corridor Area.
C. Eligibility. The RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District
is an established, unmapped floating overlay zone. Parcels eligible for RMF -SC designation
by the City Council shall be currently zoned RMF -10, RMF -15, CB, DB, OB, NB or H and
located within the area delineated on the " Areas Eligible for RMF -SC Designation Map",
found in Attachments of Section 267 of this code and are listed by section, block and lot as
follows:
123
Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot
165. 46- 1101- 9 164.76- 1064-26 165. 45- 1099- 12 165. 38- 1047- 1
165.46- 1101- 10 164. 76- 1064-27 165.45- 1099- 15 165. 38- 1047- 2
165.46- 1101- 11 164.76- 1064-28 165.45- 1100- 1 165. 38- 1047- 3
165.46- 1101- 12 164.76- 1064-29 165.45- 1100- 2 165. 38- 1047- 4
165. 46- 1101- 13 164.76- 1064- 30 165.45- 1100- 3 165. 38- 1047- 5
164. 68- 1063- 2 164.76- 1064- 31 165.45- 1100-4 165. 38- 1047- 6
164. 68- 1063- 3 164.76- 1064- 32 165.45- 1100- 5 165. 38- 1047-7
164. 68- 1063- 4 164.76- 1064- 33 165. 45- 1100- 6 165. 38- 1047- 8
164. 68- 1063- 5 164.76- 1064- 34 165. 45- 1100-7 165. 38- 1047- 9
164. 76- 1063- 7 164.76- 1064- 35 165.45- 1100-8 165. 38- 1047- 10
164. 76- 1063- 8 164.76- 1064-36 165.45- 1100-9 165. 38- 1047- 11
164.76- 1063- 9 164. 76- 1064-37 165. 45- 1100- 10 165. 38- 1047- 12
164.76- 1063- 10 164. 76- 1064-38 165. 45- 1100- 11 165. 38- 1047- 13
164.76- 1063- 11 164.76- 1064- 39 165. 45- 1100- 12 165. 38- 1047- 14
164.76- 1063- 12 164.76- 1064-44 165.45- 1100- 13 165. 38- 1047- 15
164.76- 1063- 13 164.76- 1065- 1 165. 45- 1100- 14 165. 38- 1047- 16
164.76- 1063- 14 164.76- 1065- 2 165.45- 1100- 15 165. 38- 1047- 17
164.76- 1063- 16 164.76- 1065- 3 165.45- 1100- 16 165. 38- 1047- 18
164. 76- 1063- 17 164.76- 1065- 4 165.45- 1100- 17 165. 38- 1047- 19
164. 68- 1063- 29 164.76- 1065- 5 165.45- 1100- 18 165. 38- 1047- 20
164. 76- 1063- 30 164.76- 1065- 6 165.45- 1100- 19 165. 38- 1047- 21
164.76- 1063- 31 164.76- 1065- 7 165.45- 1100- 20 165. 38- 1048- 1
164.76- 1064- 1 164.76- 1065- 8 165.45- 1100- 21 165. 38- 1048-2
164.76- 1064- 2 164.76- 1065- 9 165.45- 1100- 22 165. 38- 1048-4
164.76- 1064- 3 164.76- 1065- 10 165.45- 1100- 23 165. 38- 1048-5
164.76- 1064- 4 164. 76- 1065- 11 165. 45- 1100- 24 165. 38- 1048-6
164. 76- 1064- 5 164.76- 1065- 12 165. 45- 1100- 26 165. 38- 1048- 8
164. 76- 1064- 6 164.76- 1065- 13 165. 45- 1100-27 165. 37- 1048-9
164.76- 1064- 7 164.76- 1065- 14 165.46- 1101- 1 165. 37- 1048- 10
164. 76- 1064- 8 164.76- 1065- 15 165.46- 1101- 2 165. 37- 1048- 11
164. 76- 1064- 9 164.76- 1065- 16 165.46- 1101- 3 165.22- 1012- 1
164.76- 1064- 10 164.76- 1065- 17 165. 38- 1044- 1 165.22- 1012-3
164. 76- 1064- 11 164.76- 1065- 18 165. 38- 1046- 1 165. 21- 1025- 5
164.76- 1064- 12 164.76- 1065- 19 165. 38- 1046-2 165. 21- 1026- 1
164.76- 1064- 13 164.76- 1065- 20 165. 38- 1046-3 165.21- 1026- 3
164.76- 1064- 14 164.76- 1065- 21 165. 38- 1046-4 165. 21- 1026- 5
164.76- 1064- 15 164.76- 1065- 22 165. 38- 1046- 5 165. 29- 1026- 6
164.76- 1064- 16 164.76- 1065- 23 165. 38- 1046-6 165. 29- 1026- 7
164.76- 1064- 17 164.76- 1065- 26 165. 38- 1046-7 165. 29- 1026- 10
164.76- 1064- 19 164.76- 1065- 27 165. 38- 1046- 8 165. 29- 1026-29
164.76- 1064-20 165. 37- 1096- 31 165. 38- 1046-9 165. 29- 1026-30
164.76- 1064-21 165. 37- 1096- 32 165. 38- 1046- 10 165. 29- 1026- 31
164.76- 1064- 22 165. 37- 1097- 1 165. 38- 1046- 11 165. 29- 1026-32
164.76- 1064- 23 165. 37- 1097- 2 165. 38- 1046- 12 165. 29- 1026-33
164. 76- 1064- 24 165. 37- 1097- 3 165. 38- 1046- 13 165. 29- 1026-36
164. 76- 1064- 25 165. 45- 1099- 11 165. 38- 1046- 14 165. 29- 1026- 37
124
Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot
165. 29- 1026- 42 165. 30- 1030-2 165. 22- 1021- 1 169. 23- 3120- 3
165. 29- 1026- 43 165. 30- 1030-3 165. 22- 1021- 8 169. 23- 3120-40
165. 29- 1026- 44 165. 30- 1030-6 165. 22- 1021- 9 165. 70- 3087-37
165. 21- 1026- 47 165. 30- 1030- 10 165. 30- 1021- 10 165. 70- 3087-38
165. 22- 1027- 1 165. 30- 1030- 11 165. 30- 1021- 12 165. 70- 3087-39
165. 30- 1027-5 165. 30- 1030- 14 169. 21- 3024- 17 165. 70- 3087-42
165. 29- 1027-9 165. 30- 1031- 1 169. 21- 3024- 19 165. 70- 3087-43
165. 29- 1027- 11 165. 38- 1035- 8 169.21- 3025- 1 165. 70- 3087-44
165. 29- 1027- 13 165. 30- 1036- 1 169.21- 3025- 2 165. 70- 3087-47
165. 29- 1027- 14 169.46- 3062- 35 169.21- 3025- 3 165. 70- 3087-48
165. 29- 1027- 15 169.46- 3062- 38 169.21- 3025- 4 165. 70- 3087-49
165. 29- 1027- 16 169. 38- 3063- 22 169.21- 3025- 5 165. 70- 3087-50
165. 27- 1027- 17 169. 22- 3065- 1 169.21- 3025- 6 165. 78- 3088- 1
165. 29- 1027- 19 169. 30- 3065- 20 169. 39- 3116- 19 165. 78- 3088- 2
165. 29- 1027- 20 165. 70-3068- 1 165. 79- 3157- 1 165. 78- 3088- 3
165. 29- 1027- 21 165. 70-3068- 2 165. 79- 3157- 2 165. 78- 3088- 6
165. 29- 1027- 22 165. 70-3068- 4 165. 79- 3158- 17 165. 78- 3088- 7
165. 29- 1027- 23 165. 70-3068- 5 165. 54- 1121- 16 165. 78- 3088- 8
165. 29- 1027- 24 165. 70-3068- 6 165. 54- 1121- 17 165. 78- 3088- 9
165. 29- 1027- 25 165. 70-3068- 7 165. 54- 1121- 19 169. 21- 3051- 13
165. 29- 1027- 27 165. 70-3068- 8 165. 54- 1121- 21 169. 21- 3051- 14
165. 29- 1027- 28 165. 70-3068- 9 165. 54- 1121- 22 169. 21- 3051- 15
165. 29- 1027- 29 165.70-3068- 11 165. 54- 1121- 23 169. 39- 3091- 23
165. 29- 1027- 31 165.78- 3068- 13 165. 54- 1121- 24 169. 39- 3091- 24
165. 29- 1027- 32 165.78- 3068- 14 165. 54- 1121- 25 169. 39- 3091- 26
165. 29- 1027- 33 165.78- 3068- 15 165. 54- 1121- 26 169. 39- 3091- 27
165. 29- 1027- 35 165. 21- 1052- 2.2 165. 45- 1096- 17 169. 39- 3091- 28
165. 29- 1027- 43 165. 21- 1052- 2. 3 165. 45- 1096- 20 169. 39- 3091- 29
165. 29- 1027- 45 165.71- 3164- 26 165. 45- 1096- 21 169. 39- 3091- 30
165. 29- 1027- 46 165. 78- 3110- 10. 1 165. 45- 1096- 22 165. 61- 1084- 5
165. 29- 1027- 47 165.71- 1116- 12 165. 45- 1096- 23 165. 61- 1084- 6
165. 29- 1027- 48 165. 30- 1018- 17 165. 45- 1096- 24 165. 61- 1084- 7
165. 22- 1028- 1 165. 30- 1019- 1 165. 37- 1096- 25 165. 61- 1084- 8
169. 38- 3063-23 165. 30- 1019- 14 165. 37- 1096- 26 165. 61- 1084- 9
169. 38- 3063- 24 165. 30- 1020- 1 165. 37- 1096- 27 165. 61- 1084-22
169. 38- 3063- 25 165. 30- 1020- 7 165. 61- 1108- 13 165. 61- 1084-23
169. 38- 3063- 26 165. 30- 1020- 9 165. 61- 1108- 14 165. 61- 1084-24
169. 38- 3063- 27 165. 30- 1020- 11 165. 61- 1108- 15 165. 61- 1084-25
165. 22- 1013- 1 165. 69- 1085- 18. 1 165. 61- 1108- 16 165. 62- 1085- 1
165. 22- 1028- 2 165. 69- 1080- 1. 2 165. 61- 1108- 17 165. 61- 1085- 2
165. 22- 1029- 1 165. 22- 1012- 5 165. 61- 1108- 18 165. 61- 1085- 3
165. 22- 1029-2 165. 30- 1020- 13 165. 53- 1108- 19 165. 61- 1085- 4
165. 22- 1029- 3 165. 30- 1020- 14 165. 53- 1108- 20 165. 61- 1085- 5
165. 22- 1029-4 165. 30- 1020- 15 165. 53- 1108- 21 165. 61- 1085- 6
165. 22- 1029-5 165. 30- 1020- 16 169. 23- 3120- 1 165. 61- 1085- 7
165. 30- 1030- 1 165. 30- 1020- 17 169. 23- 3120- 2 165. 61- 1085- 8
125
Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot
165. 54- 1121- 28 165.45- 1094- 37 165.37- 1095- 12 165. 69- 1080- 8
165. 54- 1122- 1 165. 45- 1094- 38 165. 37- 1095- 13 165. 69- 1080- 9
165. 54- 1122- 4 165. 45- 1094-39 165.45- 1095- 15 165. 69- 1080- 10
165. 54- 1122-5 165. 45- 1094- 40 165.45- 1095- 16 165. 69- 1080- 11
165. 62- 1122- 8 165. 45- 1094-41 165.45- 1095- 17 165. 69- 1080- 12
165. 62- 1122-9 165. 69- 1083- 14 165. 45- 1095- 18 165. 69- 1080- 13
165. 54- 1122- 12 165. 69- 1083- 15 165. 45- 1095- 19 165. 69- 1080- 14
165. 54- 1122- 14 165. 69- 1083- 16 165. 45- 1095- 20 165. 69- 1080- 15
165. 54- 1122- 19 165. 69- 1083- 17 165. 45- 1095-40 165. 69- 1080- 18
165. 54- 1122- 20 165. 69- 1083- 18 165. 37- 1096- 1 165. 53- 1108- 22
165. 54- 1123- 1 165. 69- 1083- 19 165. 37- 1096- 2 165. 53- 1108- 23
165.62- 1116- 5 165.69- 1083- 20 165. 37- 1096- 3 165. 53- 1108- 25
165. 62- 1116- 6 165. 69- 1083- 22 165. 45- 1096-9 165. 53- 1108- 26
165. 63- 1116-7 165. 69- 1083- 23 165. 45- 1096- 11 165. 53- 1108- 27
165. 71- 1116- 8 165. 69- 1083- 24 165.45- 1096- 12 165. 53- 1108- 28
165. 71- 1116- 9 164.84- 3004- 13 165.45- 1096- 13 165. 53- 1108- 29
165. 71- 1116- 10 164.84- 3004- 14 165. 45- 1096- 14 165. 53- 1108- 30
165.71- 1116- 11 164.84- 3004- 15 165. 45- 1096- 15 165. 69- 1081- 1
165. 62- 1117- 1 164.84- 3004- 16 165. 45- 1096- 16 165. 69- 1081- 2
165. 62- 1117- 8 164.84- 3004- 17 165. 37- 1096- 28 165. 69- 1081- 4
165. 62- 1117- 9 164.84- 3004- 18 165. 37- 1096- 29 165. 69- 1081- 6
165. 62- 1117- 11 164.84- 3004- 19 165. 37- 1096- 30 165. 69- 1081- 7
165. 62- 1117- 12 164. 84- 3004- 20 165.61- 1078- 11 165. 69- 1081- 8
165. 62- 1117- 13 164. 84- 3004- 21 165. 61- 1078- 12 165. 69- 1082- 1
165. 62- 1117- 14 164. 84- 3004-22 165. 61- 1078- 13 165. 69- 1082- 2
165. 62- 1117- 15 169. 21- 3025- 33 165. 61- 1078- 14 165. 69- 1082- 3
165. 62- 1117- 17 165.45- 1094- 42 165. 61- 1078- 16 165. 69- 1082-4
165. 62- 1117- 20 165. 45- 1094-43 165. 69- 1079- 1 165. 69- 1082- 5
165. 62- 1117- 21 165. 45- 1094-44 165. 69- 1079- 2 165. 69- 1082- 6
165. 62- 1117- 22 165. 45- 1094-45 165. 69- 1079- 3 165. 69- 1082- 7
165. 62- 1118- 1 165. 45- 1094-46 165. 69- 1079- 4 165. 69- 1082- 8
165.62- 1118- 3 165. 45- 1094-47 165. 69- 1079- 5 165. 69- 1082- 9
165. 62- 1118- 5 165. 45- 1094-48 165. 69- 1079- 6 165.69- 1082- 10
165. 62- 1118- 6 165. 45- 1094-49 165. 69- 1079- 7 165. 69- 1082- 11
165. 62- 1118-7 165. 53- 1094- 50 165. 69- 1079- 8 165. 69- 1082- 12
165. 62- 1118- 8 165. 53- 1094- 51 165. 69- 1079- 9 165. 69- 1082- 13
165. 62- 1118- 10 165. 37- 1095- 2 165. 69- 1079- 10 165. 69- 1082- 14
165. 62- 1118- 11 165. 37- 1095- 3 165. 69- 1079- 11 165. 69- 1082- 15
165. 62- 1118- 13 165. 37- 1095- 4 165. 69- 1079- 12 165. 69- 1082- 16
165. 62- 1118- 15 165. 37- 1095- 5 165. 69- 1079- 13 165. 69- 1083- 1
165. 62- 1119- 1 165. 37- 1095- 6 165. 69- 1080- 1. 1 165. 69- 1083- 2
165. 62- 1119- 6 165. 37- 1095- 7 165. 69- 1080-3 165. 69- 1083- 4
165. 62- 1119- 7 165. 37- 1095- 8 165. 69- 1080- 4 165. 69- 1083- 7
165. 62- 1119-9 165. 37- 1095- 9 165. 69- 1080- 5 165. 69- 1083- 8
165. 53- 1094- 35 165. 37- 1095- 10 165. 69- 1080- 6 165. 69- 1083- 9
165. 53- 1094- 36 165. 37- 1095- 11 165. 69- 1080- 7 165. 69- 1083- 12
126
Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot
165. 53- 1104- 14 165. 61- 1107- 16 164. 84-3005- 13 169.46- 3029- 24
165. 53- 1104- 15 165. 53- 1107- 17 164. 84-3005- 14 165. 71- 3164- 1
165. 53- 1104- 16 165. 53- 1107- 18 164.84- 3006- 1 165. 71- 3164- 3
165. 53- 1104- 17 165. 53- 1107- 19 164.84- 3006- 2 165. 71- 3164-4
165. 53- 1104- 18 165. 53- 1107- 20 169.22-3089- 12 165. 71- 3164- 5
165. 53- 1104- 19 165. 53- 1107- 21 169.22- 3089- 13 165. 71- 3164- 6
165. 53- 1104- 20 165. 53- 1107- 22 169.22-3089- 14 165. 71- 3164- 7
165. 53- 1104-21 165. 53- 1107- 24 169.22- 3089- 16 165. 71- 3164- 8
165. 53- 1104- 22 165. 53- 1108- 1 169.22-3089- 17 165. 71- 3164- 9
165. 53- 1104-23 165. 53- 1108- 2 169.22-3089- 18 165. 71- 3164- 11
165. 53- 1104- 24 165. 53- 1108- 3 169.22-3089- 19 165. 69-3023- 25
165. 53- 1104- 25 165. 53- 1108- 4 169.22- 3089- 20 169. 21- 3025- 32
165. 53- 1105- 1 165. 53- 1108- 5 169.22-3089- 21 169.46-3059- 32
165. 53- 1105- 2 165. 53- 1108- 6 169.22-3089- 22 169. 21- 3051- 26
165. 53- 1105- 3 165. 53- 1108- 7 169.22-3089- 23 165. 69- 3052- 1
165.53- 1105- 4 165. 53- 1108- 9 169.22-3089- 24 165. 78- 3110- 25
165. 53- 1105- 5 165. 61- 1108- 10 169.22- 3089- 25 165. 78- 3110- 26
165. 53- 1105- 6 165. 61- 1108- 11 169.22-3089- 26 165. 78- 3110- 27
165. 53- 1105- 7 165. 61- 1111- 1 164.84- 3015- 1 165. 78- 3110- 28
165. 53- 1105- 8 165. 61- 1111- 2 164.76- 3016- 1 165. 78- 3110- 29
165. 53- 1105- 9 164. 84- 3002- 1 164.76- 3016- 3 165. 78- 3110- 30
165. 53- 1105- 10 164. 84- 3003- 1 164.76- 3016-4 165. 78- 3110- 31
165. 53- 1105- 11 164. 84- 3003- 2 164.76- 3016- 5 165. 78- 3110- 32
165. 53- 1105- 12 164.84- 3003- 4 165. 69- 3016-7 165. 78- 3110- 33
165. 53- 1105- 13 164. 84- 3003- 5 165. 77- 3017- 43 165. 78- 3110- 34
165. 53- 1105- 14 164. 84- 3004- 1 165. 77- 3017- 44 165. 79- 3122- 15
165. 53- 1105- 15 164. 84- 3004- 2 164. 84-3017- 45 165. 79-3122- 16
165. 53- 1105- 16 164. 84- 3004- 3 169.21- 3020- 1 165. 79- 3122- 17
165. 53- 1105- 17 164. 84- 3004- 4 169.21- 3020- 13 165. 79- 3122- 18
165. 53- 1105- 18 164. 84- 3004- 5 169.21- 3021- 21 165. 79- 3122- 19
165. 53- 1105- 19 164. 84- 3004- 6 169.21- 3021- 22 165. 79-3122- 21
165. 53- 1105- 21 164. 84- 3004- 7 169. 21- 3021- 23 165. 79- 3122- 22
165.53- 1106- 1 164. 84- 3004- 8 169.21- 3021- 24 165. 79- 3122- 23
165. 53- 1106- 3 164. 84- 3004- 9 169.21- 3021- 25 165. 79- 3122- 24
165.53- 1106- 4 164. 84- 3004- 10 169.21- 3021- 42 165. 79- 3122-25
165. 53- 1106- 5 164. 84- 3004- 12 169.21- 3021- 43 169.46- 3029- 25
165.53- 1106- 6 164. 84- 3004-23 165. 69- 3022-2 169.46- 3030- 1
165.53- 1106- 7 164. 84- 3004-24 169.38- 3029- 14 169.46- 3030- 2
165.53- 1106- 8 164. 84- 3004-25 169.46-3029- 15 169.46- 3031- 1
165. 53- 1106- 9 164.84- 3005- 2 169.46-3029- 16 169.46- 3031- 2
165. 53- 1106- 10 164.84-3005- 5. 2 169. 46-3029- 17 169.46- 3031- 3
165. 53- 1106- 11 164. 84- 3005- 6 169. 46-3029- 18 169.46- 3031- 4
165. 53- 1106- 12 164. 84- 3005- 9 169.46- 3029- 19 169.46- 3032- 1
165. 53- 1106- 13 164. 84- 3005- 10 169.46- 3029- 20 169.46- 3032- 2
165. 53- 1106- 14 164. 84- 3005- 11 169.46- 3029- 21 169.46- 3032-4
165. 53- 1106- 15 164. 84- 3005- 12 169. 46- 3029- 23 169.46- 3032- 5
127
Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot Section -Block -Lot
169. 46-3029- 23 169.46- 3032-5 165.79- 3114-4 165.70-3086- 10
169.46-3029- 24 169. 46-3032- 37 165. 79- 3158- 18 165. 70-3086- 11
165. 71- 3164- 1 169.46- 3062- 1 169. 21- 3050- 1 165. 70-3086- 12
165. 71- 3164- 3 169.46- 3062-2 169. 21- 3050- 2 165. 78- 3086- 21
165. 71- 3164-4 165. 71- 3164-20 169. 21- 3050- 3 165. 70-3086- 28
165. 71- 3164-5 165. 71- 3164-21 169.21- 3050-4 165. 70-3086- 31
165. 71- 3164-6 165. 71- 3164-22 169.21- 3050- 30 165. 70-3086- 32
165. 71- 3164-7 165. 71- 3164- 23 169. 39- 3091- 31 165. 70-3086- 33
165. 71- 3164- 8 165. 71- 3164-24 169. 39- 3091- 32 165. 70-3086- 34
165. 71- 3164-9 165. 71- 3164-25 165. 70-3068- 34 165. 70-3086- 35
165. 71- 3164- 11 165. 69- 3052-2 165. 78- 3068- 36 165.70-3086- 37
165. 69-3023- 25 165. 69- 3052- 3 165. 78- 3069- 19 165. 70- 3087- 1
169. 21- 3025- 32 165.69- 3052-4 165. 78- 3069- 20 165.70- 3087-2
169. 46-3059- 32 165.69- 3052- 5 165. 78- 3069- 21 165.70- 3087- 3
169. 21- 3051- 26 165. 69- 3052- 6 169.38- 3072- 23 165.70- 3087- 4
165. 69- 3052- 1 165. 69- 3052- 7 169. 38- 3072- 24 165. 70- 3087- 7
165. 78- 3110-25 165. 69- 3052- 8 169.38- 3072- 25 165. 70- 3087- 8
165. 78- 3110-26 165. 69- 3052- 9 169.38- 3072- 26 165. 70- 3087- 9
165. 78- 3110-27 165. 69- 3053- 1 169.38- 3072-27 165. 70- 3087- 10
165. 78- 3110- 28 165. 69- 3053- 3 169.38- 3072- 28 165. 70- 3087- 11
165. 78- 3110- 29 165. 69-3053- 4 169.38- 3072- 29 165. 70- 3087- 12
165. 78- 3110- 30 165. 79-3121- 1 169. 38- 3072- 30 165. 70-3087- 13
165. 78- 3110-31 169.23- 3121- 16 169. 38- 3072- 50 165. 70- 3087- 14
165. 78- 3110-32 169.23- 3121- 17 169.38- 3073- 1 165.70-3087- 15
165. 78- 3110-33 169.23- 3121- 18 169. 38- 3073- 2 165. 70-3087- 16
165. 78- 3110-34 169. 23- 3121- 19 169. 39- 3082- 39 165. 70- 3087- 17
165. 79- 3122- 15 165.79- 3121- 31 169.22- 3084- 1 165. 70- 3087- 18
165. 79- 3122- 16 165. 70-3111- 39 169.22- 3084-2 165. 70- 3087- 19
165. 79- 3122- 17 165. 70-3111- 40 169.22- 3084- 3 165.70- 3087- 20
165. 79- 3122- 18 165. 70-3111- 41 169.22- 3084-4 165. 70- 3087- 21
165. 79- 3122- 19 165. 78- 3111- 42 169.22- 3084- 36 165. 70- 3087- 22
165. 79- 3122- 21 165. 70-3111- 43 169.22- 3084- 37 165. 70- 3087- 23
165. 79- 3122-22 165. 70-3111- 44 165. 78- 3085- 1 165.54- 1132- 8
165. 79- 3122-23 164.84- 3005- 4. 1 165. 78- 3085- 3 165.54- 1132- 9
165.79- 3122- 24 164.84- 3005- 5. 1 165. 78- 3085- 4 165. 54- 1132- 10
165. 79- 3122- 25 169.39- 3107- 18 165. 78- 3085- 5 165. 54- 1132- 11
169.46- 3029- 25 169.39- 3107- 19 165. 78- 3085- 6 165. 54- 1132- 12
169. 46-3030- 1 169.39- 3107-20 165. 78- 3085- 7 165. 54- 1135- 1
169. 46-3030-2 169. 39- 3107-21 165.70- 3086- 1 165. 54- 1135- 2
169. 46-3031- 1 169.39- 3107- 33 165.70- 3086- 2 165. 54- 1135- 4
169.46- 3031- 2 169. 39- 3107- 34 165.70- 3086- 3 165. 54- 1135- 6
169.46- 3031- 3 169. 39- 3107- 35 165.70- 3086- 4 165. 54- 1135- 10
169.46- 3031- 4 169. 23- 3108- 1 165.70- 3086- 6 165. 54- 1135- 13
169.46- 3032- 1 165.70-3111- 1 165.70- 3086- 7 165. 62- 1136- 20
169.46- 3032- 2 165. 70-3111- 2 165.70- 3086- 8 165.62- 1136- 21
169.46- 3032- 4 165. 70- 3111- 3 165.70- 3086- 9 165.62- 1136- 22
128
Section -Block -Lot
165. 62- 1136- 23
165. 63- 1139-
1
165. 63- 1139-
2
165. 63- 1140-
1
165. 63- 1140-
2
165. 63- 1140-
3
165. 63- 1140-
4
165. 63- 1140-
5
165. 63- 1140-
6
165. 63- 1140-
7
165. 63- 1140-
8
165. 63- 1140-
9
165. 63- 1140- 12
165. 63- 1140- 13
165. 63- 1141-
6
165. 63- 1141-
8
165. 63- 1141-
9
165. 63- 1141- 10
165. 63- 1147- 10
169. 39- 3116- 17.
2
169. 39- 3116- 17.
3
169. 39- 3116- 17.
4
164. 84- 3005-4.
2
164.84- 3015-
2
164. 84- 3017-42
165. 69- 3022-
1
165. 69- 3023-
1
165. 69- 3023-
2
165. 69- 3023-
3
169. 21- 3024- 16
165.69- 3053-
2
169. 30- 3090- 30
169.39- 3106-
1
169. 30-3090-
2
169. 30-3090-5'
169. 39- 3106- 10
169. 39- 3106- 11
169. 23- 3115- 34
165. 78- 3069- 13
169.22-3070-
1
165. 22- 1012-
6
165. 63- 1148-
7
129
1) Residential Area.
a) Definition. A development site where the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone may be applied to any parcel currently zoned RMF -10 or
RMF -15.
b) Residential Character Preservation. In an effort to retain the existing residential
character of the development site designated with the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior
Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone and located on any parcel with the RMF -10 or
RMF -15, underlying zoning may occupy only the ground floor with one ( 1) of the
accessory uses as permitted in Section 267- 21( B2). In the event the developer elects to
do so, the permitted accessory use shall not exceed the ground floor total area.
2) Commercial Corridor Area.
a) Definition. A development site where the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone may be applied to any parcel currently zoned CB, DB,
OB, NB or H within the prescribed senior citizen housing floating overlay zone area as
shown on the Zoning Map.
b) Mixed Use Preservation. In an effort to facilitate the preservation of the commercial
character and mixed -used development patterns along the City's commercial corridors,
development site( s) to be designated with the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone located along a commercial corridor and on a parcel( s)
currently zoned CB, DB, OB, NB and H shall occupy the ground floor with the principal
permitted uses of the underlying zoning. Development site( s) to be designated with
RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone that are located on
commercially zoned parcels ( CB, DB, OB, NB or H), but not located along a commercial
corridor, may occupy the ground floor with a commercial use( s) as permitted in
accordance with the principal permitted uses of the underlying zone.
D. Boundary. The boundaries of each RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone
District shall be fixed by amendment to the official City Zoning Map as a floating overlay zone
which has been authorized by the City Council, wherever the district is applied. A metes and
bounds description of each such district shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
E. Applicability. In accordance with Chapter 267 - Article XI of the Zoning Code, the City
Council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition by applicants and after public
notice and hearing as required by law, act to amend, supplement, repeal or change the existing
regulations and provisions and rezone property to the RMF -SC Multifamily Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District established under this Chapter.
F. Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the minimum or maximum
requirements, as the case may be, but may be made more restrictive where such is determined
appropriate by the City Council, based upon consideration of the particular circumstances of
130
the individual application, to satisfy the purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V
hereof.
1) Requirements.
a) Building Height.
The maximum building height where Senior Citizen Housing is
permitted in accordance with this ordinance shall not exceed 90' feet.
The minimum base height shall not be less than 45' feet. For every 45'
feet of building height along greater road function class there shall be a
building step -back of 10' feet. For every 45' feet of building height
along lesser road function class there shall be a building step -back of
15' feet.
b) Building Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
c) Impervious Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall not exceed 80%.
d) Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet.
e) Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be
250 square feet.
f) Lot Width and Frontage. The minimum lot width and frontage shall be 100' feet.
g) Front Yard Setback. The front yard setback shall be the average front yard
setback of the existing buildings on the same side of the street.
h) Secondary Front Yard Setback. Secondary Front Yard Setback shall be the
average front yard setback of the existing buildings on the same side of the street
in which the secondary front yard faces.
i) Side Yard Setback. The side yard setback( s) shall not be less than the average
side yard setback( s) of the existing buildings on the same side of the street.
j) Rear Yard Setback. The minimum rear yard setback for structures shall be 20'
feet.
k) Primary Front Yard.
1) Primary Front Yard on corner lots. The owner of lots having frontages on
intersecting streets, ingress and egress shall be the street with the lesser
road function class to accommodate senior citizen drop-off point.
131
2) Primary Front Yard on through lots. The owner of lots having frontages
on more than one street, ingress and egress shall be the street with the
greater road function class.
1) Through Lots.
1) Any application consisting of a through lot shall include provisions for a
buffer screening area where the through lot abuts the street with the lesser
road function class. The Planning Board may allow for the construction of
a wall, fencing, landscaping and/or any other item in its judgment will
appropriately screen the activity involved or structure(s) involved from the
neighboring residential area and the abutting street( s). Where such a
buffer screening is required, it shall be of a design, materials, location,
type, height, spacing and arrangement to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board. These requirements may be waived by the Planning Board in
situations where the Planning Board determines that adjoining land uses,
abutting street( s), topographic features or existing vegetation satisfy the
same purpose. The plan and specifications for such buffer screening shall
be filed with the plans for the use of the lot. All required landscaping shall
be properly trimmed and maintained in healthy growing condition at all
times.
m) Merging Tax Lots.
1) The property owner who owns two or more contiguous parcels of land and
seeks the Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone designation shall
merge all associated tax lots for municipal regulation and tax purposes
through the Office of the City Tax Assessor.
3) Parking Requirements. All parking requirements and parking facilities shall be in
accordance with Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance.
4) Density Bonus. Upon approval by the City Council, an applicant may be granted a density
bonus by establishing public amenities such as, but not limited to, plazas, arcades and
displays of public art. In such instances where the City Council finds the proposed public
amenity to be acceptable, the applicant shall be afforded a bonus not to exceed 10 additional
dwelling units.
G. De Minimis Exceptions, Design Exceptions and Waivers. Deviation from the development
requirements, provisions, standards, uses and regulations may be necessary in unusual
circumstances. To account for these circumstances the City Council has the ability to waive or
allow an applicant to deviate from this Section of the Ordinance based on existing conditions
hardship or a special reasons hardship.
1) Existing Conditions Hardship and/ or Special Reasons Hardship. In instances where
the applicant is confronted with hardships arising from an existing condition of the land
132
or instances where the applicant creates the hardship to enhance the building and site
design, the City Council may grant exceptions from certain bulk, uses, parking or design
requirements, provided that the applicant demonstrates:
That the proposed design exception will not substantially impair the intent of the
City' s long range planning strategy.
That the proposed design will not present a substantial detriment to the public health,
safety and welfare of the community.
That the proposed design will enhance the aesthetic value of the overall design, the
site itself and the surrounding area.
That the proposed design will advance the purposes of this ordinance.
H. Obtaining Approval of Design Exceptions and Waivers. The applicant shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the City Council the following for approval of an exception or waivers:
The goals and objectives of this ordinance and the City's long range planning strategy
shall be further advanced.
The project will have no adverse impact on the physical, visual and spatial character
of the surrounding area.
The project will enhance the physical, visual and spatial character of the streetscape.
1) Deviations, exceptions or waivers shall not be granted for uses that are not specified
in this Section of the ordinance and shall not be granted for height increases which exceed
10' feet beyond the maximum permitted height of this Section.
I. Conflicting Requirements.
1) Within the areas designated by the City Council as RMF -SC Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with this Section of the Ordinance are repealed, to the extent of such
inconsistency only.
2) If any standards, objectives, land uses, provisions, controls, permitted uses and
other restrictions and requirements stated in this Section of the Ordinance differ in
content from provisions set forth in other section( s) of the Zoning Ordinance,
unless otherwise specified, this section of the Ordinance shall prevail.
3) If any provision or regulation of this section of the Ordinance shall be judged,
ruled or deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Section of the Ordinance and such
133
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Section of the
Ordinance is hereby declared severable.
J. Design Standards. The purpose of these standards is to ensure that proposed senior citizen
housing developments exhibit creativity and variety in design features so that the unique
character of Mount Vernon is preserved. These guidelines shall be applicable to all
proposed senior citizen housing developments.
1) The placement, pattern, scale, size, and rhythm of window and door openings on
building facades, including proportions and details around them make up building
fenestration. The disposition and design of window and door openings of traditional
buildings help determine their appeal and charm, and distinguish a building facade from a
generic, uninteresting appearance. Buildings with poor fenestration appear visually
uninteresting and/or boxy. The relationship of window and door openings to the wall
surface of the facade contributes to a building' s appeal and character. The added
architectural details, including materials, trims, bands and cornices bring visual interest to
building facades, enhance the " box" and provide a human scaled backdrop to the street
space.
a) Buildings shall maximize the number of street level facade openings for windows
and doors.
b) Buildings shall maximize upper level facade openings for punched -in windows, or
glass and metal curtain wall. ( Note: a glass block -filled wall opening is part of the
solid wall surface and not considered a window).
c) Buildings shall set ground floor window frames at a height above the finished
grade to reflect traditional main street building qualities.
d) Buildings shall recess all window frames, particularly along the ground floor, from
the typical wall plane surface to provide a shadow line and accentuate the ground
floor.
e) All windows shall exhibit proportional scale that appropriately indicates functions
within the building.
f) Buildings shall delineate change in surface material by a reveal or a recess detail.
g) All sides of a building open to public view shall employ architectural features such
as windows, a variety of colors, patterns and complex massing to achieve interest
especially at the pedestrian level. Flat, blank walls along public right-of-ways shall
be prohibited.
h) Architectural massing refers to the way a building is shaped. Building designs
featuring a single geometric shape such as a simple rectangle shall not be allowed.
The requirement for complex massing may be met by building designs featuring a
variety of parapet heights, varying building wall setbacks or balconies, a variety of
roof forms at different heights and an irregular building footprint.
i) Each building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible ground floor
entryways featuring no less than three of the following:
Entryways shall be recessed or projected along the street level facade of the
typical wall plane;
canopies or porticos;
134
overhangs;
recesses/projections;
raised corniced parapets over the door;
peaked roof forms;
arches;
outdoor patios;
planters;
wing walls; and
any other architectural detail or feature that accentuates the entryways for the
public.
K. Review Process. Application for development approval with the RMF -SC Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District shall follow a three- phase review process. The site
plan/ subdivision review and certificate of appropriateness review may occur simultaneous.
1) Application for the Floating Overlay Zone designation and dimensional standards approval
reviewed by the City Council.
2) Application for site plan approval reviewed by the Planning Board.
3) Application for Certificate of Appropriateness reviewed by the Architectural Review Board.
L. Procedure. Designation of a property for uses within the RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone District shall be established by the City Council either on its own
motion, on petition of the property owner or its designee or recommendation of the Planning
Board, as with any request for legislative action, the City Council has discretion has as to
whether or not to entertain a petition or a recommendation of the Planning Board.
1) Development Concept Plan. In the case of an application of a property owner or its designee
requesting the establishment of a use or uses as permitted by Chapter 267 - Article V of
RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District, the applicant shall submit
a preliminary Development Concept Plan of the proposed development concept showing all
proposed buildings and uses on the site, proposed building spacing, yard setbacks, the
proposed location and design of all streets, driveways, parking lots, screening, landscaping,
open spaces and recreation areas, proposed architectural features of all buildings, the
relationship of the proposed development to adjacent land, and the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. Such plans shall be accompanied by a brief analysis
which shall include a market demand analysis and traffic analysis and shadow analysis in
written form, explaining the proposed development concept and the planning purposes of
Chapter 267 - Article V which will be derived for the City and the immediate surrounding
neighborhood.
2) Referrals for review and report. The City Council shall refer any such application or petition
to the Corporation Counsel, Planning Board and Architectural Review Board who shall
report to it as to whether the establishment of such Zone will be in accordance with the
standards contained herein and will be of benefit to the City by satisfying the intent and
135
3)
purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V hereof. The Corporation Counsel shall
report to the City Council regarding the form of the proposed amendment. The Planning
Board shall report to the City Council regarding the proposed operation in terms of traffic
demand in relationship to its location, compatibility with the City' s long range goals and
strategies and the form of the proposed application. The Architectural Review Board shall
report to the City Council regarding the scale, mass, shape, style and size of all proposed
structures in relationship to its location and the form of the proposed application.
a) Report and recommendation. Following completion of their respective
reviews, the Corporation Counsel, Planning Board and Architectural Review
Board shall prepare and submit its report and recommendations to the City
Council with respect to the potential applicability of the RMF -SC Senior Citizen
Housing Floating Overlay Zone District to the subject property and, where
applicable, with respect to the proposed preliminary Development Concept Plan
and design.
Public hearing. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations of the Planning Board and
Architectural Review Board and any revised proposed amendment from an applicant or
notification by the applicant that no revision will be made, the City Council may schedule
and hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
4) Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published on at least three different
dates in the City' s official newspaper, the first insertion to be not less than 10 nor more than
30 days prior to the date of the hearing. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Map, at
least one week prior to the public hearing a notice of such hearing and a brief description of
the proposed change shall be mailed to all owners of property, as shown by the tax
assessment roll, within 200 feet of any land which would be affected by such change. A
copy of such notice, with proof of mailing, together with proof of notice in the official
newspaper, shall be filed in the City Clerk's office on or before the date of the public
hearing. The public hearing shall also be published on the City's website not less than 10
days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing. In addition to
notification and publication requirements, a sign shall be posted along all street frontages of
the subject site at least fourteen ( 14) days prior to the hearing date which meets the
following criteria:
1) Be at least twenty-four inches ( 24") by thirty- six inches ( 36").
2) Consist of sturdy and serviceable material.
3) Contain a white background with black letters.
4) Legible with lettering and at least two inches ( 2") in height.
5) Be placed in a location plainly visible from each street frontage upon
which the property fronts.
136
6) Be placed more than five (5') feet back from the property line.
7) Not placed in the City' s Right -of -Way.
8) Not be placed more than five (5') feet above ground.
9) Shall read as follows:
THIS SITE IS PROPOSED FOR ISSUANCE OF A SEN QOR
CITIZEN HOUSING ZONE CHANGE. THIS MATTER IS
SUBJECT TO A PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE THE CITY OF
MOUNT VERNON CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD AT CITY
HALL ON
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT AT (914) 699- 7230."
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
notification was completed. The sign must be removed forty-eight (48) hours after the public
hearing. Failure to abide by these rules for public hearing notification will result in a delay of
processing the application and scheduling of the public hearing.
5) Referral to Westchester County Planning Board and adjacent municipalities. Not less than
10 days prior to the public hearing the City Clerk shall forward copies of the proposed
amendment with the notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and
to the clerks of any abutting municipalities when required by law.
6) Council action. Following the close of the public hearing and completion of the SEQRA
process, the City Council shall act to approve the proposed floating overlay zone
designation and, where applicable, the proposed Development Concept Plan, either with or
without modifications, or shall disapprove the application. In the event of its approval,
notification of the action taken shall be forwarded to the Planning Board and Architectural
Review Board for their further review and action, as appropriate. The Planning Board and
Architectural Review Board review and action may occur simultaneous.
a) Rendering decisions. Every such application for the establishment of RMF -SC
Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District on which the City Council
may act is a legislative act seeking to amend the zoning ordinance and is therefore
subject to the full legislative discretion of the City Council. The City Council shall
either approve, deny or approve with conditions any such application and in
making its determinations shall consider the following criteria:
Compatibility with the City' s long range goals and planning strategy;
Does not change the neighborhood character;
Preservation of the mixed use development pattern within commercial areas
and along commercial corridors;
137
Conceal density through building design;
That the proposed designation will encourage appropriate use of the land in
accordance with the general purposes, intent and spirit of this chapter and
without detrimental to surrounding property values;
That the safety, health, welfare or the order of the City shall not be adversely
affected by the proposed use and its location;
That the site is suitable for the location of such use in the City;
That the proposed application shall not have a negative impact on
groundwater, traffic, public services and other issues considered pursuant to
SEQRA;
That there is sufficient roadway access to provide for emergency services
while reducing transportation needs;
That proposed landscaping and buffer areas have natural and attractive
plantings that are compatible with the adjacent area and terrain;
That the applicant exhibits the wherewithal to complete the project;
That the applicant provides for innovative and imaginative approaches to
senior citizen housing that does not detract or severely depart from the
existing neighborhood character; and
That the proposed application has appropriate height, scale, mass, size, shape
and density in relationship to its location.
The historical, architectural and/or cultural significance of the existing site or
existing structures to assess local significance.
That there is the consideration of the Architectural Review Board and the
Planning Board.
7) Council vote. The action of the City Council to approve any proposed amendment to this
chapter shall be by majority vote, except, however, if a protest is presented against such
amendment, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of the area of
any land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of
the land immediately adjacent and extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20%
or more of the area of land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not be passed except by a 3/ 4 vote of
the City Council.
8) Records. The City Clerk shall keep the official record copy of the Zoning Map and text
sections, and shall be responsible for the posting of all changes thereto. Said Clerk shall also
138
maintain a file of all such zoning maps and text sections which have been superseded by
amendment of this chapter and must be available for public inspection.
9) Planning Board and Architectural Review Board approval. Prior to any construction within
the RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing Floating Overlay Zone District, application shall be
made for site and certificate of appropriateness approval by the Planning Board and the
Architectural Review Board, respectively in accordance with each Boards' respective rules
and procedures.
a) Public hearing and Public meeting. The Planning Board and Architectural
Review Board shall schedule a public hearing and public meeting, respectively,
on the proposed site plan and certificate of appropriateness within 45 days of the
date of its receipt of a complete application in proper form and in compliance with
all SEQRA requirements. Notice of the public hearing shall be as required by
law.
M. Planning Board and Architectural Review Board action. Within 62 days of the close of the
public hearing or public meeting, the Planning Board and Architectural Review Board shall
act either to approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove the proposed site
plan/ certificate of appropriateness, respectively. The Planning Board and Architectural
Review Board decision shall be based upon the requirements of the City Council rezoning
approval, the purposes, standards and regulations of the RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone District, site plan standards in accordance with Article VIII of the
Zoning Code. Chapter 10 of the City Charter and the requirements of SEQRA. Approval shall
be required prior to the issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy.
N. Amendments During Construction.
a) Minor amendments. During construction, the Commissioners of Building and
Planning may authorize minor adjustments to the approved site plan and/or
certificate of appropriateness when such adjustments appear necessary,
appropriate and/ or De minimis adjustments as the result of technical or
engineering considerations, the existence or materiality of which was first
discovered during actual construction. De minimis adjustments shall be given to
provide for economic growth while protecting the integrity of the site, the
surrounding neighborhood, the City's long range planning strategy and the intent
of the Zoning Code.
b) Substantial amendments. Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which
require any change to an approved site plan and/ or certificate of appropriateness
which the Commissioner of Planning considers substantial, or where the applicant
wishes to modify the approved site plan and/or certificate of appropriateness for
other reasons, an amended site plan and/ or certificate of appropriateness shall be
filed for review and approval in accordance with the same procedures required for
an initial site plan and/ or certificate of appropriateness application.
139
O. Amendments After Approval. An approved site with the RMF -SC Senior Citizen Housing
Floating Overlay Zone designation shall be amended in the same manner and subject to the same
limitations as any other regulation established by this chapter.
Article V — Section 10. UR -PUD Districts.
A. Eligibility. Eligible parcels for UR -PUD zoning shall be only those located in an area officially
designated as appropriate for urban renewal by the City Council and having a minimum parcel
size of 10 contiguous acres.
B. Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the minimum/ maximum
requirements, as the case may be, but may be made more restrictive where such is determined
appropriate based upon consideration of the particular circumstances of the individual
application to satisfy the purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V hereof.
1) Maximum dimensional requirements for residential use.
a) The maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 2.50.
b) The maximum building height shall be 200 feet in height from the finished
grade.
c) The maximum lot coverage by residential structures less than six stories but
exclusive of any enclosed parking facilities whose roof and exposed sides are
bermed and landscaped to screen such parking from public view is 30% of the
total parcel area.
d) The maximum lot coverage by residential structures greater than six stories
but exclusive of any enclosed parking facilities whose roof and exposed sides are
bermed and landscaped to screen such parking from public view is 20% of the
total parcel area.
2) Minimum dimensional requirements.
a) The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 545 square feet.
b) There shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space per
dwelling unit.
3) Off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements
shall be as set forth in Article VIII of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other requirements
of this chapter, where a parcel is located within 300 feet of a municipal parking facility, the
parking requirements of the URA -PUD District shall be as follows:
a) Residential: A minimum of 0.75 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
140
b) Commercial: zero.
4) Maximum dimensional requirements for nonresidential use. The maximum building height
shall be 160 feet in height from the finished grade.
Article V - 10. PUD -2 District.
A. Eligibility. The following are the minimum requirements for establishing the eligibility of any
property for PUD -2 Planned Unit Development zoning:
1) The minimum parcel size shall be two contiguous acres. Where parcels comprising
the development site are divided by existing City streets, the area of those streets between
the lot lines of the subject parcels may be counted as parcel area to meet the two acre
minimum.
2) The [ underlying] eligible existing zoning districts shall be:
a) For residential development: RMF -6. 75, RMF -10, and RMF -15 Districts.
b) For nonresidential developments: CB and I Districts.
c) For residential/ non-residential mixed use developments: subject to the further
restrictions set forth in Section 267- 22 B( 3)( f), a combination of: (i) all three of
the NB, CB and RMF -15 Districts; or (ii) the NB and RMF -15 Districts.
B. Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the minimum/maximum
requirements, as the case may be, but may be made more restrictive where such is determined
appropriate based upon consideration of the particular circumstances of the individual
application to satisfy the purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V hereof
1) Standards for residential uses.
a) Building height.
1. Low-rise or one -family attached or detached dwellings and/or
multifamily dwellings the height of such buildings does not exceed 90 feet
in height from the finished grade.
2. Mid -rise multifamily dwellings consisting of attached units in structures
of not more than 160 feet in height from the finished grade.
b) Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for uses other than family detached
dwellings, shall be 25% for buildings and 50% for all impervious surfaces.
c) Lot. Area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be 545 square feet.
141
d) Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks for residential uses from all perimeter
lot lines shall be 20 feet.
e) The minimum distance between buildings shall be determined as part of the
application review process. In no case shall such spacing be less than 25 feet or
the average height of the two buildings, whichever requirement is more
restrictive.
2) Standards for non-residential use.
a) Building height. A maximum of 160 feet in height from the finished grade.
3) Standards for residential and non-residential mixed use.
a) Building height. A maximum of 160 feet in height from the finished grade and
not more than 14 stories.
b) Coverage. For lots divided by mapped streets, the maximum lot coverage per
individual lot or lots comprising the development site shall be 100% for buildings
and 100% for all impervious surfaces.
c) Lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be
225 square feet based on qualifying parcel size as calculated pursuant to
paragraph 267- 22A( 1) above.
d) Setbacks. There are no minimum yard setbacks for residential and nonresidential mixed uses.
e) The minimum distance between buildings on an individual site with lots
divided by a mapped street shall be determined as part of the application review
process.
f) Additional Limiting Eligibility Standards. A PUD -2 district of residential and
non-residential mixed uses shall only be mapped on sites that: (i) contain a
combination of all three of the NB, CB and RMF -15 Districts and are wholly or
partially within a1/2 ( 0.5) mile radius of the Mount Vernon East Metro -North
station; or (ii) contain the NB and RMF -15 Districts and are wholly or partially
within a' ( 0.5) mile radius of the Mount Vernon East Metro -North station.
g) Off Street Parking Space Requirements
1. Number of Required Parking Spaces
1a) The minimum number of parking spaces required for multifamily
dwellings shall be: 1 per dwelling unit; except that for senior housing 0. 25
per dwelling unit
142
lb) The minimum number of required parking spaces for all other
permitted principal uses and uses allowed by special permit shall be
determined by the City Council as part of its review of a proposed
development concept plan.
lc) Municipal parking spaces displaced by a PUD -2 development shall be
replaced at a ratio of 1: 1 and shall be provided as public parking spaces in
a location to be determined by the City Council as part of its review of a
proposed development concept plan.
2. Location of Required Parking Spaces
2a) The parking spaces required for multifamily dwelling units and all
other permitted principal uses, with the exception of senior housing, shall
be located: ( i) on site; ( ii) in a municipal garage or lot within 500 feet of
the dwelling units or other permitted uses for which the parking spaces are
required, as measured from the edge of the site to the closest edge of the
municipal garage or lot; or (iii) a combination of both (i) and ( ii), the
amount of parking spaces provided in each category to be determined by
the City Council as part of its review of a proposed development concept
plan.
2b) The parking spaces required for senior housing shall be located on
site.
h). Off Street Loading Space Requirements
1. Number and Location of Required Off Street Loading Spaces
1 a) The minimum number of loading spaces required for multifamily
dwellings, senior housing in a PUD -2 district and for all other permitted
principal uses and uses allowed by special permit, and their location, shall
be determined by the City Council as part of its review of a proposed
development concept plan.
C. Procedure. Uses in Section 267- 17 [ 267- 17] and 267- 18 [ of the PUD -2 District] may be
established by the City Council in the PUD -2 District either on its own motion or on petition of
the property owner for residential and nonresidential developments. In the case of residential and
non-residential mixed use developments, uses shall be limited to the following permitted
principal and permitted accessory uses and uses allowed by special permit. Uses allowed by
special permit shall not be permitted to occupy building space at the street level.
Permitted Principal Uses
Multifamily dwellings
Community purpose buildings
Municipal uses of the City of Mount Vernon
Business, professional or governmental offices
Business incubator space
143
Stores and shops exclusively for sales at retail for the performance of customary personal
services
Restaurants
Universities, colleges and private schools
Permitted Accessory Uses
Uses and structures which are clearly incidental and customarily accessory to the permitted
principal use on the lot on which they are located.
Uses Allowed By Special Permit
Churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship
Day-care centers
Nursery schools
1) Development concept plan. In the case of an application of a property owner
requesting the establishment of a use or uses as permitted by Chapter 267 - Article VI of
the PUD -2 District, the applicant shall submit a preliminary development concept plan of
the proposed development concept showing all proposed buildings and uses on the site,
proposed building spacing and yard setbacks, the proposed location and design of all
streets, driveways, parking lots, screening, landscaping, open spaces and recreation
areas,• proposed architectural features of all building, the relationship of the proposed
development to adjacent land, health, safety and general welfare of the community. Such
plans shall be accompanied by a brief analysis, in written form, explaining the proposed
development concept and the planning purposes of Chapter 267 - Article V which will be
derived for the city and the immediately surrounding neighborhood.
2) Planning Board referral. The City Council may refer any such application to the
Planning Board which shall report to it as to whether the establishment of such zone will
be in accordance with the standards contained herein and will be of benefit to the city by
satisfying the intent and purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V hereof.
a) Notification. Upon receipt, the Planning Board shall refer a copy of the
proposal to such city boards, agencies and departments as it determines to be
appropriate. A copy of the proposal shall also be mailed to the neighborhood
association( s) representing the neighborhood( s) within which the proposed PUD -2
District is to be located and to any such association( s) representing a
neighborhood( s) located within 1, 500 feet of such development.
b) Preliminary meeting. The applicant and the licensed professional preparing the
preliminary development concept plan shall attend a preliminary, informal
meeting with the Planning Board for the purpose of representing and discussing
this proposal. Appropriate neighborhood associations, as defined in Chapter 267 -
Article V above, shall be notified of such meeting by the applicant at least 10 days
in advance.
c) Report and recommendation. Following completion of its review, the Planning
Board shall prepare and submit its report and recommendations to the City
Council with respect to the potential applicability of PUD2 zoning to the subject
144
property and, where applicable, with respect to the proposed preliminary
development concept plan.
3) Public hearing. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations of the Planning
Board, if any, the City Council, may schedule and hold a public hearing. Notice of the
public hearing shall be published on at least three different dates in the city's official
newspaper, the first insertion to be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing. In addition, the neighborhood association( s) shall be notified as
required in Chapter 267 - Article V. A copy of such notice, with proof of mailing, shall
be filed in the City Clerk's office by the applicant on or before the date of the public
hearing.
4) Council action. Following the close of the public hearing and completion of the
SEQRA process, the City Council shall act to approve the proposed rezoning and, where
applicable, the proposed development concept plan, either with or without modifications,
or shall disapprove the application. In the event of its approval, notification of the action
taken and copies of all application materials shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for
its further review and action, as appropriate.
5) Planning Board approval. Prior to any construction within a PUD -2 District,
application shall be made for site plan and, where appropriate, subdivision approval by
the Planning Board. If a subdivision is required, such application shall be filed with the
Planning Board simultaneously with the site plan and shall be processed in accordance
with the requirements of the City of Mount Vernon subdivision and site regulations.
a) Referrals for review and report. The Planning Board shall refer the site plan
application for review and report to all other boards, agencies and officials of the
city which it deems appropriate. All such boards, agencies and officials to which
referral is made shall have not less than 30 days from the date of forwarding to
submit their reports.
b) Report from the Commissioner of Planning. The Commissioner of Planning
shall report to the Planning Board whether the proposed site and/ or subdivision
plan complies with all of the standards and requirements of the PUD -2 District
and its purposes.
c) Public hearing. The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposed site plan within 45 days of the date of its receipt of a complete
application in proper form and in compliance with all SEQRA requirements.
Notice of the public hearing shall be as required by law.
D. Common lands and facilities.
1) Where a PUD -2 District approved pursuant to this authorization results in the
permanent, preservation of open spaces or the creation of commonly used lands or
facilities, including streets, driveways and parking lots, their location, design, ownership
and use shall be as approved as part of the application review process, using as a guide
the purposes set forth herein and in §37 of the General City Law.
145
2) Subject to approval as a part of the combination of the following arrangements:
a) As a general rule, all such lands and facilities in and associated with a building
composed of individually -owned units, such as a condominium or cooperative,
shall be owned by a property owners association as described in Section 267 -
Article V below.
b) The lands and facilities may be conveyed to a recognized conservation
organization dedicated to the preservation and maintenance of open space,
provided that such organization has indicated its agreement to maintain such
lands, and further provided that such organization is acceptable to the City
Council.
c) Such lands and facilities may be dedicated to the City of Mount Vernon,
provided that public access is assured and the City Council has voted to accept
such offer.
d) All or the balance of the common lands which are not to be conveyed or
dedicated in accordance with Chapter 267 - Article V or Chapter 267 - Article V
above or Chapter 267 - Article V below, and any private common facilities, shall
be owned and maintained by a property owners association, subject to the
following requirements:
1. The property owners association shall be a legal entity, including but
not limited to a condominium corporation, cooperative corporation or a
not-for-profit membership corporation created by a trust agreement or
certificate of incorporation, approved as to form and sufficiency by the
Corporation Counsel and designed to assure the permanent preservation,
protection and maintenance of the common lands and any improvements
thereon for their intended purpose.
2. The property owners association shall be made responsible for the
continued future maintenance, ownership and use of all such common
lands and facilities.
3. The property owners association shall not be permitted to be dissolved
and shall not dispose of any common land or any improvements thereon or
thereunder, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization established to
own and maintain such common land and improvements as hereinabove
referred to and subject to the same restrictions on maintenance and use as
the first such legal entity, as well as approval by the Planning Board as set
forth above.
4. The property owners association shall be subject to an agreement with
the city, provided that in the event it, or any successor organization, shall
at any time after approval of the development fail to maintain the common
land or any improvements thereon in reasonable order or condition in
accordance with the approved plan, the city may serve written notice upon
146
such legal entity or successor organization, or upon the property owners
within the development, setting forth the manner in which the association
has failed to maintain the common land or any improvements thereon, and
said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies be corrected
within a designated time frame. If the deficiencies are not corrected within
the designated timeframe, the City of Mount Vernon, in order to preserve
the taxable values of the property within the development and to prevent
the common land and improvements thereon from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon and take possession of said common land and
improvements and maintain the same until such time as the City Council
shall determine that the property owners association is ready and able to
maintain the common land and improvements in proper condition. Said
entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common land or improvements except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the property owners association and the offer of
dedication is accepted by the City Council. The decision of the city with
respect to the action described in this section shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to review in accordance with the
provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The cost to
the city of any such maintenance shall be assessed against the properties
within the PUD -2 District and, in the event of the failure or refusal of any
property owner to pay any such charges when due, the unpaid amount
thereof shall become a lien against his property and, together with interest
from the due date thereof, shall be included in the annual tax levy of the
city upon such property for each such fiscal year, and the amount so levied
shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes.
5. The property owners' association agreement shall require that every
property owner within the PUD -2 District shall automatically be and
remains a member of the association and shall be subject to a charge for
his proportionate share of expenses of the association's activities,
including but not limited to the maintenance and operation of the common
land and improvements thereon. The charge shall be a lien on the property
in the event that it remains unpaid by the property owner for a period of
more than 60 days after assessment thereof by the governing body of the
property owners association. The obligation of each property owner to
pay a proportionate share of the association' s expenses may be enforced by
an action in the name of the association or by the city as provided in
Chapter 267 - Article V, or in the name of both.
6. The permanent preservation of common open space lands and facilities
or their intended purposes shall further be legally assured to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board and the Corporation Counsel by the
filing of appropriate covenants, deed restrictions, easements or other forms
of agreement. The permitted uses within such areas shall be limited to
those specifically approved by the Planning Board and shown on the site
147
development plan, plus other uses customarily incidental and accessory
thereto. Subsequent to the approval of the final site development plan, the
uses permitted within privately owned common land areas may be
modified only upon approval by the Planning Board and only upon
application by the entity owning such common land area. In each such
case, a public hearing shall be held with the same notice as required by
law for final site development plan approval. Such modification may
permit a use in the same general category of use previously approved or
may allow a change in the location of a particular use from one portion of
the common land areas to another.
7. Dedication of the common land areas, including any common facilities
or improvements thereon, to the common use of all property owners
within the PUD -2 District shall be recorded directly on the site
development plan or by reference on the site development plan to a
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions in a separate
document recorded or to be recorded at or about the time of the filing of
the approved final site development plan. Such declaration of covenants,
conditions and restrictions shall permanently grant to each property owner
in common with all other property owners within such PUD -2 District an
easement in and to the common land areas and the common facilities
thereon and of the use thereof.
e) All such lands and facilities in and associated with a building composed of
rental units shall be owned and maintained by the entity which owns the building.
E. Planning Board action. Within 62 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board
shall act either to approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove the proposed site plan.
The Planning Board decision shall be based upon the requirements of the City Council rezoning
approval, the purposes, standards and regulations of the PUD -2 District and the requirements of
SEQRA. Approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permit or certificate of
occupancy within the PUD -2 District.
Article V — Section 11. UR -PUD -S4 South Fourth Avenue — East Third Street Urban
Renewal Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone; UR-PUD-S4—TP Townhouse
Preservation Sub -District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Overlay Zone is to preserve the special character of
architecturally and culturally significant structures while fostering the development of highrise mixed use structures within the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal
Area. South Fourth Avenue is a unique shopping street within the City' s downtown;
accordingly the enhancement, growth and expansion of this shopping street is essential to the
future growth and stability of the area.
To further this objective, a sub -district shall be established herein to preserve the
architecturally and culturally significant " brownstone" style urban flats that fall within the
South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Area. The intent is to foster this type
148
of unique urban housing along the streets that are directly adjacent to the high-rise mixed use
structures. Although the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone is to be developed in a coordinated and
unified fashion, the sub -district has a tailored purpose and site development standards
reflective of its location, function and desired appearance.
B. Eligibility. The UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone shall apply only to those parcels located in the area
officially designated as the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Area,
deemed appropriate for urban renewal by the City Council of the City of Mount Vernon and
rezoned, reclassified and re -designated by the City Council to the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone
C. Boundary. The boundaries of the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone shall be fixed by amendment to
the official City Zoning Map as authorized by the City Council. A metes and bounds
perimeter description of the overlay zone, including Section, Block and Lot of all parcels,
within such Overlay Zone, shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
D. Applicability. In accordance with Section 267- 53 of the Zoning Code, the City Council may
from time to time, on its own motion or on petition by applicants and after public notice and
hearing as required by law, act to amend, supplement, repeal or change the existing
regulations and provisions and rezone property to the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone established
under this Chapter.
E. Use Requirements. Permitted principal, accessory and special permit uses as set forth in
Section 267- 21 E of the Zoning Code.
F. Standards. The following standards are hereby established as the minimum or maximum
requirements, as the case may be, but may be made more restrictive where such is determined
appropriate by the City Council, based upon consideration of the particular circumstances of
the individual application, to satisfy the purposes as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article V
hereof.
1) Requirements.
a) Building Height.
A maximum of 120 feet in height from the finished grade and not more
than 11 stories.
2) The number of floors shall include all floors located above the finished
grade. Portions of the building, such as basements or podiums that are
substantially or partly submerged, shall not be counted as a floor as long
as they do not extend more than five feet above grade. Floors that
extend more than five feet above grade shall be counted as a floor.
b) Building Coverage. The maximum lot coverage per individual lot or lots
comprising the development site shall be 80% for buildings.
149
c) Impervious Coverage. The maximum lot coverage per individual lot or lots
comprising the development site shall be 100% for all impervious surfaces.
d) Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 5, 000 square feet.
e) Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be
300 square feet.
0 Lot Width and Frontage. The minimum lot width and frontage shall be 50 feet.
g) Front Yard Setback. At least 70% of the aggregate length of the street wall
along a commercial corridor shall be located at the property line. The front yard
setback along a non- commercial corridor shall not be less than the average front
yard setback for the existing building on the same side of the street.
h) Secondary Front Yard Setback. The maximum secondary front yard setback
along a commercial corridor shall not exceed the property line. The minimum
secondary front yard setback on a non- commercial corridor shall not be less
than the average front yard setback for the existing buildings on the same side
of the street.
i) Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback for properties fronting on a
non- commercial corridor shall not be less than the average side yard setback for
the existing buildings on the same side of the street.
j) Rear Yard Setback. The minimum rear yard setback for structures shall be 20
feet.
k) Primary Front Yard.
1) Primary Front Yard on corner lots. The owner of lots having frontages on
intersecting streets, ingress and egress shall be along East Third Street or
South Fourth Avenue to accommodate public access.
2) Primary Front Yard on through lots. The owner of lots having frontages
on more than one street, ingress and egress shall be along South Fourth
Avenue.
G. Building Entrances.
1) The building( s) shall have at least one primary entrance facing a street; secondary
entrances shall be directly accessible by a sidewalk or plaza.
2) Main building entrances shall be open directly to the outside.
150
3) Every building shall have at least one entrance that does not require passage through a
parking lot or garage to gain access.
4) Entrances to residential, office or other upper story uses shall be clearly
distinguishable in form and location from retail or ground floor uses.
H. Buffers.
1) Any application to construct or alter a structure in this Urban Renewal Area shall
include provisions for a buffer screening area along any lot line abutting a privately -
owned lot in a residence district. The Planning Board may allow for the construction
of a wall, fencing, landscaping and/ or any other item that in its judgment will
appropriately screen the activity involved or structure( s) involved from the
neighboring residential property. Where such buffer screening is required, it shall be
of a design, materials, location, type, height, spacing and arrangement to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board. These requirements may be waived by the
Planning Board in situations where the Planning Board determines that adjoining land
uses, abutting street( s), topographic features or existing vegetation satisfy the same
purpose. The plan and specifications for such buffer screening shall be filed with the
plans for the use of the lot. All required landscaping shall be properly trimmed and
maintained in healthy growing condition at all times.
I. Density Bonus. Upon approval by the City Council during its review of a preliminary
development concept plan, an applicant may be granted a density bonus by providing physical,
social or cultural community benefits or amenities such as, but not limited to, plazas, parks and
displays of public art. In such instances where the City Council finds the proposed benefits or
amenities to be acceptable, the applicant shall be afforded a bonus not to exceed three (3)
additional stories of building height.
J. Merging tax lots. A property owner who owns two or more contiguous parcels of land and
seeks the use of the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone designation shall merge all associated tax lots
for municipal regulation and tax purposes through the Office of the City Tax Assessor.
K. Off Street Parking Space Requirements
1) The total parking requirement shall be the sum of all individual requirements for uses.
A joint use parking agreement, if executed according to the standards set forth below,
would allow a reduction in the total requirement for a building or project.
2) Number of Required Parking Spaces
a) The minimum number of parking spaces required for multi -family dwelling
units shall be 1. 0 per dwelling unit, except that for senior dwelling units 0.25
per dwelling unit.
151
b) The minimum number of parking spaces required for office and
commercial/retail space shall be: 1 per every 1, 000 square feet of office and
commercial/retail space.
c) The minimum number of required parking spaces for all other permitted
principal uses and uses allowed by special permit are as provided in the
zoning code; except, where not so provided, the parking requirement shall be
determined by the City Council, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Planning and Community Development, as part of its review
of a preliminary development concept plan.
d) For mixed-use developments, approval by the City Council of shared parking
facilities may effectively reduce the total number of required parking spaces
by up to a maximum of 25% or to a rate of 0.75 spaces per multi -family
residential dwelling units, whichever is less.
d) Municipal parking spaces displaced by a UR -PUD -S4 development shall be
replaced at a ratio of 1: 1 and shall be provided as public parking spaces in a
location to be determined by the City Council as part of its review of a
preliminary development concept plan.
3) Location of Required Parking Spaces
a) The City Council may allow all or part of the required parking to be located:
i) on site; ( ii) in a municipal garage or lot within 500 feet of the dwelling
units or other permitted uses for which the parking spaces are required, as
measured from the edge of the site to the closest edge of the municipal garage
or lot; or (iii) a combination of both (i) and (ii), the amount of parking spaces
provided in each category to be determined by the City Council as part of its
preliminary development concept plan review.
b) Where the City Council approves the location of such parking spaces on a lot
different from the lot occupied by the structure or use served, the City Council
shall require a legal instrument, in form and filing, satisfactory to the
Corporation Counsel assuring the continued use of said parking spaces in
connection with the uses or structures served.
L. Shared use parking facilities serving mixed-use developments are encouraged.
1) Applicants may proposed less than the total required number of parking spaces for all
uses if the spaces are provided as part of a shared use parking facility. Shared use of
required parking spaces may occur where two or more uses on the same site or on
separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking
demands occur at different times. A request for shared use of required parking spaces
must be submitted in writing to the City Council as part of its preliminary
development concept plan review:
152
a) The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants who are
sharing the parking;
b) The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;
c) An analysis, prepared by a qualified planning or engineering professional,
showing that the peak parking demands for the different uses occur at
different times, and that the parking area will supply at least the minimum
number of required spaces for each use during its respective peak parking
times; and
d) A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees
access to the shared parking for all uses.
M. Usable Open Space. Except as provided herein, all structures shall be developed so that at
least 10% of the total area of the development remains permanently as usable open space.
1) For purposes of this section, usable open space is defined as an area that:
a) Is not encumbered with any substantial structure;
b) Is not devoted to use as a roadway, parking area, sidewalk or above -ground
stormwater retention/detention area;
c) Is either:
i) Properly planted or landscaped, or
ii) Enhances the pedestrian environment
d) Is capable of being used and enjoyed for purposes of informal and
unstructured recreation and relaxation;
e) Is legally and practicably accessible to the residents of the development from
which the required open space is taken, or to the public.
2) These areas may include, but are not limited to, active and passive recreation areas,
tot lots and community gardens on individual plots, green roofs, and hardscaped
courtyards that may include water features, benches or low walls with seating areas,
free- standing planters, public art or other pedestrian space or design features
integrated into the overall design of the development. Such areas shall be shown on
the site plan.
3) Structures on less than 10,000 square feet are not subject to open space requirements
unless the project is part of or subsequently becomes a part of a series of projects or
phases of a larger development, in which case the original project shall be joined with
153
all subsequent projects or phases in order to determine the required open space for the
whole.
N. Design Standards. Development within the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone shall be in accordance
with the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Design Guidelines attached
to the Plan, as determined by the Planning Board during site plan review and by the
Architectural Review Board during Certificate of Appropriateness review. Furthermore, any
development within the Overlay Zone shall incorporate the following design elements:
1) Buildings shall maximize the number of facade openings for windows and doors in
keeping with the intended function of the building and the architectural character of
the street.
2) All sides of a building open to public view shall employ architectural features such as
windows, a variety of colors, patterns and complex massing to achieve interest
especially at the pedestrian level. Flat, blank walls along public right-of-ways shall
be prohibited.
3) Complex massing shall be used for all structures proposed. Building designs
featuring a single geometric shape, such as a simple rectangle, shall not be allowed.
The requirement for complex massing may be met by building designs featuring a
variety of parapet heights, varying building wall setbacks or balconies, a variety of
roof forms at different heights and an irregular building footprint.
4) Each building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible ground floor
entryway( s).
O. Supplemental Development Standards
1) There shall be set aside an area or areas for recreational purposes exclusively for the
use of occupants of the development and their guests. These areas may include, but
are not limited to, green roofs, community room( s), sitting areas and group game
areas, active and passive recreation areas, tot lots, and community gardens on
individual plots. Such areas shall be shown on the site plan and/ or within the
proposed buildings.
2) Where a UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone approved pursuant to this authorization results in
the permanent preservation of open spaces or the creation of commonly used lands or
facilities, including streets and driveways and parking lots, their location, design,
ownership and use shall be as approved as part of the application review process,
using as a guide the purposes set forth in the Plan.
3) Utilities are required to be underground and any aboveground equipment shall be
located away from major pedestrian streets and corners. Equipment boxes and vaults
must be placed in back of the sidewalk and where landscaping can minimize or screen
their impact. Relocation and provisions for private and public underground utility
154
systems will be made, as needed, to adequately serve redevelopment undertaken in
accordance with this Plan. The costs of relocating the underground utility lines will,
where appropriate, be borne by the utility companies, pursuant to the appropriate
laws, regulations and ordinances concerned with the redevelopment of the project
area.
4) Adequate facilities shall be provided for the removal of snow, trash, garbage, and
recyclables and for the general maintenance of the development. When the method of
disposing of trash and other solid wastes is by means of industrial -type receptacles
dumpsters), all such receptacles shall be located on permanent platforms that shall be
well distributed to serve the development. All receptacles shall be suitably enclosed
on three ( 3) sides by opaque screening or other treatment to be approved by the
Planning Board in its site plan review.
5) Artificial lighting of the grounds shall provide illumination sufficient for the
convenience and safety of all residents. However, such outdoor lighting shall not
project light onto, nor shall sight sources be visible from, adjacent properties. No
outdoor light source shall be more than ten ( 10) feet above the ground level
underneath it.
6) Parking areas shall be paved in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Sidewalks
shall be provided along all internal and external street frontages. Internal roadways
shall have a minimum width which is in accordance with the City' s standards.
7) The City of Mount Vernon shall have the right to require that the applicant or owner
execute such agreements and covenants as it may deem to be required. Said
agreements or covenants shall be recorded in the County Clerk' s office and constitute
a covenant running with the land. Such covenant or agreement may be modified or
released only as set forth in said covenant or agreement or by the City Council.
P. Occupancy Restrictions. Within the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone, affordable housing shall be
limited to occupancy for income eligible persons or families according to Federal income
guidelines as set forth by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or
any other requirements under the financing for the project (when the project is financed using
government funding), and the Land Disposition Agreement (LDA).
Review Process. Following determination by the Urban Renewal Agency and approval by the
City Council of a designated redeveloper( s), the application by the designated redeveloper( s)
for development approval within a UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone shall follow a two -phased
review process:
Application for preliminary development concept plan approval by the City
Council; and
Application for subdivision and/ or site plan approval by the Planning Board and
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Architectural Review Board.
Timing of the submission of preliminary development concept plan, site plan and Certificate
Q.
155
of Appropriateness applications to the City Council, Planning Board and Architectural
Review Board will be coordinated to minimize the length of the review process.
1) Application Process
a) The application for a preliminary development concept plan review shall be
submitted to the City Clerk, who will forward the Application to the Commissioner
of Planning and Community Development, for the Commissioner' s review for
substantial compliance with application standards, prior to its referral to the City
Council. The Application shall include:
b) A preliminary development concept plan showing the various proposed land uses and
their spatial arrangement, including the proposed general location of buildings,
parking areas, public community and/or recreation facilities, utility and maintenance
facilities and open space. An indication of the approximate square footage of
buildings and the approximate number of dwelling units (if applicable). An
indication of the appropriate number of parking and loading spaces in relationship to
their intended use, accompanied by a description of any alternative means of parking
to be utilized. An indication of need for phasing of construction of the project. The
configuration of any interior road system and connection/ access to the adjoining City
road system. The general configuration of pedestrian circulation systems.
Descriptions, sketches and elevations showing the general architectural treatment
and design scheme for the entire development. Any proposed " green" design
features and technologies to be incorporated into the development. Density bonus
and bulk and/ or area variances sought. Drawings shall be submitted approximately
to scale, but need not be to the precision of a finished engineering drawing or final
site plan.
c) Such plans shall be accompanied by a brief analysis, in written form, explaining the
preliminary development concept plan and the planning purposes which will be
achieved and the benefits to be derived by the City and the immediately surrounding
neighborhood in accordance with the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban
Renewal Plan.
2) Upon receipt by the Commissioner of Planning and Community Development of a
preliminary development concept plan application in substantial compliance with
application standards, the application shall be returned to the City Clerk for
placement on the City Council' s agenda. The City Council shall refer the
application to the Planning Board and Architectural Review Board for review and
report. Within 65 days of the date of the Planning Board meeting at which such
referral is received, the Planning Board shall make its report to the City Council, and
within 65 days of the date on which such referral is filed with the Secretary of the
Architectural Review Board, the Architectural Review Board shall make its report to
the City Council. No action shall be taken by the City Council until the City
Council' s receipt of the Planning Board report or the expiration of the Planning
Board 65 day review period, and the City Council' s receipt of the Architectural
Review Board report or the expiration of the Architectural Review Board' s 65 day
review period. Either or both of said review periods may be extended by resolution
of the City Council.
156
3) City Council review of preliminary development concept plan will be in accordance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act. During the course of its review
of a preliminary development concept plan, the City Council may request such
additional information as it deems necessary in order to properly evaluate the
Application.
4) The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing, with notice published in the
City' s official newspaper in accordance with City Code, on the application for
preliminary development concept plan approval. The Applicant must notify all
property owners within 500 feet of any boundary of the development site which is
the subject of the application of the public hearing; such notices shall be given by
registered mail or certified mail, return sender requested or by regular mail to such
property owners whose names appear as the owners of record in the Office of the
Assessor. Such notice shall be mailed not more than 21 days prior to and not less
than 10 days before the date of the public hearing. The Applicant shall file with the
City Council, not less than 9 days prior to the date of the public hearing, a duly
sworn affidavit attesting that such property owners were so notified. Where the City
Council is serving as lead agency under SEQRA and determines to hold a SEQRA
hearing, the SEQRA hearing may be conducted jointly with this public hearing if
practicable.
Within 45 days of the close of the public hearings and completion of the SEQRA
process, the City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove
the preliminary development concept plan. The review period may be extended by
resolution of the City Council as circumstances require.
6) Approval or approval with modifications of the preliminary development concept
plan by the City Council is required for and shall be deemed to authorize the
Applicant to proceed with the detailed design of the proposed development in
accordance with such preliminary development concept plan and to submit a site
plan and/ or subdivision application to the Planning Board for approval per Article
VII of Chapter 267 of City Code and submit a Certificate of Appropriateness
application to the Architectural Review Board. Such plans shall be approved by the
Planning Board and the Architectural Review Board in accordance with the
municipal zoning code, prior to issuance of a building permit.
7) Preliminary development concept plan approval shall expire 12 months from the
date of City Council approval unless all required approvals from the Planning Board
and ARB are received prior to that date. Upon request of the Applicant, the City
Council may extend that time period in increments for not more than 6 months, each
time an extension is granted.
5)
R. Townhouse Preservation Sub -district (UR -PUD -S4 -TP).
1) Purpose. The purpose of the Townhouse Preservation Sub -district is to preserve the
architecturally and culturally significant " brownstone" style urban flats that fall
within the South Fourth Avenue -East Third Street Urban Renewal Area through the
use of preservation and rehabilitation strategies.
157
2) Boundaries. The boundaries of the UR -PUD -S4 -TP' Sub -District shall be fixed by
amendment to the official City Zoning Map as authorized by the City Council. A
metes and bounds perimeter description of the sub -district, including Section, Block
and Lot of all parcels, within such Sub -District, shall be kept on file in the Office of
the City Clerk.
3) Requirements. Multifamily residential uses, not to exceed three units, shall be
permitted in the Townhouse Preservation Sub -district.
4) Rehabilitation.
Under this sub -district, redeveloper( s) and/or property owner( s) shall make every
effort to preserve, maintain and restore all structures within this sub -district. As such,
any exterior alteration, restoration, reconstruction, demolition or new construction of
properties in this sub -district will maintain the materials, height, bulk, setbacks, light
fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the " Modern Flats". In the event that a
building( s) or structure(s) of which or a portion of which is destroyed or damaged by
any means to an extent of 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of such building
or structure, the building(s) or structure( s) shall be reconstructed as prescribed in the
Chapter 267 - Article VI.
5) Reconstruction.
In the event the Building Commissioner determines that a building or structure, all or
a portion of which is destroyed or damaged by any means to an extent of 75 percent
or more of the replacement cost of the entire building or structure, the redeveloper( s)
and/ or property owner( s) depending on the number of properties may elect one ( 1) of
the following:
To construct a multi -family building(s), not to exceed three ( 3) dwelling units,
within the existing building footprint(s) which is in keeping with the architectural
style of the Modern Flats as determined by the Architectural Review Board during
Certificate of Appropriateness review;
To merge the parcel( s) into the overall UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone and follow all
regulations governing development in that Overlay Zone provided that the
redeveloper( s) and/ or property owner(s) demonstrate to the City Council that
efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property(ies) for
preservation purposes have failed and that the property is incapable of earning a
reasonable return.
S. Conflicts with other zoning requirements.
1) In approval of a preliminary development concept plan under this Chapter 267 -
Article VI, the City Council may vary the bulk and area requirements that would
otherwise apply under any other provision of this chapter.
158
2) If any provision of the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone conflicts with any other
requirement of the Zoning Code, the UR -PUD -S4 Overlay Zone provision shall
supersede that other requirement to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 5. The Official Zoning Map of the City of Mount Vernon is hereby amended as
follows:
A. The Official Zoning Map of the City of Mount Vernon is amended to reflect that the
following premises are hereby rezoned, reclassified and re -designated to a UR -PUD -S4 South
Fourth Avenue — East Third Street Urban Renewal Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone:
Address Section -Block -Lot
158 S. 4th Ave. 165.78- 3088- 21
160 S. 4th Ave. 165.78- 3088- 22
162 S. 4th Ave. 165. 78- 3088- 23
7 W. 3rd St. 165. 78- 3088- 24
9 W. 3rd St. 165. 78- 3088- 25
9 E. 3rd St. 165. 78-3110- 19
163 S. 4th Ave. 165. 78- 3110-20
161 S. 4th Ave. 165. 78- 3110-21
159 S. 4th Ave. 165. 78- 3110-22
157 S. 4th Ave. 165.78- 3110- 23
201 S. 6th Ave. 169. 22-3084-01
26 W. 3rd St. 169. 22-3084- 02
24 W. 3rd St. 169. 22-3084- 03
204 S. 5th Ave. 169. 22- 3084- 04
205 S. 6th Ave. 169. 22-3084- 36
208 S. 5th Ave. 169. 22-3084-37
205 S. 5th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 01
10 W. 3rd St. 169. 22-3089-02
202 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 03
206 S. 4th Ave. 169.22- 3089- 04
208 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22- 3089- 05
210- 224 S. 4th Ave. 169.22- 3089- 06
226 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22- 3089- 11
230 S. 4th Ave. 169.22- 3089- 12
232 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 13
234 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 14
238 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 16
242 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22-3089- 17
246 S. 4th Ave. 169. 22- 3089- 18
256 S. 4th Ave. 169.22- 3089- 19
159
256 S. 4th Ave.
258 S. 4th Ave.
260 S. 4th Ave.
264 S. 4th Ave.
227 S. 5th Ave.
223 S. 5th Ave.
217 s. 5th Ave.
215 S. 5th Ave.
213 S. 5th Ave.
209 S. 5th Ave.
207 S. 5th Ave.
2 E. 3rd St.
10 E. 3rd St.
12 E. 3rd St.
16 E. 3rd ST.
230 S. 3rd Ave.
234 S. 3rd Ave.
238 S. 3rd Ave.
253 S. 4th Ave.
270 S. 3rd Ave.
267 S. 4th Ave.
229 S. 4th Ave.
217 S. 4th Ave.
215 S. 4th Ave.
211 S. 4th Ave.
209 S. 4th Ave.
207 S. 4th Ave.
203 S. 4th Ave.
7 East 4th Street
169. 22- 3089- 20
169. 22- 3089- 21
169.22-3089- 22
169.22-3089- 23
169.22- 3089- 38
169.22- 3089- 39
169.22- 3089-40
169.22- 3089-41
169. 22- 3089-42
169. 22-3089-43
169.22- 3089-44
169.22- 3109- 01
169. 22- 3109- 02
169. 22-3109- 03
169. 22-3109- 04
169. 22-3109- 08
169. 22-3109- 09
169.22- 3109- 10
169.22- 3109- 16
169.22- 3109- 18
169.22- 3109- 20
169.22- 3109- 29
169.22- 3109- 30
169.22- 3109- 31
169.22- 3109- 32
169.22- 3109- 33
169. 22- 3109- 34
169. 22-3109- 35
169. 22-3109- 36
B. The Official Zoning Map of the City of Mount Vernon is amended to reflect that the
following premises are hereby rezoned, reclassified and re -designated to a UR -PUD -S4 -TP
Townhouse Preservation Sub -district:
Address Section -Block -Lot
240 S. 3rd Ave. 169. 22-3109- 11
242 S. 3rd Ave. 169.22- 3109- 12
244 S. 3rd Ave. 169. 22- 3109- 13
246 S. 3rd Ave. 169. 22- 3109- 14
248 S. 3rd Ave. 169. 22- 3109- 15
160
Article VI - Special Permit Uses
Article VI — Section 1. General provisions.
Special permit uses for which conformance to additional requirements is mandated by this
chapter shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the
satisfaction of the conditions and standards set forth in this section, in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter. All such uses are declared to possess characteristics of such unique
and special form that each specific use must be considered as an individual case.
Article VI — Section 2. Approving agency.
The approving agency for the following listed special permit uses shall be the Planning Board:
A. Universities or colleges as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
B. Offices for drug rehabilitation purposes.
C. LPG distribution businesses and/or facilities.
D. Fast-food restaurants providing drive -up window service as regulated by Chapter 267 -
Article VI.
E. Domiciliary -care facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
F. Public utility uses as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
G. Uses of other governmental agencies as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
H. Height limitations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article IV.
I. Private schools as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
J. Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
K. Bars, nightclubs and catering halls as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article V.
L. Motor vehicle dealerships.
M. Motor vehicle service stations as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
N. Motor vehicle service and repair facilities as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI
O. Motor vehicle body repair shops as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
P. Car washes.
Q. Churches or other places of worship.
R. Day- care centers.
S. Nursery schools.
T. Satellite earth stations or dish antennas as regulated by Chapter 267 - Article VI.
U. Asphalt heating and/ or mixing plant located at least 1, 200 feet from a residence district.
V. Manufacture, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products, in fully enclosed buildings,
provided that the off-street loading facilities are located at least 50 feet from a residence
district.
W. Adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment business, adult motion -picture theater, as
regulated in Chapter 267 - Article VI.
Added 2- 3- 1999]
161
Article VI — Section 3. Procedure.
A. Application. Applicants shall submit a preliminary application to the Building Department
prior to formal submission of a complete special permit application to the approving agency. An
application shall be considered officially submitted at such meeting, provided that the approving
agency or staff determines such application to be complete. If not, such application shall be
rejected. The application shall include a site plan meeting the requirements of Chapter 267 -
Article VII, as well as a written statement describing the nature of the proposed use and how it
will meet the requirements of this chapter.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
B. Review and decision. Review shall be in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Review by other agencies. Upon acceptance of a complete application, the approving
agency shall forward copies for review and report to such other agencies and officials of
the City as it deems appropriate. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with the notice of
public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and to the clerks of abutting
municipalities as required by law.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
2. Public hearing. A public hearing on an application for a special permit shall be held by the
approving agency within 62 days of the date that a complete application is received.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Notice, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009. This local law also providedfor the
renumbering ofSubsection B(4) and (5) as Subsection B(3) and (4), respectively.
3. Action. Within 62 days of the date that the public hearing is closed, the approving agency
shall make its decision and shall file with the Building Commissioner a written report
setting forth the facts of the case and its findings, conclusions and decisions on the
application. The approving agency may only authorize the issuance of a special permit
where it finds that all standards of this chapter have been met or a variance therefor has
been granted.
4. Extensions of time periods. The applicant may be granted extensions of any of the above
stipulated time limits; provided, however, that any extension of time granted to an official
or agency making a report to the approving agency shall equally extend any time limit for
the approving agency.
Article VI — Section 4. Standards.
All special permit uses shall comply with the following standards in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter. The approving agency shall attach such additional conditions and
safeguards to any special permit as are, in its opinion, necessary to ensure initial and continual
conformance to all applicable standards and requirements.
162
A. The location and size of the special permit use, the nature and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in relation to it and the location
of the site with respect to streets giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is located.
B. The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences and the nature and extent of
existing or proposed plantings on the site are such that the special permit use will not hinder or
discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings.
C. Operations in connection with any special permit use will not be more objectionable to
nearby properties by reason of noise, traffic, fumes, vibration or other such characteristics than
would be the operations of permitted uses not requiring a special permit.
Article VI — Section 5. Standards and requirements for specific special permit uses.
The following standards and requirements are hereby established for specific special permit uses.
They must, as applicable, be met before issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board.
A. Universities, colleges and private schools.
1. The institution shall be a not-for-profit corporation.
2. The institution shall be chartered by the Board of Regents of the State of New York and
shall be operated in accordance with the requirements of the New York State Education
Department.
3. Outdoor playing fields shall be set back from neighboring streets and property lines and
shall be screened from public view with fencing and/or buffer landscaping all in
accordance with a plan as determined adequate by the approving agency.
4. The minimum off-street parking and loading space requirements shall be determined by
the approving agency based on consideration of at least the following: gross floor area;
expected number of students and staff; capacity of classrooms, laboratories and places of
public assembly; scheduling of classes; availability of public transit; availability of public
parking in the immediate area; and expected number of students to be resident on campus.
B. Domiciliary -care facilities. No office of a professional person shall be permitted except for
the treatment of residents of the facility itself.
C. Radio towers.
1. Radio towers for licensed amateur radio stations shall not exceed 75 feet above the
established grade.
2. The radio tower shall be set back from any lot line a distance at least equal to its height.
3. The tower shall have either a smooth, nonclimbable surface to a height of 10 feet above
grade or else a six -foot -high fence with a locked gate completely enclosing the tower and
located within 10 feet of it.
4. The radio tower shall be a commercially manufactured type with published specifications,
standards and stresses.
5. The base of the tower shall be no greater than two square feet in area.
163
6. Guy wires shall be provided as necessary and shall terminate at a solid structure not less
than 10 feet above grade.
D. Satellite earth stations and dish antennas. A satellite earth station or dish antenna may be
located, installed, constructed or maintained on any lot, building or structure only when in
compliance with all the following requirements:
1. All satellite earth stations or dish antenna shall be designed, constructed and installed in
conformance with all building, electrical, fire prevention, noise and other applicable codes
and regulations, as well as any other construction or performance standards, rules and
regulations of any government entity having jurisdiction over such devices, including,
without limitation, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
2. The height of the satellite earth station or dish antenna shall be measured from the bottom
of its base or pad to the highest point of the earth station or antenna when in the most
vertical position.
3. All satellite earth stations and dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard.
4. Setbacks from the property line shall be equal to or greater than the height of the proposed
structure, but not less than 15 feet from the rear and side lot lines.
5. The distance from any guy anchorage or similar device shall be at least 10 feet from any
property line.
6. Suitable protective nonclimbable fencing and a landscape planting screen shall be provided
and maintained around the structure and accessory attachments in order to minimize
visibility from streets and surrounding properties.
7. The applicant shall present appropriate documentation related to any license required by
federal, state or local agencies.
8. No satellite earth station or dish antenna shall be erected to a height greater than the
permitted building height in the district in which it is located.
9. Only one such structure shall exist at any one time on any single residentially zoned and
used lot or parcel.
10. The application shall include construction drawings showing the proposed method of
installation, structural engineering analysis and site plan depicting structures and plantings
on the property and all residential structures on adjacent properties. At the request of the
approving agency, documentation of a maintenance program may be required.
11. The construction and installation of roof -mounted satellite dish antennas may be
permitted only when the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving
agency that locating the satellite dish antenna in conformance with Subsection D(3) above
would obstruct the antenna's reception window or otherwise excessively interfere with the
reception by not allowing receipt of at least 70% of the available programming, and such
obstruction or interference involves factors beyond the applicant's control. The
construction and installation of roof -mounted satellite dish antennas shall meet the
following requirements:
a. The load distribution within the building's roof and/ or a wind velocity test shall be
provided by a registered engineer where deemed necessary by the Building
Commissioner.
b. A roof -mounted satellite dish antenna installed on a pitched roof shall be installed on
that side of the pitched roof not facing any public or private road.
1. 64
c. A roof -mounted satellite dish antenna installed on a flat roof shall be installed on that
portion of the flat roof which is least visible from any public or private road.
d. A satellite dish antenna mounted on a roof or building shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, nor shall any such antenna project more than six feet above the peak or highest
point of the roof line.
e. Where feasible, and taking into consideration structural and architectural factors, roof -
mounted satellite dish antennas shall be installed with parapets and/ or an architecturally
matching screening plan.
1. APPLICATION: This Special Permit Use shall be applicable only to properties meeting
the following standards:
a. An area of at least one- half acre;
b. Within one-quarter mile of a train station, as measured in a direct line from the closest
edge of a passenger platform to the closest point of the property;
c. Within 200 feet of an exit to a limited -access highway or parkway, as measured in a
direct line from the closest point of an entrance to or exit from such highway or
parkway to the closest point of the property; and
d. Within one-quarter mile of a municipally operated parking facility, as measured in a
direct line from the closest pedestrian entrance of such facility to the closest pedestrian
entrance of the property.
2. PROCEDURE: Notwithstanding any other provision of the codes, laws, rules and
ordinances of the City of Mt Vernon, and in recognition of the unique characteristics of this
type of development, the following shall apply:
a. The Special Permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council;
b. The Site Plan to be submitted with the Special Permit Application shall depict the
proposal to the extent necessary to explain the project; and
c. If the Special Permit is approved, the detailed Site Plan meeting all requirements
Chapter 267 - Article VI shall be submitted within six months of such approval, and
shall include a Stormwater Management Plan only where clearing, grading, excavating,
soil disturbance or placement of fill results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than
one acre, or the same activities disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part
of a larger common plan of development;
3. STANDARDS:
a. The maximum average height of development may not exceed 120 feet (but not more
than 12 stories). However, in the case of a corner lot, a height of 180 feet (but not more
than 18 stories) may be permitted for up to one third of the lot area and the rest of the lot
area must be developed at a lower height so that the average height of all development
on the lot is maintained at no more than 120 feet;
b. Note 1 on the Schedule of Dimensional Regulations Nonresidence Districts shall not
apply; and
c. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be one ( 1. 0) per dwelling unit
165
F. Fast-food restaurants providing drive -up window service. No fast-food restaurant providing
drive -up window service shall be located within 200 feet of a public school, church or other
place of worship or any other fast- food restaurant providing drive -up window service.
G. Motor vehicle service stations, repair facilities and body repair shops.
1. All repair work and servicing, except for the sale of fuel and lubricants, shall be
performed within a fully enclosed building.
2. All vehicles in the process of repair or servicing, and all products for sale, except
lubricants in sealed containers, shall be stored within a fully enclosed building.
3. No part of any building, equipment or pump shall be located within 30 feet of any
residence district or within 15 feet of any lot line.
4. All motor vehicle filling stations, service stations, repair facilities, body repair shops,
storage and sales areas shall be screened along all streets and property lines, except where
adjoining another automotive use and except at points of ingress and egress. Such
screening shall consist of an evergreen hedge or wall of masonry construction (faced in
brick or stone). Along the street frontage portion of a lot, the height of screening shall be
no less than two nor more than three feet. In all other areas, it shall be a minimum of
three feet six inches and a maximum of six feet in height, except where a lesser height is
required to provide safe sight distance for traffic or pedestrians. All such screening areas
shall be at least three feet in width.
H. Public utility uses.
1. When proposed, aboveground public utility uses shall comply with the district
dimensional regulations in which they are located and shall be subject to a finding, in
addition to the standards of Chapter 267 - Article VI, that a public necessity exists for
such use and that the use of the particular site for which application is made is either
necessary or appropriate from a public standpoint.
2. The approving agency shall require that such use be enclosed by protective fencing with a
gate which shall be closed and locked except when necessary to obtain access thereto.
3. The installation shall be so designed, enclosed, painted and screened with evergreens that
it will be harmonious with the area in which it is located. The entire property shall be
suitably landscaped and maintained in reasonable conformity with the standards of
property maintenance of the surrounding neighborhood.
I. Adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment business and adult motion -picture theater.
An adult entertainment store, adult live entertainment business or adult motion -picture theater
may be established on a property by special permit subject to the following conditions:
Added 2- 3- 1999]
166
1. No one establishment may exceed more than 5, 000 square feet of floor space. Floor space
includes storage areas and other areas restricted to employees or owners only, but does
not include spaces where human occupation does not normally occur, such as an
unfinished attic or basement with less than six feet from floor to ceiling of said attic or
basement.
2. Only one type of adult entertainment business shall be established on any one property.
3. All adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited from displaying any adult
entertainment merchandise or creating any display or sign illustrating specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas in such a manner that it may be wholly or partially
visible from any public right-of-way.
4. All adult live entertainment businesses and adult motion -picture theaters shall be
prohibited from conducting performances or creating viewing areas that are conducted
out-of-doors and/or are wholly or partially visible from any public right-of-way.
5. Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted to patronize or be employed for the
purpose of working at any adult entertainment business as defined by Chapter 267 -
Article II.
6. Viewing booths used for the viewing of films, videos or other visual material or for
viewing live entertainment shall not be enclosed and shall not have more than three walls
and shall be placed in such a manner that patrons can be monitored by the employees or
the owner of the business in order to control indecent or lewd behavior by the patrons of
such viewing booths.
7. No property with an adult entertainment business shall be located any closer than 500 feet
from an property line of any residential district, parks, schools, places of worship,
community centers, youth services, day- care centers, nursery schools or museums within
the City or in any adjoining municipality. Distance between property lines shall be
measured from the shortest distance between the two property lines irrespective of rightsof-way.
8. No adult entertainment business shall be established in any building that has a residence,
even if the residence is classified as a nonconforming use for that district or located
within 500 feet of any residence, even if the residence is classified as a nonconforming
use in the district where the residence is located within the City or in any adjoining
municipality.
9. No adult entertainment business shall be established within 1, 000 feet of any other adult
entertainment business, as defined by Chapter 267 - Article II.
10. Adult live entertainment business with on- site entertainment shall be prohibited from
operating from the hours of 4:00 a.m. to 6: 00 p.m.
167
11. All adult entertainment business uses shall meet all other requirements of this chapter and
other applicable ordinances and laws of the City of Mount Vernon, including parking
regulations as set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
12. No adult entertainment business shall be established on the same property or an adjacent
property where there is another previously established business that is regularly
patronized by children.
J. Regulations for the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities.
Added 2- 23- 2005, approved 2- 24- 2005]
1. Purpose and legislative intent. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of
Mount Vernon' s authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The City of Mount Vernon finds that wireless
telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public
welfare, character and environment of the City and its inhabitants. The City also
recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an
economic development asset to the City and of significant benefit to the City and its
residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities is consistent with the City's land use policies, the City is
adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facilities application and
permit process. The intent of this zoning regulation is to minimize the negative impact of
wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review
and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of
environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
City of Mount Vernon as well as protect the scenic and aesthetic facets of the City and be
in line with the City's Master Plan for Land Use adopted November 27, 1961.
2. Severability.
a. If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of these
regulations or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void,
unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part,
section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be
severable, and the remaining provisions of these regulations, and all applications
thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in
full force and effect.
b. Any special use permit issued under these regulations shall be comprehensive and not
severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any
material respect by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority,
the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the City.
3. Definitions.
a. For purposes of these regulations, and where not inconsistent with the context of a
particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When not inconsistent with
168
the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the
plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word " shall" is always mandatory, and not merely
directory.
b. As used in this section, the following terms shall have meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY or STRUCTURE - An accessory facility or structure
serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and
located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities,
including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or
cabinets,
APPLICATION - All necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant
submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities.
ANTENNA - A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. Such shall
include, but not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging, personal
telecommunications services ( PCS), microwave telecommunications and services not
licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the City' s siting, building and
permitting authority.
BASE TRANSMITTER - A stationary transmitter that provides radio
telecommunications service to mobile and/or fixed receivers, including those
associated with mobile stations.
COLLOCATION - The use of an existing tower or structure to support antennas for
the provision of wireless services.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE - The inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in
commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably
anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The
inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing
alone, shall not deem a situation to be commercially impracticable and shall not
render an act or the terms of an agreement commercially impracticable.
COMMON CARRIER - An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock
company, trust or corporation engaged in rendering radio telecommunications
services to the general public for hire.
COMPLETED APPLICATION - An application that contains all information and/ or
data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
169
application and where a consultant is involved, when the consultant has issued a final
report.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM or DAS - A network of spatially separated
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides
wireless service within. a geographic area or structure.
FAA - The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized
successor agency.
FCC - The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT - When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the
preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said
highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY - The addition, removal or change of any of the
physical and visually discernible components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as
antennas, cabling, radios, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds,
changing the color or materials of any visually discernible components, vehicular
access, parking and/or an upgrade or change -out of equipment for better or more
modem equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a
telecommunications tower or telecommunications site is a modification. A
modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless
facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any
matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without
adding, removing or changing anything, or for the addition of internal equipment
which will not result in any change to the visual appearance of a wireless facility.
MONOPOLE - Any freestanding pole greater than 12 feet in height in a residential
district and 25 feet in height in a nonresidential district upon which an antenna is or
has been located.
NIER - Non -ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON - Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint-stock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any
other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY - See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS - Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services,
170
including cellular radiotelephone, specialized mobile radio system and personal
communications services as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
PLANNING BOARD - The Planning Board of the City of Mount Vernon, New York.
SITE PLAN - A map showing the layout, arrangement and use of buildings and land,
including accessory uses, structures, facilities and services and meeting the
informational requirements of these regulations.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT - The official document or permit by which an applicant is
allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or
issued by the City.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY - Minimize adverse aesthetic and visual
impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding,
and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and
physically intrusive facility.
STATE - The State of New York.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS - The transmission and/or reception of audio, video,
data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or
electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE - See clefinition for "wireless telecommunications
facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE - A structure used in the provision of
services described in the definition of "wireless telecommunications facilities."
TEMPORARY - Temporary in relation to all aspects and components of these
regulations, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES means and includes a
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER and TOWER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE and PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY -
A structure, facility or location designed, or intended tobe used as, or used to
support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without
limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures that employ camouflage
technology, including, but not limited to structures such as a multistory building,
church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other structures that can be used to mitigate
the visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such, including all
related facilities, such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated
with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving
171
radio, television, cellular, paging, 911, personal telecommunications services,
commercial satellite services, microwave services and services not licensed by the
FCC, but not expressly exempt from the City's siting, building and permitting
authority, excluding those used exclusively for the City's fire, police or exclusively
for private, noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands,
amateur radio and other similar noncommercial telecommunications where the height
of the facility is below the height limits set forth in these regulations and local zoning.
4. Special use permit application and other requirements.
a. Permit granting agency; applications to be complete.
1. All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or
any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
section. The Planning Board is the officially designated agency or body of the City
to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make
decisions with respect to granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying, or
revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The City
may at its discretion delegate or designate other official agencies of the City to
accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the Planning Board
with respect to the granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or
revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
2. An application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth
and completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the applicant,
shall also sign the application and shall agree to remove any existing violations and
make all existing telecommunications facilities compliant with these regulations and
all applicable local, state and telecommunications codes prior to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy or compliance or the functional equivalent for a new or
modified wireless facility. At the discretion of the City, any false or misleading
statement in the application may subject the applicant to denial of the application
without further consideration or opportunity for correction.
3. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise
incomplete may be rejected by the City.
b. The applicant shall include a statement in writing:
1. That the applicant' s proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the special use
permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the City in writing, as
well as all applicable and permissible local codes, laws, and regulations, including
any and all applicable City, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations;
2. That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally
permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the applicant is authorized to
do business in the state. Written evidence of that authorization shall be provided.
172
c. No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or constructed until the
application is reviewed and approved by the City, and the special use permit has been
issued and a building permit.
d. All applications for the construction or installation of new wireless telecommunications
facilities shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. The application shall be
signed by an authorized individual on behalf of the applicant. Where a certification is
called for, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer
licensed in the state. The application shall include the following information:
1. Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless telecommunications
facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the City with service to
adjacent municipalities to not exceed 40% of the total area to be covered by the
proposed facility. Such documentation shall include propagation studies and maps of
the proposed site and all other planned, proposed, in service or existing sites in the
City and in all contiguous municipalities. If the applicant is addressing a capacity
issue, documentation must be submitted to include but not be limited to the
following: usage and forecasted or present blockage; call volume, drive -test data
results, including date of test. Locations of tests, and signal strength results; and any
other technically pertinent information.
2. The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report.
3. The name, address, and phone number of the property owner, operator, and
applicant, and to include the legal form of the applicant.
4. The postal address and Tax Map parcel number of the property.
5. The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated.
6. Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a diagram
showing the location of all lot lines; in the case of a new tower, topographical map
of property and adjacent land at increments of two feet zero inches; topographic
lines which clearly define the slopes and height of the land and structure location and
heights at each finished floor and roof.
7. The location of nearest landmark.
8. The location of nearest residential structure which shall include a vicinity map to
show what facilities are adjacent to the installation.
9. The property owner and address of all adjacent residential structures, occupiable
structures, child day-care center, schools, camps, public parks and playgrounds.
10. The location, size and height of all structures on the property which is the subject of
the application.
11. The location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and all
appurtenant structures.
12. The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and
fencing; in the case of a new tower, such shall be shown via the use of plans,
sections and three- dimensional models.
13. The number, type and design of the tower( s) and antenna(s) proposed and the basis
for the calculations of the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users.
14. The owner, make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna( s) and the
number and type of existing antennas.
173
15. A description of the proposed tower and antenna( s) and all related fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above preexisting grade,
materials, color and lighting.
16. The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting
equipment.
17. The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective radiated power of the
antenna( s).
18. Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the antenna( s).
19. Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are within the threshold levels
adopted by the FCC and that the proposed site will not produce or contribute to the
production of emissions levels exceeding the thresholds listed in Table IV or any
subsequent superseding emission standard adopted by the FCC, based on the
maximum equipment output.
20. Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause interference with other
telecommunications devices.
21. A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless
telecommunications facilities.
22. Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and analysis has been
conducted and that taking into account the subsurface and substrata, and the
proposed drainage plan, that the site is adequate to assure the stability of the
proposed wireless telecommunications facilities on the proposed site.
23. Certification, where co -location is not proposed, that co -location is not feasible and
why.
e. In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written report
demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing tower(s) or the use
of alternative buildings or other structures within the City. Copies of written requests
and responses for shared use shall be provided to the City in the application, along with
any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection.
f. The applicant shall certify that the telecommunications facility, foundation and
attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, City, state and
federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads.
g. The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunications facilities will be
effectively grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and property and installed
with appropriate surge protectors.
h. The Planning Board intends to be the lead agency, pursuant to SEQRA. The Board
shall conduct an integrated, comprehensive environmental review of the proposed
project in combination with its review of the application under these regulations.
i. An applicant shall be required to submit an environmental assessment form and a visual
addendum. Based on the results of the form, including the visual addendum, the City
may require submission of a more detailed visual analysis. The scope of the required
environmental and visual assessment will be reviewed at the preapplication meeting.
174
j. The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include:
1. A Zone of Visibility Map which shall be provided in order to determine locations
from which the tower may be seen by a turning radius of 360°.
2. Pictorial representations of before and after views from key viewpoints both inside
and outside of the City as may be appropriate, including but not limited to state
highways and other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic
districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other
location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents.
Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key sites at a preapplication
meeting.
3. An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and accessory
buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or
appropriateness of screening.
k. The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall
effectively screen from view the base and all related facilities and structures of the
proposed wireless telecommunications facilities.
1. Any and all representations made by the applicant to the City on the record during the
application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application
and may be relied upon in good faith by the City.
m. All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be installed
underground and in compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of New York State
and of the City, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety
Code and the National Electrical Code, where appropriate.
n. All wireless telecommunications facilities applications shall contain a demonstration
that the facility is sited so as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably possible and
thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character, on
existing vegetation, and on the residences in the area of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
o. Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or associated
facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to
blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural
surroundings; this shall include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as
may be required by the City.
p. At a telecommunications site, an access road, turnaround space and parking shall be
provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of
vegetation, which cutting of vegetation shall be replaced in equal amount to near or in
175
q.
proximity to the location of the proposed cutting. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
A person who holds a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, provide for removal of, modify or restore the
permitted wireless telecommunications facilities in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the City, state, or
United States, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the National
Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not
limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In
the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding, the more stringent shall
apply.
r. A holder of a special use permit granted under these regulations shall obtain, at its own
expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, rule, regulation or code,
and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the City
or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
s. An applicant shall submit to the City 11 completed applications determined to be
needed at the pre -application meeting. Written notification of the application shall be
provided to the legislative body of all adjacent municipalities.
t. The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed tower to
accommodate future demand for at least five additional commercial applications; for
example, future co -locations. The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate
at least five additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as
close to the applicant' s antenna as possible without causing interference. This
requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that
the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is
commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based
upon:
1. The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area.
2. The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed.
3. The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless telecommunications
facilities spaces/ sites.
4. Available space on existing and approved towers.
u. Shared use.
1. The owner of the proposed new tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall
negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless
service providers in the future, and shall:
a. Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared -use
applicant;
176
b. Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new
tower by other telecommunications providers;
c. Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications provider agrees
in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not limited
to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration,
land costs, site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity,
less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to
accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference.
2. Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of
the special use permit for the tower.
v. There shall be a pre -application meeting. The purpose of the preapplication meeting
will be to address issues which will help the applicant with the review and permitting
process. A pre -application meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a
prior site visit for the requested site. Costs of the City's consultants to prepare for and
attend the pre -application meeting will be borne by the applicant.
w. The holder of a special use permit shall notify the City of any intended modification of
a wireless telecommunications facility and shall apply to the City to modify, relocate or
rebuild a wireless telecommunications facility.
x. In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new telecommunication tower, the
applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on the application, hold a " balloon test." The
applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a threefoot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new
tower. The dates ( including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date),
times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14
days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the
City. The applicant shall inform the City, in writing, of the dates and times of the test,
at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive
hours sometime between 7: 00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date
shall be on a weekend, but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary
date may be on a weekday.
y. The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified
individual or organization, to determine if the tower or existing structure intended to
support wireless facilities requires lighting under Federal Aviation Administration
Regulation Part 77. This requirement shall be for any new tower or for an existing
structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or
building. If this analysis determines that the FAA must be contacted, then all filings
with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be
provided in a timely manner.
5. Location of wireless telecommunications facilities.
177
a. Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said
wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, [ 1]
being the highest priority and [ 111 being the lowest priority.
Amended 9- 23- 2009, approved 9- 24-2009]
1. On existing towers, buildings or other structures on City -owned properties,
including the right-of-way, and properties owned by the Industrial Development
Agency (IDA) and the Urban Renewal Agency (URA).
2. On existing towers, buildings or other structures elsewhere in the City.
3. A new tower on City -owned properties, including the right-of-way, and properties
owned by the IDA or URA in areas zoned for industrial use.
4. A new tower on City -owned properties, including the right-of-way, and properties
owned by the IDA or URA in areas zoned for commercial use.
5. A new tower on City -owned properties, including the right-of-way, and properties
owned by the IDA or URA in areas zoned for downtown business use.
6. A new tower on City -owned properties, including the right-of-way, and properties
owned by the IDA or URA in areas zoned for neighborhood business use.
7. A new tower on City -owned properties, including the right-of-way, and properties
owned by the IDA or URA in areas zoned for residential use.
8. A new tower on properties in areas zoned for commercial use.
9. A new tower on properties in areas zoned for downtown business.
10. A new tower on properties in areas zoned for neighborhood business use.
11. A new tower on properties in areas zoned for residential use.
b. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a
detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not
selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the
reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the
hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for the
proposed site.
c. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the
only site leased or selected. An application shall address co -location as an option. If
such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction
of the City why co -location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements
between providers limiting or prohibiting co -location shall not be a valid basis for any
claim of commercial impracticability or hardship.
d. Notwithstanding the above, the City may approve any site located within an area in
the above list of priorities, provided that the City finds that the proposed site is in the
best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants and will
not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and
neighborhood.
e. The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the applicant's review of the
above locations in order of priority, demonstrating the technological reason for the
site selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed
178
written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be
included with the application.
f. Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or
highest available priority, the City may disapprove an application for any of the
following reasons:
1. Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements.
2. Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or historical
di strict.
3. The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary
to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation.
4. The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would
create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the
public, employees and agents of the City, or employees of the service provider or
other service providers.
5. Conflicts with the provisions of these regulations.
6. Shared use of wireless telecommunications facilities and other structures.
a. Locating on existing towers or other structures without increasing the height shall be
preferred by the City, as opposed to the construction of a new tower. The applicant
shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other suitable
structures within four miles of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the
applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot be used.
b. An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall
be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the
applicant.
c. Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically
required to provide service primarily and essentially within the City, to the extent
practicable, unless good cause is shown.
7. Height of telecommunications tower( s).
a. The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any tower,
facility and/or antenna and the basis therefor. Such documentation will be analyzed in
the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and
essentially within the City, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
b. The maximum permitted height of a new tower shall be the minimum height
necessary to provide service to locations within the City of Mount Vernon, but in no
case shall the height exceed 80 feet above average grade level, unless the applicant
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that a greater height is necessary.
179
c. Omnidirectional or whip antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches
in diameter and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the tower
or tall building.
d. Directional or panel antenna shall not exceed six feet in height or two feet in width
and shall be of a material or color which matches either the exterior of the tower or
tall building or the sky tone above and beyond.
e. Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed three feet in diameter and,
when building- or rooftop -mounted, shall be located or screened so as not be easily
visible from abutting public streets. No dish antennas shall be clustered.
f. Building -mounted antennas should be located and designed to be an integral part of
the building and any wall -mounted antennas should not exceed more than four feet
from wall.
g. No tower constructed after the effective date of these regulations, including allowing
for all attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit operation without
required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with municipal, City, state,
and/ or any federal statute, law, Local law, City law, code, rule or regulation.
8. Appearance and visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities.
a. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked,
except as required by law.
b. Towers shall be galvanized and painted with a rust -preventive paint of an appropriate
color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with
the requirements of these regulations.
c. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting
of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal
regulations.
9. Security and noise of wireless telecommunications facilities. All wireless
telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located or otherwise secured in a
manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically:
a. All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy wires, shall be
made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that
they cannot be climbed or collided with; and
b. Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed such a manner
that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them;
180
c. Equipment shelters in connection with facilities on existing buildings shall be
constructed either within the building or on the rooftop in a location secured from the
public;
d. Noise -producing equipment shall be sited and insulated to guarantee there is no
increase in noise above allowable ambient levels measured from habitable or used
spaces as per codes at the property line and adjacent edifice.
10. Signage. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four
square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of
the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain the
name( s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna( s) as well as emergency phone
number(s); the date of installation and the application number and inspection dates. The
sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the
access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet.
The sign shall not be lighted, unless lighting is required by applicable law, rule or
regulation. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted.
11 Lot size and setbacks. All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless
telecommunications facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded
rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: a
distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications facility
structure plus 10% of the height of the tower or structure, or the existing setback
requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory
structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback
requirements for the property on which it is situated.
12. Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant.
a. The Board and City may hire any consultant and/ or expert necessary to assist the
Board and the City in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
recertification.
b. An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse the City for all
reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the City in
connection with the review of any application, including the construction and
modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $ 5, 000. The
placement of the $5, 000 in escrow fees with the City shall precede the pre -application
meeting. The City will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The
City's consultants/ experts shall invoice the City for its services in reviewing the
application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. If
at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $ 1, 500, the
applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the City, replenish said escrow
account so that it has a balance of at least $3, 000. Such additional escrow funds shall
be deposited with the City before any further action or consideration is taken on the
181
application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the City is more than the
amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance
shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
Amended 10- 13- 2010, approved 10- 14- 2010]
c. The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in Article VI - 5J( 12b) of this section
may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of the
application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary
review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification.
d. An applicant shall have 10 days for the date of billing to appeal to the Planning Board
through the Commissioner of Planning and Development for any fee that the
applicant deems unreasonable. The Commissioner of Planning and Development shall
conduct a investigation into the matter and report back to the Planning Board and the
applicant within 30 days. The Planning Board shall make the final determination as to
the fee' s reasonableness.
Added 10- 13- 2010, approved 10- 14- 2010]
13. Exceptions from a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
a. No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site
for the placement or use of wireless telecommunications facilities as of the effective
date of these regulations without having first obtained a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities and a building permit. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit shall be required for
those noncommercial exceptions noted in the definition of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
b. All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the effective date of
these regulations shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist; provided,
however, that any visible modification, including visible deterioration, of an existing
wireless telecommunications facility must comply with these regulations.
14. Public hearing and notification requirements.
a. Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, a public hearing shall be held by the Board, notice of
which the applicant shall handle, and shall be published in the official newspaper of
the City no fewer than 10 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public
hearing. The applicant shall also notify nearby landowners whose property is located
within 1, 500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless
telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located. For co -locations without
increasing the height, the applicant shall notify nearby landowners whose property is
located within 500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new
wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located.
182
b. The Board will set the public hearing date referred to in Article VI - 5J( 14a) of this
section only after it finds the application is complete. The Board, at any stage prior to
issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information as it deems
necessary.
c. In addition, the applicant shall post a sign on the property proposed for the special
permit on or before 15 days prior to the first date of public hearing and shall remove
such sign within two days following such hearing. The sign shall be at least 30 inches
by 20 inches, consist of sturdy and serviceable material containing a white
background with black letters and shall be placed in a location plainly visible from
the most commonly traveled street upon which the property fronts but in no case
more than 20 feet back from the front lot line. Such sign shall not be more than three
feet above the ground and shall read as follows, in legible lettering at least two inches
high:
THIS SITE IS PROPOSED FOR ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL PERMIT AS
FOLLOWS (DESCRIBE PROPOSED SPECIAL PERMIT). THIS MATTER IS
SUBJECT TO A PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE THE CITY OF MOUNT VERNON
PLANNING BOARD ON (GIVE DATE) AT 9: 00 A.M. AT CITY HALL IN THE
MAYOR' S CONFERENCE ROOM UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED
d. In addition, an applicant for a new facility on an existing building shall post a copy of
the notice of public hearing at least 10 days prior to public hearing in the lobby of the
building.
e. Prior to the first public hearing on the application, the applicant shall submit a
notarized statement to the secretary of the Planning Board certifying full compliance
with the requirements set forth above.
15. Action on an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities.
a. The Board will undertake a review of an application pursuant to these regulations in a
timely fashion and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative
complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's
interest and need to be involved and the applicant' s desire for a timely resolution.
b. The Board may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory or other
committee for a nonbinding recommendation.
c. After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the Board may
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be
in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the
applicant.
d. If the Board approves the special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within 15
183
calendar days of the Board' s action, and the special use permit shall be issued within
30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits and subsequent
certificates of compliance, once a special use permit has been granted hereunder and
approval of the site plan, no additional permits or approvals from the City, such as
zoning approvals, shall be required by the City for the wireless telecommunications
facilities covered by the special use permit.
e. If the Board denies the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities,
then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within 15 calendar days
of the Board' s action.
16. Extent and parameters of special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be as follows:
a. Such special use permit shall be nonexclusive.
b. Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the
express prior written approval of the Board, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld. The applicant shall submit an executed assignment and assumption
agreement to the Board prior to obtaining such approval by which the assignee or
transferee agrees to all requirements of this chapter and the special permit.
c. Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the
applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and
provisions of the special use permit, or for a material violation of these regulations
after prior written notice to the holder of the special use permit.
17. Application fee.
a. At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit for a new
tower or collocating on an existing tower or other suitable structure where there is an
increase in height of the tower or structure, such person shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee of $10,000 to the City, such fee is exclusive of any and all other fees.
If the application is for a special use permit for collocating on an existing tower or
other suitable structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is
required, the nonrefundable fee shall be $4,500.
Amended 10- 13- 2010, approved 10- 14- 2010]
b. No application fee is required in order to rectify a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a visible modification of the
wireless telecommunications facility since the date of the issuance of the existing
special use permit for which the conditions of the special use permit have not
previously been modified. In the case of any modification, the fees provided in
Article VI - 5J( 17a) shall apply.
184
c. Performance security. The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly
required to execute and file with the City a bond, or other form of security acceptable
to the City as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount
of at least $75, 000 and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the City to
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of these regulations and
conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to these regulations. The full
amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the
term of the special use permit and/ or until any necessary site restoration is completed
to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance
of the original special use permit.
19. Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications facilities. In order to
verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications
facilities, place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in
accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws
and regulations and other applicable requirements, the City may inspect all facets of
said permit holder's, renter's, lessee' s or licensee' s placement, construction, modification
and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and
buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site.
20. Liability insurance.
a. A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall secure
and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and
property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the special use
permit in amounts as set forth below:
1. Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and property
damage: $ 1, 000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
2. Automobile coverage: $ 1, 000,000 per occurrence/$ 2,000,000 aggregate;
3. Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
b. The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the City
and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and
consultants as additional named insureds for all wireless facilities located on City -
owned property, which includes properties owned by IDA and Urban Renewal
Agency.
c. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best' s rating of at least A.
d. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance
company to furnish the City with at least 30 days' prior written notice in advance of
the cancellation of the insurance.
185
e. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the City at least
15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or
replace.
f. Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facilities is initiated,
but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of the special use permit, the holder of
the special use permit shall deliver to the City a copy of each of the policies or
certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts.
21. Defense and indemnification.
a. Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is proposed for City
property, pursuant to these regulations, shall contain a provision with respect to
indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by
the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt
the City, and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents,
and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of
any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity,
which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, product performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however,
any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as
may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the City, or its
servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced
herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are
included in those costs that are recoverable by the City.
b. Notwithstanding the requirements noted in Article VI - 5J( 21a) of this section, an
indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the City itself
applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
22. Fines.
a. In the event of a violation of these regulations or any special use permit issued
pursuant to these regulations, the City may impose and collect, and the holder of the
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the City,
fines or penalties as set forth below.
b. A violation of this local section is hereby declared to be a violation, punishable by a
fine not exceeding $ 1, 000 per day per occurrence or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
c. Notwithstanding anything in this section, the holder of the special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated
186
damages or other penalties to evade or avoid compliance with these regulations or
any section of these regulations. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the
special use permit to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The City
may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of these regulations,
without limiting other remedies available to the City.
23. Default and/ or revocation.
a. If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved,
relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance
with the provisions of these regulations or of the special use permit, then the City
shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such violation. Such
notice shall specify the nature of the violation or noncompliance and that the
violations must be corrected within seven days of the date of the postmark of the
notice, or of the date of personal service of the notice, whichever is earlier.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection or any other section of
these regulations, if the violation causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or
threat to the health or safety of lives or property, the City may, at its sole discretion,
order the violation remedied immediately.
b. If within the period set forth in Article VI - 5J( 23a) above, the wireless
telecommunications facilities are not brought into compliance with the provisions of
these regulations or of the special use permit, or substantial steps are not taken in
order to bring the affected wireless telecommunications facilities into compliance,
then the City may revoke such special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities, and shall notify the holder of the special use permit within 48 hours of such
action.
24. Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
a. Under the following circumstances, the City may determine that the health, safety, and
welfare interests of the City warrant and require the removal of wireless
telecommunications facilities:
1. Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned ( i. e.,
not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90
consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any three -hundred -sixty -five-day
period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case,
repair or removal shall commence within 90 days;
2. Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair
that it creates a health or safety hazard;
3. Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified
without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required special use
permit, or any other necessary authorization.
187
b. If the City makes such a determination as noted in Article VI - 5J( 24a) of this section,
then the City shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications
facilities are to be removed. The City may approve an interim temporary use
agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications
facilities.
c. The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and
remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and
facilities, from the site and restore the site to its original condition, such restoration
being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt
of written notice from the City. However, if the owner of the property upon which the
wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway
to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of
the City.
d. If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not
been made to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after
the permit holder has received notice, then the City may order officials or
representatives of the City to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the
sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder.
e. If, the City removes, or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities,
and the owner of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove
it from the site to a lawful location within 10 days, then the City may take steps to
declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their
components.
f. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the City may approve a
temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no
more than 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or
relocation of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by
the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the City, and an
agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the
City. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the ninety -day time
period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section.
25. Relief. Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement
of these regulations may request such at the preapplication meeting, provided that the
relief or exemption is contained in the original application for either a special use permit,
or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit, a request for
modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent,
partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief,
waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs
of the Board and the City in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption.
188
No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear
and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption will have no
significant effect on the health, safety and welfare of the City, its residents and other
service providers.
26. Adherence to state and/ or federal rules and regulations.
a. To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or
federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special use permit shall
adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and
the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations
regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards.
b. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state
or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and
specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and
security are changed and/ or are modified during the duration of a special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special use
permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a
maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the
issuing entity.
27. Conflict with other laws. Where this section differs or conflicts with other laws, rules
and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the City, state or
federal government, this section shall control.
Article VI — Section 6. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Expiration. A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the specific use identified in
the permit and, unless other provisions are specifically set forth by the approving agency, the
special permit shall expire if said use shall cease for more than one year for any reason, or if
substantial construction, in accordance with the special permit, has not been completed within
two years from the date of issue. Such time limits shall be tolled by any judicial proceedings to
review the approving agency' s decision.
B. Modification of special permits.
1. Any change or increase in use or reduction in lot size requires amendment to the special
permit in accordance with the application and review requirements of this section, except
that the Building Commissioner may issue building permits as requested, without
amendment of the special permit, where he finds that:
189
a. There is no change in use, or that the proposal falls within the definition of the existing
special permit.
b. The change would require less than 10 additional parking spaces.
2. Notwithstanding the above, the Building Commissioner may require the formal filing of a
complete amended application where he finds that the proposed change will be
significant in the essential characteristics of the existing layout, arrangement or use of
buildings or land.
C. Renewal. On written application, a special permit approved with a time limitation may be
renewed by the Planning Commissioner upon notice to the approving agency which authorized
the issuance of the special permit, provided that no such renewal shall be made by the Planning
Commissioner unless there has been compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances,
regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Planning Commissioner shall notify in
writing the approving agency which authorized the issuance of the special permit at least 45 days
prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made by the Planning
Commissioner if there is objection by a majority vote of the approving agency.
Article VI — Section 7. Uses of other governmental agencies.
A. Introduction. The City Council recognizes the necessity, in furtherance of the public health,
safety and welfare, for other governmental agencies, from time to time, to plan the location of
uses within the City of Mount Vernon. Absolute immunity from the requirements of this chapter
for other governments can, however, undermine one of the essential purposes of zoning, which is
to rationally coordinate land use planning so as to promote orderly development and the
preservation of property values. To ensure that other governments will not unnecessarily
prejudice the welfare of the citizens of Mount Vernon, and in furtherance of the welfare of their
constituencies, the City Council will examine proposed uses of other governments and balance
the competing public interests represented by such other governments against those represented
by the City of Mount Vernon.
B. General rule. No use of a government or public authority other than that of the City of Mount
Vernon may be established or enlarged without obtaining a governmental use special permit
from the Planning Board.
C. Standards. A governmental use shall meet either of the following standards:
1. It shall be essentially consistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter for the
district in which it is to be located; or
2. In balancing the interest and needs of the citizenry represented by the other governmental
agency against those of the citizenry of the City of Mount Vernon, it shall be clear that
the interest and needs of the citizenry represented by the applicant are more vital with
respect to the particular use, taking into account the following:
a. The public health, safety and welfare on a regional or statewide basis, as applicable.
190
b. Predicted effects on the area -wide land use pattern, the natural environment, noise,
traffic congestion and public services.
c. Expected impacts on surrounding landowners.
d. The adequacy of accessory services and facilities proposed as a part of such
governmental use, such as parking and landscaping.
e. The availability of feasible alternative locations for such proposed governmental use
or of alternative methods of meeting the need for such use.
Article VII — Site Plan Approval
Article VII — Section 1. Approval required.
A. Site plan approval is required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction or
enlargement of any principal use, other than a one-, two- or three-family dwelling where such
dwelling is permitted by right and where the natural grade is not changed by more than four feet
at any point on the site, and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any change of
use or occupancy which would result in an increase in the requirement for off-street parking or
loading spaces in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter. The Planning
Board shall be the approving agency for all site plan applications.
B. The approved site plan, and any conditions attached thereto, shall be complied with prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Continued compliance with all such conditions shall
be a requirement of the continued validity of the certificate of occupancy. Site plan revisions,
other than minor adjustments approved by the Commissioners of Buildings and Planning,
pursuant to Chapter 267 - Article VII hereof, shall be subject to the same approval procedure and
requirements as the initial site plan.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the Planning Board adopting rules and
regulations, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-8-2009 by L.L. No. 2-
2009. This local law also providedfor the renumbering ofSubsection D as Subsection C.
C. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter to the contrary, site plan approval
shall not be required for any new use sponsored by the Mount Vernon Industrial Development
Agency or Mount Vernon Urban Renewal Agency.
Article VII — Section 2. Procedure.
A. Application. Applicants for site plan approval shall submit a preliminary informal application
and discuss it with the Department of Planning prior to the formal submission of a complete site
plan application. An application shall be considered officially submitted provided that the
approving agency or staff determines such application to be complete. A receipt for the required
application fee shall accompany the application. The Department of Planning shall send one print
to the Commissioner of Public Works, the Building Commissioner and the Fire Commissioner
and other such officials and/or agencies it deems appropriate for their review and comments. In
addition, copies shall be forwarded with notice of the public meeting to the Westchester County
Planning Board and to the clerks of abutting municipalities as required by law.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009
191
Editor's Note: This local law also repealed Subsection B, Notification, which immediately
followed this subsection. This local law also providedfor the renumbering of Subsections C
through F as Subsections B through E, respectively.
B. Action. Within 62 days of the date of receipt of a complete application, unless such time is
extended by mutual agreement between the Planning Board and the applicant, the Planning
Board shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the application. The Planning
Board shall approve the application where it finds that the standards of Chapter 267 - Article
VII have been met. The Planning Board may approve such application conditionally where it
finds that such conditions or modifications are necessary to ensure initial and continued
conformance with the standards of Chapter 267 - Article VII have been met. The Planning Board
shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision, and the decision shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk and the Department of Buildings. Any conditions required by the Planning Board
shall be noted on the original and all file copy prints of the site plan. The Chairman of the
Planning Board shall sign the original and prints, as approved by the Planning Board, when they
determine that the plans submitted are in full compliance with all requirements and conditions of
their approval and comply with all other applicable requirements. The Department of Planning
shall retain the original and all file copy prints and return one print to the applicant and to the
Building Department. The City Clerk's Office, the Assessor's Office and the Law Department
shall receive one copy of the signed Planning Board resolution.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
C. Variances in conjunction with a site plan.
1) Site plan approval shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter. Where an
application requires a variance from any requirement of this chapter, site plan approval shall
not be effective until and unless such variances shall be issued by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
2) In cases where an applicant requires one or more variances, the applicant shall file an
application with the Building Department, which shall also advise the applicant of the
procedures and requirements to be followed in seeking those variance( s) from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
D. Expiration. Unless otherwise specifically set forth by the Planning Board in connection with
its approval of a site plan, such approval shall expire if a building permit is not issued within one
year from the date of approval and if all construction work is not completed within two years of
the date of issue of such permit. Upon application to the Planning Board, extensions totaling a
maximum of 12 months may be granted to each of these time periods, for appropriate cause.
Such time limits shall be tolled by any judicial proceedings to review the Board' s decision.
E. Amendments.
192
1) Minor amendments. During construction, the Commissioners of Building and Planning
may authorize minor adjustments to the approved site plan when such adjustments appear
necessary or appropriate as the result of technical or engineering considerations, the
existence or materiality of which was first discovered during actual construction. Such minor
adjustments shall be consistent with the concepts of the approved site plan.
2) Substantial amendments. Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which require
any change to an approved site plan which the Commissioner of Planning considers
substantial, or where the applicant wishes to modify the approved site plan for other reasons,
an amended site plan shall be filed for review and approval in accordance with the same
procedures required for an initial application.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 20091
Article VII — Section 3. Application.
The site plan application shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan prepared by a legally
qualified individual, firm or licensed design professional, including but not limited to a
registered architect, landscape architect or professional engineer. A site plan shall demonstrate
that the standards of Chapter 267 - Article VII of this chapter can be met and shall include at
least the following information:
A. General. Site plans shall be drawn on sheets not exceeding a size of 30 inches by 40 inches,
and to a convenient scale, but not less than one inch equals 20 feet, unless approved by the
Commissioner of Planning.
B. Legal data.
1) The name and the address of the applicant and authorization of the owner if different
from the applicant.
2) The name, address, signature and seal of the professional preparing the site plan.
3) Title of the development, date prepared and date of revisions, if any.
4) North arrow, scale and site vicinity map drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
600 feet.
6) Proof of the certified mailings as required in Chapter 267 - Article VII.
7) Map, block and lot numbers of the property as shown on the official tax records.
8) Description of all existing and proposed deed restrictions or covenants applying to the
property.
9) Existing zoning of the property and all adjoining properties.
193
10) Zoning schedule chart of required and proposed standards for each site plan, including
any variances granted. The chart shall include the following:
a) Use of structure.
b) Floor area by use.
c) Floor area ratio.
d) Building height: stories and feet.
e) Building length.
f) Building coverage.
g) Impervious surface coverage.
1) Lot area ( square feet).
h) Lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
i) Floor area per dwelling unit (square feet).
j) Lot width and frontage.
k) Yards: front, side and rear.
m) Area of usable open space.
n) Number of off-street parking and loading spaces.
C. Natural features.
1) Topographic data at a maximum contour interval of two feet, showing existing and
proposed contours, extended at least 20 feet into adjoining properties.
2) Surface features, such as the location of rock outcrops.
3) Vegetative cover, including the location of existing wooded areas, all individual trees of
12 inches caliper or greater, both on site or on adjacent City property, and all other
specimen trees.
4) The location of all existing watercourses, water bodies, intermittent streams, wetlands
and springs.
5) Boundaries of any area subject to flooding or stormwater overflows, including flood
hazard areas as established by the federal government.
D. Existing structures and utilities.
1) Location of all structures on the premises and approximate location of all neighboring
structures within 100 feet of all lot lines of the premises.
2) Location of all existing adjacent public and private streets, ways and roads, paved areas
and sidewalks. The names and existing widths of adjacent streets, including curblines and
elevations at the center line of the street and the reference grade at the curb at the center
of the front wall of the building.
3) Locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing sewers, culverts, water lines
and other underground utilities within the property lines and other underground utilities
within the property, to the extent known or relevant.
4) Fences, landscaping and screening.
5) All other existing improvements.
E. Proposed development.
194
1) The location and dimensions (length, width, floor elevations and height in feet and in
stories) of proposed structures, with floor plans showing all proposed floor space by type
of use and floor level.
2) Preliminary architectural plans showing at least three exterior elevations of the proposed
structure and materials to be used.
3) The location, width and finished grades of proposed public and private streets, ways,
roads and sidewalks, including pavement type and profiles.
4) The location, layout, finished grade, pavement specifications and curbing proposed for
parking and loading spaces, including access drives.
5) Driveway profiles from the center line of the street to the garage floor or parking lot,
indicating all slopes by percentage of grade. Elevations at the center line of the street, top
of the curb and at the lot line must also be indicated on the profile. Where there is no
curb, the curb elevation is assumed to be equal to the elevation at the center line of the
street and should be so indicated.
6) The location, design and proposed screening of outdoor storage areas, including
proposed provisions for refuse and storage collection.
7) The location, size and design of all proposed water supply, sanitary sewerage, valves,
hydrants and other such utility facilities, including connections to any existing such
facilities, with profiles.
8) Stormwater drainage systems with details of catch basins, dry wells, retention basins and
other related facilities; and calculation of expected storm drain loads and stormwater
runoff pattern to be accommodated by the proposed drainage system.
9) Landscaping plan, to include type, size, quantity and location of all plants and other
landscaping materials to be used, with English and Latin names. Included in the plan
shall be an indication of all existing vegetation to be retained and the methods to be used
to protect such vegetation during the course of construction.
10) The location, height, design and materials of all proposed fences and walls.
11) Type, location, design, shielding and hours of operation of exterior lighting.
12) Location, type, size, wording, design, color and illumination of all traffic and
directional signs.
13) Estimate of earthwork, showing the quantity of any material to be imported to or
removed from the site.
14) Description of measures planned to assure proper erosion and sedimentation control
both during and after construction, with reference to Westchester County' s Best
Management Practices Manual for Construction Related Activities, Standards and
Specifications.
15) A statement from the applicant's licensed design professional indicating the estimated
cost of construction of all new streets and sidewalks and of the water supply, sanitary
sewerage and storm drainage systems.
F. Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan or a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of Chapter 226 of this Code shall be
required for site plan approval. The stormwater management plan or the SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards of Chapter 226. The approved site plan shall be
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 226.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
195
G. Waivers from site plan requirements. Upon written request by the applicant to the Planning
Board, the Planning Board may waive or modify performance requirements and standards if it is
determined by Planning Board Staff that the waiver will not have an impact on public health and
public safety, and subject to the findings and establishments of the general conditions for such
waiver as shall be found in Article 3, § 27- a5, of the General City Law of the State of New York,
as amended.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
H. Other. Any other information determined necessary or appropriate by the Planning Board or
its staff in order to provide for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
Article VII — Section 4. Standards.
In considering and approving site plans, the Planning Board shall be guided by the purposes of
this chapter, including the purposes of the applicable zoning district or districts, and, as a
condition of approval, shall require such modifications of the proposed plans as it deems
necessary to comply with the spirit as well as the letter of this chapter. The Planning Board shall
also specifically take into account the following:
A. Safe, adequate and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation both within and
without the site. At least the following aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to determine
conformity to this standard:
1) The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on existing streets.
2) The number, locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits,
drives and walkways. Vehicular access to state and county roads must also be approved
by the State Department of Transportation or County Department of Public Works, as
appropriate.
3) The visibility in both directions at all exit points of the site. The driver of an automobile
should have an unobstructed view of the street for that distance necessary to allow safe
entrance into the traffic stream.
4) The location, arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities, which shall, at a
minimum, meet the requirements of Article VIIII of this chapter.
5) Interconnection of parking facilities via access drives within and between adjacent lots,
in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and
convenient traffic circulation.
6) The location, arrangement and adequacy of loading areas, which shall, at a minimum,
meet the requirements of Chapter 276 - Article VIII of this chapter.
7) Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, both within the boundaries of the
development and in relation to the adjoining street and sidewalk system. Sidewalk
crossings are subject to approval by the City Commissioner of Public Works.
8) The location, arrangement and adequacy of facilities for the physically handicapped,
such as ramps, depressed curbs and reserved parking spaces.
196
9) The location, arrangement and adequacy of landscaping within and bordering parking
facilities and loading spaces, which shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of
Chapter 267 - Article VIII of this chapter.
10) Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones. The Planning Board may require the
provision of fire zones and may also require suitable legal agreements for enforcement of
any parking and traffic circulation restrictions.
B. The protection of environmental quality and the preservation and enhancement of property
values in the neighboring area. At least the following aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to
determine conformity to this standard:
1) The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and plantings so as to ensure
harmony with adjacent development, screen parking facilities and loading spaces, and
conceal storage areas, refuse areas, utility installations and other such features. Such
walls, fences, hedges and plantings shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of
Chapter 267 - Article IV and Chapter 267 - Article 40 of this chapter.
2) The prevention of dust, erosion, and drainage onto adjacent properties, both during and
after construction, through the planting of ground cover or the installation of other
appropriate protective devices and/ or ground surfaces.
3) The preservation of natural features of the site, such as wetlands, unique wildlife
habitats, historic structures, major trees and scenic views, both from the site and onto or
over the site.
4) The conformity of exterior lighting to the requirements of Chapter 267 - Article IV of
this chapter.
5) The design and arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory facilities (such as airconditioning systems, public address systems, etc.) so as to achieve minimum and
acceptable noise levels at the property boundaries.
6) The provision of adequate storm- and surface water drainage facilities so as to properly
drain the site, not impede the existing flow of drainage from neighboring properties and
not increase downstream flooding. Upon completion of development, the control and
retention of stormwater runoff shall be provided as directed by the Commissioner of
Public Works, who may require the submission of an engineer's report.
7) Access to sunlight for present and potential future solar energy systems, both on and off
site, as well as building siting, orientation and landscaping, meeting at a minimum the
requirements of Chapter 267 - Article IV of this chapter.
Article VIII — Off -Street Parking and Loading
Article VIII — Section 1. Purposes.
All structures and uses shall be provided with a sufficient amount of off-street parking and
loading spaces for employees, residents, visitors, clients, patrons, deliverers and other persons at
such structures or uses, but not less than the minimum requirements of this chapter. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure or use, whether for a new structure or a
change of use of an existing structure, until all required off-street parking and loading spaces
197
have been established in accordance with this chapter. The continued operation of such facilities
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall be required as a condition of the
continued validity of the certificate of occupancy.
Article VIII — Section 2. Spaces required.
A. Schedule of Off -Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements. The Schedule of Off -Street
Parking and Loading Space Requirements
Editor's Note: The Schedule of Off -Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements is included
at the end ofthis chapter.
presents the minimum parking space and loading space requirements of this chapter. Where there
is more than one use, the minimum requirements shall be cumulative for all uses, except where
shared use of parking or loading spaces are permitted by the approving agency pursuant to
Chapter 267 - Article VIII thereof. For uses that do not fall within the categories listed, or for
uses where no minimum number of spaces is specified, the Commissioner of Planning shall
recommend to the approving agency minimum parking and loading space requirements based
upon the specific nature of the proposed facility or use, and the approving agency shall establish
the requirements on that basis. Required spaces developed for specific structures and uses shall
be reserved at all times to persons who are employed at or make use of such structures and uses,
except where such parking spaces are dedicated to and accepted by the City of Mount Vernon as
public parking, or where arrangements for shared use are made pursuant to Chapter 267 - Article
VIII - 2B below.
B. Shared use. The total number of off-street parking and loading spaces required shall be the
sum of the requirements for each individual use, except that such total may be reduced by the
approving agency where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of such agency that the
capacity of the facility will satisfy the purposes of this chapter by reason of variation in the
probable time of maximum use by residents, visitors, patrons, deliverers and/ or employees.
C. Limitations on reserved spaces. No more than 10% of the minimum required off-street
parking spaces designed to serve nonresidential uses and no more than one space per dwelling
unit in multifamily residential developments shall be permitted to be reserved for the exclusive
use of individual dwelling units, persons and/or business establishments. Limitations on reserved
spaces do not apply to parking spaces provided in excess of the minimum requirements of this
chapter.
D. Effect on existing structures and uses. Structures and uses in existence or for which building
permits have been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to the
parking or loading space requirements of this chapter, provided that any parking and loading
facilities existing or approved to serve such structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced
or re -designated to serve other structures or uses, except to the extent that they exceed such
requirements. At the time of any enlargement, change or expansion of existing structures or uses
in the future, the following requirements shall apply:
198
1. Required parking and loading facilities for that part of the structure or use which
constitutes an enlargement or expansion shall be provided in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter.
2. To the maximum extent deemed feasible and reasonable by the approving agency, parking
and loading facilities shall also be provided to serve the existing portion of such structure
or use that does not conform to all parking and loading space requirements of this
chapter.
3. At the time of any change of use in an existing structure which would result in an
increased off-street parking or loading space requirement, the additional parking and
loading spaces so required shall be provided in accordance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
E. Alternate methods of complying with parking and loading requirements.
1. Alternate locations. Required off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot
with the structure or use which they serve, except as follows:
a. The approving agency may allow all or part of the parking spaces required to serve
structures or uses to be located on any lot entirely within 250 feet of the structures or
uses to be served, provided that such parking is a lawful use in the district in which it
is to be located, and further provided that the approving agency determines that it is
impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the structures or uses being
served.
b. In any H District, the required parking spaces may be provided on any lot within 450
feet of the structures or uses to be served.
c. Where the approving agency approves the location of such parking spaces on a lot
different from the lot occupied by the structure or use served, the approving agency
shall require a legal instrument, in form and filing, satisfactory to the Corporation
Counsel, assuring the continued use of said parking spaces in connection with the
uses or structures served.
d. The construction or expansion of any nonresidential structure or facility involving less
than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area shall not be required to provide accessory
off-street parking and loading spaces when such use is located within 500 feet of a
municipal parking facility operated by the City of Mount Vernon.
e. For the construction or expansion of any nonresidential structure or facility involving
more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area, the approving agency may allow all
or a portion of the parking spaces required to serve structures or uses to be located
within a municipal parking facility operated by the City of Mount Vernon within 500
feet of the structure or uses to be served, provided that the applicant demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the approving agency that the current capacity of the municipal
parking facility will satisfy the purposes of this chapter.
2. Fee in lieu of off-street parking spaces.
Added 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009 Editor's Note: This local law also providedfor the
renumbering ofSubsection E(2) and (3) as Subsection E(3) and (4), respectively.]
199
a. Application for a permit for construction, alteration, addition or change of use shall
not be granted if the minimum required off-street parking spaces are not provided in
accordance with this chapter, except that:
1. The applicant shall pay a parking fee for each required space which is not
provided on site, or on another lot as permitted per Article VIII - 2E( 1 a), ( b), ( c),
in lieu of providing the minimum required off-street parking spaces upon
approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals of an area variance for off-street
parking.
2. The applicant shall pay a parking fee for each required space for which approval
from the City Planning Board has been granted to utilize a municipal parking
facility as permitted in Article VIII - 2E( 1d) and ( e).
3. Exception for a housing project contracted to provide low rent or low purchase
price for low-income households, the parking fee shall only be charged if a
dwelling unit is not provided with at least one off-street parking space. In such
case, one parking fee shall be charged for each and every dwelling unit for which
no parking space is provided, unless City Council approval is granted for waiving
the fee. This exception shall not relieve the applicant to obtain approval from the
Zoning Board of Appeals for an off -street -parking variance.
b. The parking fee shall be paid to the issuing agency prior to the issuance of the permit,
except that the fee may be paid at any time prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for project under construction at the time this amendment takes effect.
3. Loading facilities. Required off-street loading facilities shall be provided on the same lot
with the structure or use which they serve. However, the approving agency may allow
off-street loading spaces to be located within the building being served, provided that the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving agency that such spaces shall
be permanently available for their intended purpose.
4. Parking of commercial vehicles. Where commercial vehicles are proposed to be parked
overnight on a nonresidential property, the following requirements shall apply:
a. They shall be parked only in spaces specifically designated for such uses on an
approved site plan.
b. They shall be vehicles which are customary to and used on a regular basis in
connection with a permitted principal use on the premises.
c. They shall not be used for the storage of goods.
Article VIII — Section 3. Setbacks.
Required off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with the following setback
requirements:
200
A. In R1 and R2 Residence Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be provided
within the front yard setback requirements.
B. In RMF Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be provided within the front,
side and rear yard setback requirements, except that the minimum side and rear yard setbacks
for unenclosed parking shall be only three feet where adjacent to other lots in an RMF or
Nonresidence District and 10 feet where adjacent to an Rl or R2 District. Buffer landscaping
within such setback areas shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
267 - Article VIII of this chapter.
C. In any H or RMF -SC District, off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be provided
within the front, side and rear yard setback requirements, except that minimum front, side
and rear yard setbacks for unenclosed parking shall be only five feet.
D. In Nonresidence Districts, off-street parking and loading spaces shall be required to set back
from front, side and rear lot lines only to the extent necessary to provide landscaped buffer areas
in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 267 - Article IV of this chapter.
E. Except where located within or adjacent to an R1 or R2 Residence District, enclosed off-street
parking and loading spaces, which are to be below existing grade and covered with landscaping
or a landscaped terrace, shall not be required to comply with the building setback requirements
of this chapter, provided that their location and design are approved by the approving agency.
Article VIII — Section 4. Design and layout.
A. Access. Access to all off-street parking and loading facilities shall be designed in accordance
with the following requirements:
1. Access driveways. All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided with
unobstructed access and shall be designed to prevent the backing of any vehicle across a
sidewalk or into a street except at locations specifically designed for such purposes where
no reasonable alternative is available and approval has been granted by the approving
agency. Exception: backing of a vehicle across a sidewalk or into a one- way street shall
be permitted from an access driveway serving one- or two-family dwellings in a one- or
two-family district. Access driveways connecting off-street parking and loading facilities
to the street or streets from which they derive access shall be designed in accordance with
the following requirements:
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
a. Access driveways serving one- and two-family residences shall not be less than nine
feet in width nor closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line and shall be
connected to the street with a radius return at each intersection corner of not less than
25% of its width. They shall also not exceed a grade of 10%, except that a 12% grade
may be allowed by the Planning Board for a driveway serving a single-family
residence, provided that said Board determines that such grade would be appropriate
for the purpose of reducing environmental impact. No more than one access driveway
curb cut shall be permitted to serve any one- or two-family residence, except that a
201
circular driveway with two curb cuts shall be permitted on a lot with 150 feet or more
of road frontage. No curb cut shall be permitted within the street intersection area
required for sight visibility pursuant to Chapter 267 - Article IV.
b. Access driveways serving multifamily and nonresidence uses shall be not less than 20
feet in width for two-way drives and 12 feet in width for one- way drives. Each such
drive shall be connected to the street with a radius return at each corner of not less
than 25% of its width. They shall also not exceed a grade of 5%, except that a 7%
grade may be allowed by the approving agency, provided that said Board determines
that such grade would be appropriate for the purpose of reducing environmental
impact. Notwithstanding the above, the approving agency may allow lesser
dimensions for a driveway providing access to fewer than 20 spaces. Similarly, it may
require greater dimensions where determined necessary based upon the number of
spaces served and/ or the nature of the intended use.
2. Interconnection of off-street parking facilities. In order to provide maximum efficiency,
minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and convenient traffic flow, the agency approving
a site plan may require the interconnection of parking facilities via circulation drives
within and between adjacent lots. To help assure the accomplishment of this, the
approving agency may require a written instrument in recordable form, such as deed
restrictions, satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel, binding the owner and his heirs and
assigns to permit and maintain such interconnection of parking facilities.
B. Dimensional requirements. All off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with at
least the following minimum dimensional requirements:
1. Parking space dimensions. All off-street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet in width
and 18 feet in length, except that a width of 8. 5 feet may be permitted by the approving
agency for long-term ( commuter, worker or residential) use. The approving agency may
also permit a one -foot lesser paved depth where an unobstructed vehicle overhang area is
provided, as in the case of landscaped traffic islands.
2. Loading space dimensions. Off-street loading spaces shall be at least 15 feet in width, 40
feet in length and 14 feet in height, except that adjacent loading spaces need each be only
12 feet in width.
3. Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the
dimensional requirements as set forth in the New York State Building Code.
4. Compact car spaces. In any off-street parking facility containing 50 or more spaces, the
approving agency may permit up to 1/ 3 of such spaces to be specifically designed and
limited in their use to compact cars. The minimum dimensions for such spaces shall be
7. 5 feet in width and 15 feet in length.
5. Aisle dimensions. All driveway aisles providing access to -off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be of sufficient width as determined appropriate by the approving agency to
provide safe and convenient access to such spaces, taking into consideration the nature of
202
the motor vehicles and uses served, the frequency of vehicle turnover, the angle of
parking and the direction and amount of traffic flow. Minimum aisle width dimensions
shall be as promulgated by a nationally recognized planning and/ or traffic engineering
organization, such as the American Planning Association, the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, and/ or the Urban Land Institute. As an example, the minimum aisle width
serving ninety -degree parking spaces would be 24 feet, except 20 feet for compact car
spaces.
Article VIII — Section 5. Improvement.
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the approving agency.
A. Pavement. All off-street parking and loading facilities, including driveways, shall be
surfaced with asphaltic cement concrete, portland cement concrete, paving stone or brick.
B. Grading and drainage. All off-street parking and loading facilities, other than those
serving one- or two-family dwellings, shall be provided with an interior network of
drains. The finished surface shall be pitched to drain to drywells or drain sumps within
property lines in accordance with plans as may be required and approved by the
Commissioner of Buildings. No parking or loading facility shall be pitched so as to drain
across a sidewalk, into a street or onto any neighboring premises.
C. Space delineation. For all uses, other than one- or two-family dwellings, all required
parking and loading spaces shall be individually identified by means of pavement
marking with double -striped painted lines.
D. Signage. Appropriate signs and pavement markings shall be provided in all off-street
parking and loading facilities as necessary to direct internal traffic flow. Such signs shall
generally not exceed two square feet in area.
E. Illumination. Illumination of all off-street parking and loading facilities, other than those
accessory to one- and two-family dwellings, shall be provided such that the lighting level
shall not exceed an intensity of five footcandles, nor shall it be less than 1. 5 footcandles
at pavement level. All such lighting shall be of such type and location and have such
shading as will prevent objectionable glare observable from neighboring properties.
F. Partial waiver of improvement. Where the agency approving a site plan determines, in
connection with its review of such site plan, that less than the required number of parking
or loading spaces will satisfy the intent of this chapter because of variations in the
probable time of maximum use by joint users, the approving agency may waive a portion
of the improvement, but not for more than 1/ 3 of the total number of spaces required by
this chapter. In all cases, it shall be expressly demonstrated on the site plan that sufficient
area remains for the provision of the total number of spaces required and the site plan
shall bear such designation. Such unimproved portion of the off-street parking and
203
loading facility shall, where determined practical by the approving agency, be used and
maintained as additional landscaped area until and unless required for parking or loading
use. Legal instruments, in form and filing, satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel, shall
be submitted by the applicant, ensuring the improvement of such spaces within six
months of the date of written notice to the property owner by the agency stating that all or
a portion of such spaces have been determined to be necessary and shall be improved.
Article VIII — Section 6. Landscaping and screening.
Except for off-street parking facilities and spaces accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling, all
off-street parking and loading facilities shall be curbed, screened and landscaped with
appropriate trees, shrubs, ground cover and other plant materials to assure the establishment of a
safe, convenient and attractive facility. Such landscaping and screening shall be planted and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Landscaping. In all off-street parking facilities which contain 25 or more parking spaces
and which are not located in parking garages, at least 6% of the total area within the
perimeter of the parking facility shall be so landscaped, and at least one shade tree, of not
less than three inches caliper, shall be provided for each 12 parking spaces.
1. Raised planting islands shall be provided as necessary to guide vehicle movement, to
provide adequate space for plant growth and, where appropriate, to provide for
pedestrian circulation and vehicle overhang. Such raised planting islands and the
landscaping within them shall be designed and arranged so as to provide vertical
definition to major traffic circulation aisles, entrances and exits, to channel internal
traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate diagonal movement of vehicles and to provide
cooling shade and relief from the visual monotony and summer heat of a large paved
parking area. Curbs of such islands shall be designed so as to facilitate surface
drainage and to prevent vehicles from overhanging sidewalks and damaging
landscaping materials.
2. The minimum width of landscaped islands shall be eight feet and any external comer
shall be rounded with a curb radius of not less than three feet.
3. The selection, amount and location of all landscaping materials shall be subject to
approval by the approving agency based upon considerations of the adequacy of the
proposed landscaping to serve its intended purpose with minimal maintenance,
including plant care, snow plowing, leaf removal and general compatibility with
motor vehicles and pedestrians.
4. All landscaping shall continue to be maintained in a healthy growing condition
throughout the duration of the structure or use which it is intended to serve. Any
planting not so maintained shall be replaced with new plants at the beginning of the
next immediately following growing season.
204
5. The design and maintenance of landscaping and screening shall create no obstruction
to driver vision at traffic intersection areas.
B. Screening. All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be screened along their
periphery where they abut streets, public spaces and residence districts. Such screening
shall consist of evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as, in
the judgment of the approving agency, will screen the activity involved from the above -
referenced abutting uses. The approving agency may allow a wall or fence of location,
height, design and material determined suitable by such agency to be substituted for or to
supplement the required screen planting.
Article VIII — Off -Street Parking and Loading
Article VIII — Section 7. Operation and maintenance.
A. Permanent maintenance. Required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
maintained so long as the use or structure exists which the facilities are designed to serve.
B. Operation. The operation of off-street parking and loading facilities shall be conducted in
such a manner as to limit their use to licensed motor vehicles on a transient basis. The
servicing, repair, fueling or storage of motor vehicles or trailers shall not be permitted in
such areas.
Article IX — Zoning Board of Appeals
Article IX — Section 1. Organization.
A. Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as heretofore established by the City Council
pursuant to § 81 of the General City Law of the State of New York, is hereby maintained. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of six members.
B. Meetings and records. The presence of four members of the Board shall be necessary for a
quorum and the concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to effect any decision before
the Board. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on
every question or, if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every rule, determination, regulation,
amendment or appeal thereof, and every order, requirement and decision of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Board.
Article IX — Section 2. Powers and duties.
A. General. The Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed by General
City Law and by this chapter, which powers and duties are summarized and more particularly
specified in the following, provided that none of the following sections shall be deemed to
205
any of the powers of the Board of Appeals that are conferred by the General City Law. In
passing upon any matter before it, the Board shall take into specific consideration the goals
as well as the specific standards of this chapter.
B. Rules and regulations. The Board of Appeals may adopt such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary and proper to the performance of its powers and duties hereunder and may
amend or repeal the same.
C. Nonconforming uses. As more fully set out in Chapter 267 - Article IV of this chapter, the
Board of Appeals is authorized to extend the permitted period for discontinuance of a
nonconforming use in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 267 - Article IV of this
chapter; to review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for
reconstruction of a nonconforming building in accordance with requirements of Chapter 267
Article IV of this chapter; to permit the change of a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use in accordance with Chapter 267 - Article IV of this chapter; and to
review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for the improvement of
a nonconforming use in accordance with Chapter 267 - Article IV of this chapter.
D. Variances. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or agency charged with the enforcement of this chapter, or on referral
of an applicant to the Board by an approving agency acting pursuant to Article VI or VII of
this chapter, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict letter of this
chapter, where its literal interpretation would cause unnecessary hardship, in such manner as
to observe the spirit of the chapter, secure public safety and welfare and do substantial
justice.
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 1999]
1. Use variances. Where, because of unnecessary hardship, an applicant desires to utilize
land for a principal or accessory use not allowed in the district in which the land is
located, and where such applicant presents appropriate proof of such unnecessary
hardship with reference to the standards enumerated below, the Board may grant a
variance of the applicable provisions of this chapter for the specific case, provided that as
a condition to the grant of any such variance, the Board shall make each and every one of
the following findings:
a. After considering all permitted uses, that the property in question cannot yield a
reasonable return as demonstrated by competent financial evidence if used only for a
purpose allowed in that district.
b. That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances affecting only the property
which is the subject of the application and not to general conditions in a substantial
portion of the neighborhood.
c. That the use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
206
d. That the use to be authorized by the variance is in reasonable harmony with the intent
of this chapter.
e. That the unnecessary hardship claimed as a ground for the variance has not been
created by the owner.
f. That within the intent and purpose of this chapter, the variance, if granted, is the
minimum variance necessary to afford relief. To this end, the Board may permit a
lesser variance than that applied for.
2. Area variances. Where an applicant requests a variance of lot area or other dimensional
requirements of this chapter, and where such applicant presents appropriate proof with
reference to the standards enumerated below, the Board may grant a variance of the
applicable provisions of this chapter for the specific case after weighing the benefit to the
applicant against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and
community if such variance is granted. In making this determination, the Board of
Appeals shall consider the following:
Amended 3- 10- 1999, approved 3- 11- 19991
a. How substantial the variation is in relation to the requirement.
b. Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical
or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district.
c. Whether a substantial change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or
a substantial detriment to adjoining properties created.
d. Whether the difficulty can be alleviated by some method feasible for the applicant to
pursue other than a variance.
e. Whether the difficulty alleged by the applicant was self-created, which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily
preclude the granting of the area variance.
3. Conditions and safeguards. The Board of Appeals may prescribe such conditions or
restrictions applying to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary in each specific
case in order to minimize the adverse effects of such variance upon other property in the
neighborhood and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In the case of a use
variance, any permits for additional construction or any change in occupancy or use of
the premises affected shall require reapplication to the Board of Appeals for modification
of said use variance. Such conditions or restrictions shall be incorporated into the
building permit and certificate of occupancy. Failure to comply with such conditions or
restrictions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may constitute the basis for
denial or revocation of a building permit or certificate of occupancy and for all other
applicable remedies.
E. Interpretations. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter, or on request from any
official, agency or board of the City, or on the Board of Appeals own initiative, the Board of
Appeals is authorized to decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision of
207
this chapter. Interpretations shall be made in accordance with the intent of the particular
provision being interpreted.
Article IX — Section 3. Procedure.
A. Appeal or application. All appeals of any denials and all applications to the Board shall be
made by the owner or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on forms prescribed by
the Board. Each appeal or application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall
refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved and shall exactly set forth, as the case
may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the adjustment that is applied for and
the grounds for which it is claimed that the same should be granted.
B. Review by other agencies. Upon a receipt of a completed appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall forward copies for review and report such to the Planning Department,
Building Department, Law Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Department of
Public Works and any other officials and agencies as it deems appropriate. The Planning
Board may submit to the Board of Appeals an advisory opinion on any appeal or application
at any time prior to the rendering of a decision. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a
notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and to the clerks of
abutting municipalities when required by law.
C. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on any appeal,
application or request made pursuant to this chapter. The deliberations of the Board shall be
conducted publicly and all votes on any matter before the Board must be taken at a public
meeting.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. 'No. 2- 2009]
1. Publication in the official newspaper. The applicant shall give public notice of such
hearing and of the substance of the application shall be given by publication in the City's
official newspaper at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. The applicant shall
file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such notification was completed.
2. Mailing to abutting and adjacent property owners. The applicant must notify all property
owners in an affected area as determined by the Board, but, at a minimum, the applicant
shall notify all property owners within 250 feet of any boundary of the property which is
the subject of an application for all single-, two- and three-family properties and must
notify any property owners within 500 feet of any boundary of the property which is the
subject of an application for all multifamily, nonresidentially zoned and nonresidential
uses. Such notice shall be given by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, and regular mail to such property owners whose names appear as the owners
of record in the office of the Assessor of their respective municipality. Such notice shall
be mailed not more than 21 days prior to and not less than 10 days before the date of the
public hearing. The applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting
that such property owners were so notified.
Amended 5- 11- 2011, approved 5- 12- 20111
208
3. Sign posting. A sign as prescribed in the Planning Board' s Rules and Regulations shall be
posted along all street frontages of the subject site at least 14 days prior to the hearing
date. The applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
notification was completed.
4. Affidavit submission. All required affidavits shall be filed not less than nine days prior to
the date of the public hearing.
D. Action. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, shall be recorded and
shall fully set forth the facts of the case and the findings and conclusions on which it was
based. Such resolution and findings shall be prepared by the Corporation Counsel. Such
decision shall be made within 62 days of the date of the public hearing. The Board of
Appeals shall notify the Planning Board, the Building Commissioner, the City Clerk's Office,
the Assessor's Office, and the Law Department and each applicant of its decision in each
case, in writing, upon the filing of its decision in the office of the Board.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
Article IX — Section 4. Procedure.
A. Appeal or application. All appeals of any denials and all applications to the Board shall be
made by the owner or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on forms prescribed by
the Board. Each appeal or application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall
refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved and shall exactly set forth, as the case
may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the adjustment that is applied for and
the grounds for which it is claimed that the same should be granted.
B. Review by other agencies. Upon a receipt of a completed appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall forward copies for review and report such to the Planning Department,
Building Department, Law Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Department of
Public Works and any other officials and agencies as it deems appropriate. The Planning
Board may submit to the Board of Appeals an advisory opinion on any appeal or application
at any time prior to the rendering of a decision. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a
notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board and to the clerks of
abutting municipalities when required by law.
C. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on any appeal,
application or request made pursuant to this chapter. The deliberations of the Board shall be
conducted publicly and all votes on any matter before the Board must be taken at a public
meeting.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
1. Publication in the official newspaper. The applicant shall give public notice of such
hearing and of the substance of the application shall be given by publication in the City's
official newspaper at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. The applicant shall
file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such notification was completed.
209
2. Mailing to abutting and adjacent property owners. The applicant must notify all property
owners in an affected area as determined by the Board, but, at a minimum, the applicant
shall notify all property owners within 250 feet of any boundary of the property which is
the subject of an application for all single-, two- and three- family properties and must
notify any property owners within 500 feet of any boundary of the property which is the
subject of an application forall multifamily, nonresidentially zoned and nonresidential
uses. Such notice shall be given by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, and regular mail to such property owners whose names appear as the owners
of record in the office of the Assessor of their respective municipality. Such notice shall
be mailed not more than 21 days prior to and not less than 10 days before the date of the
public hearing. The applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting
that such property owners were so notified.
Amended 5- 11- 2011, approved 5- 12- 2011]
3. Sign posting. A sign as prescribed in the Planning Board' s Rules and Regulations shall be
posted along all street frontages of the subject site at least 14 days prior to the hearing
date. The applicant shall file with the Board a duly sworn affidavit attesting that such
notification was completed.
4. Affidavit submission. All required affidavits shall be filed not less than nine days prior to
the date of the public hearing.
D. Action. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, shall be recorded and
shall fully set forth the facts of the case and the findings and conclusions on which it was
based. Such resolution and findings shall be prepared by the Corporation Counsel. Such
decision shall be made within 62 days of the date of the public hearing. The Board of
Appeals shall notify the Planning Board, the Building Commissioner, the City Clerk's Office,
the Assessor' s Office, and the Law Department and each applicant of its decision in each
case, in writing, upon the filing of its decision in the office of the Board.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
Article IX — Section 5. Expiration.
A variance granted under this chapter shall automatically expire if a building permit for
construction in accordance with the plans for which such variance was granted has not been
issued within one year of the date of the variance and if all construction is not completed within
two years of the date of issuance of the building permit, or if both have not occurred within such
other time limits as may be established by the Board of Appeals in connection with its decision.
Such time limits shall be tolled by any judicial proceedings to review the Board' s decision.
Article IX — Section 6. Reapplication.
After an application has been decided, no matter presented to the Board of Appeals shall again
be presented to or entertained by said Board within a period of three years from the date of such
decision or determination or, if renewed by the courts, within the same period after the final
210
adjudication thereof, except upon a showing by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the Board of
Appeals, that there has been a material change in the circumstances under consideration in the
original proceeding.
Article X — Enforcement and Administration
Article X — Section 1. Enforcement.
A. General. No board, agency, officer or employee of the City shall issue, grant or approve any
permit, license, certificate or other authorization for any construction or alteration of any
building or structure or for any use of land, building or structure that would not be in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as permitted under Article IX of this
chapter.
B. Enforcing authority. The provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations authorized
hereunder shall be enforced by the Building Commissioner or a designated member of his
Department.
1. The Building Commissioner and his duly authorized assistants shall maintain files of all
applications for building permits and site plans submitted therewith and for certificates of
occupancy, and records of all building permits and certificates of occupancy issued by
them, which files and records shall be open to public inspection.
2. The Building Commissioner shall keep a record of every identifiable complaint of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and of the action taken consequent on
each such complaint, which records shall be public records.
Article X — Section 2. Permits.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
Except under written authorization of the Board of Appeals, as provided in Article IX of this
chapter, no building permit shall be issued for any land, building or structure where said action
would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Every application for a building permit as required by the Building Commissioner shall be
accompanied by a site plan as required in Article VII of this chapter. The application shall be
made in triplicate. When site plan approval by the Planning Board is not required by Article
VII of this chapter, the Building Commissioner, in reviewing such site plan, shall be guided
by the standards as set forth in Chapter 267 - Article VII of this chapter. On issuance of a
building permit, the Building Commissioner shall return one copy of all documents filed to
the applicant.
B. If a permit is denied, the Building Commissioner shall state in writing to the applicant the
reason for such denial.
C. Permit requirements.
211
1. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to conspicuously post the permit and
maintain the approved plans at the job site until the work is completed and the
inspections are passed.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to request in writing the required
inspections, or required reinspections, at least 72 hours in advance. The permit holder
shall not cause any conditions, and/ or proceed with any construction phase, that would
prevent a required inspection to be fully carried out and passed by the Building Official.
3. The Building Official shall advise the permit holder in writing of the result of a required
inspection within 24 hours.
4. The requested inspection or reinspection shall not be carried out if any one of the
following conditions exist:
a. The permit is not conspicuously posted at the work site.
b. The approved plans are not at the work site.
c. One or more of the required inspections of preceding construction phases have not
been passed.
d. The legalization and/ or reinspection fees, or other required fees, have not been paid.
5. At completion of work, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to submit the
documentation required by codes and conditions of the permit, and apply for the type of
compliance certificate listed on the permit.
Artkle X — Section 3. Certificates of occupancy and certificates of tenancy.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
Except under written authorization of the Board of Appeals, as provided in Article IX of this
chapter, no certificate of occupancy or certificate of tenancy may be issued unless such
occupancy is in complete conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of
occupancy may continue in effect as long as such occupancy or use is in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and any requirements made in connection therewith at the time of the
issuance thereof. The details of any detailed statement or plan approved by the City Council,
Planning Board, Building Commissioner, Board of Appeals or Architectural Review Board,
acting under the terms of this chapter, and any conditions attached to such approval, shall be
deemed to be such requirements.
A. Application. All applications for certificates of occupancy or certificates of tenancy shall be
on forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. Such certificates shall be issued no less
than 30 days after review and approval by the Building Department, provided that all
applicable codes or ordinances in effect are complied with. In the event that the Building
Commissioner denies a certificate of occupancy, notice of the denial setting forth the reasons
therefor shall be sent to the applicant within 15 days after receipt of the written application.
212
B. Conditional temporary certificates of occupancy.
1. A conditional temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Commissioner for a period not to exceed 90 days during the completion of any alterations
that are required under the provision of any law or ordinance. Conditional temporary
certificates may be renewed by the Building Commissioner for periods not exceeding 90
days, but in no event shall temporary certificate renewals exceed a total of six months.
Such conditional temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the
respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or of the City respective to the use or
occupancy of the land or building or any other matter covered by this section, and such
conditional temporary certificates shall not be issued except under such restrictions and
provisions as will adequately assure the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the
building and of adjacent buildings and land.
2. No conditional temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued when the landscaping,
screening and/ or lighting required pursuant to any City Board approval granted in
conjunction with approval of a building permit is not completed, unless the applicant of
such certificate complies with the following requirements:
a. Submit, prior to the issuance of such certificate, a performance bond issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New York, guaranteeing
satisfactory completion of the work required within the limitation of the certificate, or
any extension thereof, in a sum equal to the cost of the work, as estimated by the
Commissioner of Buildings; and
b. Submit a signed and notarized agreement that the work shall be completed as
approved within the time limitation of the certificate or any extension thereof.
c. If the work to be completed is limited to the work required to be performed within the
City's right-of-way, such as, but not limited to, sidewalk, trees and/or lampposts, the
applicant may choose to submit a certified check made to the order of the City of
Mount Vernon, in a sum equal to the cost of the work, as estimated by the
Commissioner of Buildings, plus 15% administrative cost, together with the
agreement listed above, which shall additionally authorize the City of Mount Vernon
to perform the work should the applicant exceeds the time limitation and any
extension thereof.
3. For the following regulations, Chapter 267 - Article X -2C through and including H,
unless otherwise specified, the term " certificate of occupancy" shall be deemed to mean
either a " certificate of occupancy" or a " certificate of tenancy," as the case may be. For a
certificate of occupancy, the term building shall be deemed to mean building and land, or
land when no structure exists at the premises. For a " certificate of tenancy," the owner
shall be deemed to mean the business owner and the building, the tenancy space.
C. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building and the use of the building and/ or
land complies with all provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the City that
pertains to the construction, occupancy and use of such building or land.
213
D. Each certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is required for both initial and
continued occupancy and use of the building and/or land to which it applies.
E. Upon written request by the owner, the Building Commissioner shall, after inspection, issue a
certificate of occupancy for any building or use thereof or of land existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter, certifying such use and whether or not the same and the building
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
F. It shall be unlawful to occupy and use a land, structure or tenancy space, other than a one- or
two- family dwelling, if the certificate of occupancy or tenancy is not kept on the premises
and made available for inspection at any time upon request from a Building Official or other
official representing the City of Mount Vernon.
G. The certificate of occupancy shall become invalid if the building, land or tenancy, as
applicable, is not used or occupied in complete compliance with all the provisions of the
certificate of occupancy. The owner shall be responsible to obtain all necessary permits to
return the premises to code compliant conditions within the specified time. Failure to do so
shall lead to the revocation of the certificate. The time shall be as specified by applicable
code or as specified on the notice of violation. The most restrictive time shall take
precedence, but in no case shall it exceed one year.
H. No occupancy shall be permitted in a building which certificate of occupancy have been
revoked. No occupancy shall be permitted in any the parts of the building which are used and
occupied in noncompliance with the certificate of occupancy, or/and have been altered so as
to become noncompliant with life, fire and safety code requirements such as required means
of egress, fire separation, fire detection, fire suppression and structural integrity.
I. Annual required inspections. Inspections of places of public assembly and common areas of
multiple dwellings shall be annually conducted by the Building Official as a condition of the
certificate of occupancy or certificate of tenancy.
I. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building, the owner of the business for a
tenancy space, or a duly authorized agent, to request the annual inspection in due time.
The applicant shall be charged a late fee for failure to apply for an inspection 30 days
prior to the due date.
2. The Building Commissioner shall keep records of the annual inspections and issue the
appropriate certificate of inspection to the applicant, or the result of a failed inspection.
Such certificate shall certify that the spaces subject to the inspections are in compliance
with the requirements of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of tenancy for these
spaces.
3. No certificate of inspection may be issued if violations of the certificate of occupancy or
tenancy are identified.
4. Public assembly spaces:
214
a. The maximum number of occupants for each public assembly space shall be listed in
the certificate of occupancy.
b. Each assembly space shall be inspected yearly. Each assembly space shall receive a
certificate of inspection issued by the Building Commissioner. The certificate for
assembly space shall be the occupancy sign, which shall list the use of the space, the
maximum number of occupants, and the dates of issuance and expiration, in addition
to the specific identification of the premises and the space.
c. It shall be unlawful to occupy a public assembly space without an occupancy sign
conspicuously posted.
5. Multiple dwellings:
a. The common areas of a multiple dwelling shall be inspected yearly by a Building
Official.
b. The certificate of multiple dwelling inspection shall list the date of inspection, the
name of the Building Official, the name of the building owner, the name and phone
number of the building superintendent, the date of any other required inspections such
as sprinkler system, elevators, etc., and the date of issuance and expiration of the
certificate. The certificate shall be kept on the premises with the certificate of
occupancy.
Article X — Section 4. Site work and construction activity.
No site clearing, excavation or other similar activity in preparation for construction shall be
permitted until and unless a permit or approval for such activity has been issued by the
Commissioner of Buildings and/ or the appropriate City agency or official and any required bond
has been posted therefore. Once construction has been started it shall be diligently prosecuted to
completion. In the event that construction is halted or unreasonably delayed, and, in the opinion
of the Building Commissioner, such halt or delay may create a safety or health hazard or an
adverse impact on the environment or the neighborhood in which it is located, said Building
Commissioner may order a termination of construction activities on the site and the immediate
restoration of the site to a safe, healthful and attractive condition.
Article X — Section 5. Fees.
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
For the purpose of defraying the professional and administrative costs involved in the review of
applications and appeals, including the cost of preparing and publishing legal notices as required
by law, all applications shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City of Mount Vernon in
the amounts prescribed below. This fee shall be waived where the applicant is an agency of the
City:
A. Each application or petition requesting any amendment, supplement, change, modification or
repeal of any provision of this chapter, including the Zoning Map: $2,000, but not less than
2,000 per acre for any application requesting a map change.
215
B. Each application for site plan approval: $500, plus $20 for each required off-street parking
and loading space.
C. Each application for a special permit: $500, plus the required site plan application fee.
D: Each application for an area variance: $ 250 for existing one- and two-family dwellings,
1, 000 for existing uses, other than one- and two-family dwellings, $2,000 for new structure
or new development of any use.
E. Each application for a use variance: $ 2,000.
F. Five hundred dollars for each lot requiring area variances for reapportionment.
G. One thousand dollars for each lot requiring area variances for a subdivision.
H. Application for an interpretation of the Zoning Code to the Board of Appeals: $ 350 per
interpretation.
Article X — Section 6. Penalties for offenses; stop -work order.
A. Penalties.
1. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any other regulation made
under authority conferred thereby, or who shall build or alter any structure in violation of
any statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall knowingly assist
therein, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment, or both; such fine and imprisonment to
be in accordance with the following schedule:
Amended 7- 8- 2009 by L.L. No. 2- 2009]
a. For each conviction, a fine not to exceed $ 1, 000 or imprisonment not exceeding 15
days or both.
2. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and additional violation. In
addition to the foregoing provisions, the City shall have such other remedies for any
violation or threatened violation of this chapter as is now or may hereafter be provided by
law. The application of any above penalty shall not be held to prevent any action under
Chapter 267 - Article X - 5B below.
B. Prevention. In case any land or structure is used, erected, constructed, altered or maintained
in violation of this chapter or of any regulation, restriction or requirement made pursuant
thereto, including any statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, in addition to
other lawful remedies, any appropriate action or proceedings may be instituted to prevent
such unlawful use, erection, construction, alteration or maintenance; to restrain, correct or
abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of such structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Whenever the Building
Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any structure is being
conducted in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or not in conformity with any
216
regulation, restriction or requirement made pursuant thereto, including any written statement
or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or in an unsafe or dangerous manner, he shall
issue a stop -work order pursuant to the provisions of Article III of the Mount Vernon
Building Code.
Article XI — Amendments
Article XI — Section 1. General.
The City Council may from time to time, on its own motion, on petition or on recommendation
of the Planning Board, and after public notice and hearing as required by law, act to amend,
supplement, repeal or change the regulations and districts established under this chapter.
A. Contents. Any petition for amendment of this chapter shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall describe the proposed changes. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Map, a copy of
the applicable portion of the official copy of the Zoning Map, as kept by the City Clerk, shall
be included, showing existing and proposed zoning. Also included for proposed map
amendments shall be a map drawn to an appropriate scale showing all properties and the
names of the owners of such properties located within 200 feet of any land which would be
affected by such change, as shown on the tax assessment rolls.
B. Notice. The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements as to notice in
Chapter 267 - Article XI below.
Article XI — Section 2. Initial consideration.
Where petition is made by the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any district or of the
frontage of the several properties constituting a part thereof, as provided by § 83 of the General
City Law, the City Council shall hear and vote upon said petition within 90 days of the filing of
such petition, in proper form, with the City Clerk. In the case of all other applications and
petitions submitted to the City requesting an amendment of this chapter, the City Council may,
on its own motion, decide not to formally consider such amendment.
Article XI — Section 3. Referrals for review and report.
If any amendment is to be considered by the City Council, it shall be referred for review and
report to the Planning Board, the Corporation Counsel and any other board, agency or official of
the City which the City Council deems appropriate. The Planning Board may confer with the
petitioner and assist such petitioner, where appropriate, to place the amendment in its most
suitable form. Such conference and assistance shall not be deemed to constitute any commitment
by the Planning Board as to its position on the advisability of the proposed amendment nor to
require the petitioner to make any modification to his application. After said conference,
however, the petitioner shall be allowed to revise his petition and to provide copies of such
revised petition to the City Council and to any board, agency or official to which the original
proposed amendment was referred. The Corporation Counsel shall report to the City Council
217
regarding the form of the proposed amendment. The Planning Board shall report to the City
Council regarding the form and the advisability of the proposed amendment. Its report shall
analyze the proposed amendment and shall state the Board' s reasons for its recommendation,
describing any conditions it believes make the amendment advisable or not, and specifically
stating whether the amendment would be in accordance with the purposes of this chapter as set
forth in Chapter 267 - Article I. All boards, agencies and officials to which such proposed
amendments are referred shall have not less than 30 days from the date of forwarding, or from
the date of revision by the petitioner, whichever is later, to submit their reports. In no case shall
this section restrict the right of an applicant come before the Planning Board for an informal
discussion and review prior to formal submission or a petition for amendment of this chapter.
Article XI — Section 4. Public hearing.
On receipt of the requested reports and any revised proposed amendment from an applicant or
notification by the applicant that no revision will be made, the City Council may schedule and
hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
Article XI — Section 5. Notice of hearing.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published on at least three different dates in the City' s
official newspaper, the first insertion to be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Map, at least one week prior to the
public hearing a notice of such hearing and a brief description of the proposed change shall be
mailed to all owners of property, as shown by the tax assessment roll, within 200 feet of any land
which would be affected by such change. A copy of such notice, with proof of such mailing,
together with proof of notice in the official newspaper, shall be filed in the City Clerk's office on
or before the date of the public hearing.
Article XI — Section 6. Referral to Westchester County Planning Board and adjacent
municipalities.
Not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, the City Clerk shall forward copies of the
proposed amendment with the notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning
Board and to the clerks of any abutting municipalities when required by law.
Article XI — Section 7. Action.
The action of the City Council to approve any proposed amendment to this chapter shall be by
majority vote, except, however, if a protest is presented against such amendment, duly signed
and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of the area of any land included in such
proposed change, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent
and extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of land directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such
amendment shall not be passed except by a 3/ 4 vote of the City Council.
Article XI — Section 8. Records.
218
The City Clerk shall keep the official record copy of the Zoning Map and text sections, and shall
be responsible for the posting of all changes thereto. Said Clerk shall also maintain a file of all
such Zoning Maps and text sections which have been superseded by amendment of this chapter.
Article XII — Miscellaneous
Article XII — Section 1. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase of this chapter
be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect any other portion of this chapter.
Article XII — Section 2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the " Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mount
Vernon."
Article XII — Section 3. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Article XII — Section 4. Effect on building permits and building permit applications.
A. Except as provided in this section, nothing herein shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been
lawfully issued prior to or, under the circumstances noted below, within 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter, provided that the proposed use complies with the use
requirements of this chapter, and further provided that construction shall begin within six
months of the date of such permit; the foundation, or 15%, of the construction valuation shall
be completed within one year of the date of such permit; and the entire building or structure
shall be completed within two years of the date of such permit.
B. In addition, if the Building Commissioner determines that an application (with accompanying
construction plans) for a building permit filed prior to the effective date of this chapter meets
all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance in existence as of the date immediately prior to the
effective date of this chapter, has received all necessary conditional or final approvals by the
City Council or the Board of Appeals and complies with the use requirements of this chapter,
then the Building Commissioner shall issue all necessary permits within a reasonable time,
but not longer than 60 days from such date, provided that the applicant has taken all steps
deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner to obtain such permit.
C. Any of the above periods may be increased up to 50% by the Building Commissioner, on
showing of good cause.
D. Notwithstanding the preceding, the Building Commissioner may require any such plans,
construction or use to be subject to the site plan approval procedures as set forth in Article
219
VII of this chapter and to be modified to comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
extent that the site plan approving agency determines such compliance to be reasonable and
practical.
Article XIII — Signs
Article XIII — Section 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable regulations for the design, construction,
installation and maintenance of all exterior and interior signs, banners, awnings and canopies in
the City of Mount Vernon in order to:
A. Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and convey their messages and
the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs;
B. Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City;
C. Protect the public health, safety and welfare;
D. Reduce traffic hazards;
E. Facilitate the creations of an attractive and harmonious community;
F. Protect property values;
G. Promote economic development; and
P. Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs containing noncommercial
messages.
Article XIII — Section 2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BILLBOARD
Any sign which is not located on the premises that it advertises or identifies; billboards
are supported by uprights or braces placed on the ground and not attached to any
building.
COMMISSIONER
The Commissioner of Buildings, unless otherwise specified.
FACING or SURFACE
The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or
illustrated on the sign.
ILLL UMINATED SIGN
Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, design or outlines illuminated externally
by electric lights or internally by luminous tubes.
220
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
Any material winch will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1, 200° F. and will not
continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
INSTALL
Build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting
of signs.
OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURE
Any marquee, awning, billboard or street clock as further defined in this chapter.
PERMITTEE
A person receiving an erection permit pursuant to the provision of this chapter.
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
SIGN
Any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, emblem, symbol, design or other figure
of similar character which is a structure or a part thereof, or is attached to or in any
manner represented on a building or other structure, and is placed out of doors in view of
the general public and is used for purposes of advertisement, identification or expression.
SIGN AREA
The area of a sign shall be measured as follows:
A. Where such sign is on a panel, within a frame or is outlined, all of the area of such
panel or area within such frame or outline shall be included.
B. Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, figures or symbols engraved,
painted or in any way attached to a building wall or window or on a fascia panel that
is an integral part of the building design, the area shall be constructed to be that of the
smallest regular geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters, designs,
figures or symbols.
STRUCTURAL TRIM
The molding, battens, capping, nailing, strips, latticing and platforms which are attached
to the sign structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign or banner or pennant designed to advertise or announce a particular event or series
of events, to solicit political support or to announce the availability for sale of a particular
item or items which will be available or occurring for a limited period of time, and is not
permanently mounted.
Article XIII — Section 3. Approval procedure for sign permit; exceptions.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, paint with a new message,
redesign, relocate and reconstruct an existing sign by making a structural change or a change
in the message or cause to be erected, altered, painted, painted with a new message,
redesigned, relocated and reconstructed within the corporate limits of the City any sign or
signs, without first having obtained and paid for and having in force a permit therefor from
the Commissioner.
221
B. The following two operations shall not be considered creating a new sign and, therefore, shall
not require a sign permit:
1. Replacing copy: the changing of the advertising or message on an approved sign which is
specifically designed for the use of a replaceable copy.
2. Maintenance: painting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or a
sign structure, unless a structural change is made or there is a change in the message.
C. Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the Commissioner, which
application shall include:
I. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The name, address, telephone number and insurance coverage of the sign maker.
3. The location of the building upon which the sign is to be erected.
4. A color photo of the building upon which the sign is to be erected and immediately
adjacent building( s).
5. Size of the sign.
6. A description of the construction details of the sign, showing the lettering and/ or pictorial
matter composing the sign and a description of the position of lighting or other
extraneous devices.
7. Sketches drawn to scale and supporting information indicating location of sign colors, size
and types of lettering or other graphic representation, logos and materials to be used,
electrical or other mechanical equipment, details of its attachment and hanging. Samples
of materials should accompany the application where required by the Commissioner.
8. The written consent of the owner of the property upon which such sign or signs is or are
to be erected and maintained. In addition, such sign application shall be accompanied by
a fee as established in the Building Code.
9. Such other pertinent information as the Commissioner may require to ensure compliance
with this section.
D. Following formal submission to the Commissioner, said Commissioner shall refer all
applications for signs to the Department of Planning and Community Development within
three business days for advice on matters of consistency with the design guidelines and
requirements outlined herein. The Department of Planning and Community Development
shall render an opinion to approve, disapprove or approve with conditions to the
Commissioner within 10 days of receipt of the application.
222
E. The Commissioner shall issue a permit for a sign within seven calendar days of the receipt of
a complete and satisfactory application from the Department of Planning and Community
Development, except as noted in Subsection F herein.
F. In those cases where an applicant does not wish to implement the design conditions of
approval outlined by the Commissioner, the matter shall be referred to the Commissioner of
the Architectural Review Board for an advisory opinion. In such cases, the Architectural
Review Board shall recommend approval or disapproval of such sign application within 30
days from the date of referral. The decision of the Commissioner, however, will be final.
G. Appeal from permit denial. Any applicant, feeling aggrieved by the decision of the
Commissioner upon any application for a permit for any sign, may appeal to the Sign Review
Appeals Board from such decision, and the Sign Review Appeals Board may affirm, reverse
or modify such decision of the Commissioner.
H. Issuance of sign construction permit. Upon approval of the application by the Commissioner,
or after any conditions for approval established by the Architectural Review Board are
satisfied, the Commissioner shall issue a permit for construction of such sign.
Article XIII — Section 4. Revocation of permit.
The Commissioner may revoke any permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of
this chapter or a misrepresentation of fact on the permit application.
Article XIII — Section 5. Permit display and voltage.
Every permitted sign or other advertising structure shall display in a conspicuous place the
permit for the sign, including the voltage of any electrical apparatus used, if appropriate, for at
least the period of erection and for at least 15 days thereafter.
Article XIII — Section 6. Maintenance and inspection.
A. All signs shall be maintained in good order and a condition similar to their original or
approved condition. No sign or other advertising structure shall be inadequately maintained so as
to show evidence of deterioration, including peeling, rust, dirt, fading, discoloration or holes.
The Commissioner or someone appointed by the Commissioner may perform an inspection,
whenever deemed necessary, of any sign or advertising structure in the City of Mount Vernon
regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the structure is unsafe, in need
of repair, not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Where indicated by the Commissioner, signs and
other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure and to
223
receive dead loads as required in the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code or other
ordinances of the City of Mount Vernon.
Article XIII — Section 7. Signs required.
All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises, any part of which is located on the
ground floor, shall be so identified by a permanent sign, as defined in Chapter 267 - Article VIII,
and shall meet all requirements for application for same.
Article XIII — Section 8. Prohibited signs.
A. All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises over three stories in height
located on upper floors are prohibited from utilizing ground -floor level space for the placement
of a sign. Building directories or any listing or identification of upper -floor tenants shall not be
located on the exterior of the building.
B. All occupants of business, commercial or industrial premises located above ground -floor
level are prohibited from displaying signs of paper construction.
C. Outdated signs. No signs or other advertising structure shall advertise a business or product
which is no longer in existence at the location where such sign or advertising structure exists.
1. Any sign now or hereafter existing, which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or a product available for purchase by the public on the premises, shall be
taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the
building or structure upon which such sign may be found within 30 days after closing of
the business or after such business ceases to exist at that premises.
2. The Commissioner is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign upon the failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified in the order.
a. The expense of said removal, when certified by said Commissioner to the City
Council, shall be paid by the City and such amount shall thereupon be and become a
lien upon to premises in question.
b. The cost of such removal shall be levied and collected in the same manner and under
the same penalties as an assessment for a public improvement.
3. All temporary for rent/ sale signs, whether residential, business, commercial or industrial,
shall be removed 30 days after the property is rented or sold. Any sign remaining on the
property for sale or rent after the aforementioned thirty -day period will be subject to a
violation issued by the Building Department.
D. Moving signs. Except for temporary holiday season or grand opening displays as provided
for herein, no sign or part thereof may consist of pennants, revolving or insulating signs,
ribbons, streamers or similar attached devices.
E. Nonconforming sign.
224
1. For the purpose of this section, a " nonconforming sign" shall be defined as a sign of a
type not permitted, either as listed in this section or omitted from Chapter 267 - Article
XIII, Permitted signs. Such signs shall be removed in accordance with the procedure
written for outdated signs.
Editor's Note: See Subsection C.
2. A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged, and the message may not be altered or
repainted in any way. The nonconforming sign shall be removed if deemed unsafe by the
Commissioner. Upon the issuance of the Commissioner' s determination, it shall be
removed immediately.
3. Once a nonconforming sign is removed, it is deemed permanently removed and may be
replaced only with a sign that conforms to the criteria of permitted signs as outlined in
this chapter.
Editor's Note: See Chapter 267 - Article VIII.
4. If the Commissioner elects to cause the removal of such sign, the expense of such
removal, when certified by said Commissioner to the City Council, shall be paid by the
City, and such amount shall thereupon be and become a lien upon the premises in
question and shall be levied and collected in the same manner and under the same
penalties as an assessmentfor a public improvement.
F. Obstructions to doors, windows or fire exits. No sign or other advertising structure shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door,
window or fire exit. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire
stair/platform.
G. Traffic hazards. No sign or other advertising structure shall:
1. Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection.
2. Interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal
or device because of its position, shape or color.
3. Make use of the words " stop," " look," " drive-in," " danger," or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses traffic.
H. Unsafe signs.
1. No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute a hazard to safety or health by
reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or maintenance.
2. The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which such sign is located shall be
jointly and severally liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination sources, in a
neat and orderly condition and good working order at all times and to prevent the
225
development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical
appearance or safety of such sign.
I. Illuminated signs.
1. No sign or other advertising structure shall be illuminated with lights that glare into or
upon any adjacent residential premises or district, operators of motor vehicles or
pedestrians on the public right-of-way.
2. No sign or other advertising structure shall have lights or illuminations that flash, move,
rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker vary in intensity or color or use intermittent electrical
pulsations.
3. Indirect lighting for signs should not focus on adjacent properties, but on the lettering or
the subject sign. If permitted, this lighting should be presented in the permitting
application in enough details and drawings so as to show the impact of such lighting on
the facade or face of the building.
J. Billboard. Billboards may not hereafter be erected. Existing billboards, except for roof -
mounted billboards, may remain as long as they are properly maintained as per Chapter 267 -
Article VIII.
K. Roof sign. No roof signs may hereafter be erected and no sign may hereafter extend above
the roof line, except time and temperature devices which do not bear advertising of the
business. Such devices shall be in good working order at all times. Existing roof signs may
remain and be maintained in good order for as long as the business remains in continuous
ownership.
Article XIII — Section 9. Permitted signs.
A. Wall signs.
1. A wall sign, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean all flat signs of solid face
construction, including painted signs, which are placed against a building or other
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side walls of said building or structure
so that it is parallel (not perpendicular) to the building face.
2. Construction materials required. All signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible
materials; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used.
3. Location or placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening or
project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached, or project above or
below the articulated sign band (if any) on the building's facade. The thickness of the sign
panel is limited to no more than 12 inches maximum; in the case of multistory buildings,
not above the sill of windows of the second story nor more than 18 feet above the outside
grade, whichever is lower.
226
4. Area. No wall sign shall exceed 300 square feet in area and a height of 36 inches;
maximum letter height on a wall sign or individual -mounted -letters sign shall be 24
inches. Two square feet per linear foot to the principal frontage of the structure in which
the use is located can be used as a guide to calculate the overall size of permitted wall
signs in acceptable proportions for the facade. The only exception to the foregoing
regulation is for wall signs in connection with commercial businesses along principal
arterial corridors discussed in Chapter 267 - Article XIII - A5 below.
5. Principal arterial corridors. A commercial business along a principal arterial corridor that
is set back from the principal arterial corridor shall apply to the Sign Review Appeals
Board to increase its wall sign area. The maximum size allowances that may be approved
are as follows:
a. The height of the sign area to a maximum of 60 inches.
b. The size of individual lettering to a maximum of 48 inches.
c. The height of a wall -mounted sign above grade to a maximum of 30 feet.
d. Logos for identifying the business may be a maximum of 72 inches in height.
6. Multi -tenancy.
a. Where there are two or more tenants occupying a portion of the first -floor frontage of
a given structure, each tenant shall be entitled to a sign equivalent in size to portion of
the frontage so occupied.
b. In the case of multiple occupants of a multistory building, no exterior wall signs may
be permitted on the exterior upper floor. Signs are permitted inside windows,
provided that said interior sign does not cover more than 25% of the window area.
B. Permanent interior signs, ground -floor level. The Commissioner shall review all permanent
interior sign applications for conformance with the intent of this article. Upon this review and
at the discretion of the Commissioner, the applicant may be required to appear before the
Sign Appeals Board for its recommendation. However, in no instance may a permanent
interior sign cover more than 20% of the aggregate storefront window area of said business
and shall be in conformity with other similarly located permanent interior signs of the
neighboring businesses, unless the aggregate window area is less than 100 square feet, in
which case, 10 square feet of sign will be permitted.
C. Awnings and canopies.
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AWNING
A roof -like covering of canvas, vinyl, acrylic, metal or duck attached to a frame
supported entirely from a building and projecting over a sidewalk or yard, which
may or may not be retracted to a position virtually flat against the building when not
in use.
227
CANOPY
A structure, other than an awning, made of canvas, vinyl, acrylic, metal or duck
sheltering an area, on a framework supported by the ground or sidewalk, which may
be attached to a building at one end. It projects over a sidewalk or yard forming a
covered walk to the entrance of building.
2. Location.
a. Height above sidewalk: awnings. No portion of an awning shall be less than seven feet
above the level of the sidewalk or yard over which it is erected and shall be no higher
than the first story of the building.
b. Height above sidewalk: canopies. No portion of a canopy shall be less than nine feet
above the level of the sidewalk or yard over which it is erected.
c. Extension: awnings. No awning shall be permitted to extend beyond a point four feet
from the face of the building on which it is erected.
d. Setback from curbline: canopies. No canopy shall be permitted to extend beyond a
point two feet inside the curbline (measuring from the street side of the curb toward
the building).
e. Width: canopies. No canopy shall be permitted to exceed eight feet in width.
3. Advertising. No advertising shall be placed on any awning, if a wall sign for the business
located at that premises exists and is to remain, except that if there is a sign on the
building, then the name and nature only of the business, industry or pursuit conducted
within the premises may be painted or otherwise permanently placed on the awning in a
space not exceeding 14 inches in height on the front and/ or side of said awning. Lettering
for said advertising shall not exceed 14 inches in height for waterfall awnings and six
inches in height for all other type of awnings, subject to design approval by the
Department of Planning and Community Development.
D. Projecting signs.
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HORIZONTAL PROJECTING SIGN
Any projecting sign which is greater in width than height.
PROJECTING SIGN
Any sign which is attached either parallel or perpendicular to the face plane of a
building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of
that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
VERTICAL PROJECTING SIGN
Any sign which is greater in height than in width.
2. Construction.
228
a. Projecting signs, including frames, braces and supports, shall be designed by a
structural engineer, architect or manufacturer, constructed of incombustible materials
and two-faced.
b. Illumination. If projecting signs are to be illuminated, reflectors shall be provided with
the proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign and
preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property. No floodlight or spotlight or
reflectors of the goose -neck type shall be permitted on projecting signs.
c. Glass requirements. The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated, if any, may
be composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent incombustible material.
Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate glass at least 1/ 4
inch thick and, in case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three
square feet, it shall be wired glass.
d. Movable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting sign, such as the cover
of a service opening, shall be securely fastened utilizing hinges or locking devices.
e. Area limitations. Except by special permission of the City Council, projecting signs
shall be limited in area as follows:
1. Horizontal projecting signs shall not exceed 50 square feet on each side.
2. Vertical projecting signs shall not exceed 80 square feet on each side.
3. Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal faces of any
projecting sign shall not exceed 18 inches.
f. Location and projection over public property. Every projecting sign shall be placed at
least eight feet above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, no more than two
feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the
sign nearest the wall. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least 15 feet above the
public driveway, alley or thoroughfare over which it is erected.
g. Installation and prohibited anchorage' s built. No projection sign shall be secured with
wire, strips of wood or nails, nor shall any projection sign be hung or secured to any
other sign.
h. V- shaped signs prohibited. V-shaped signs consisting of two single -faced signs
erected without a roof or ceiling shall not be permitted.
E. Freestanding signs ( not billboards).
1. Freestanding signs may be permitted only in business, commercial industrial and
residential districts if the building or use served by the sign is set back at least 20 feet
from the front property line. Only one such sign may be permitted for each street frontage
of business, commercial or industrial structure or to identify a residential development
and may be located at the property line.
2. The top of such sign shall be no higher that 12 feet from the ground nor less than three
feet above the grade level or 1/ 2 of the allowable front yard setback, and the sign shall be
no larger than 48 square feet. The location and illumination of such sign shall not block
the view of, or otherwise interfere with, official traffic signs and signals.
229
3. A freestanding sign to identify the occupants of a medical or professional office building
may be permitted in any district where such uses are permitted under this chapter. Said
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet when it abuts a low-density residential district.
F. Marquees.
1. A marquee, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean any roof overhang or permanent
construction projecting from the wall on the front of a building which is entirely
supported by and covering an entrance to the building or thoroughfare.
2. Construction.
a. Required materials. Marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces,
shall be constructed of incombustible materials, designed by an architect or structural
engineer and may be illuminated.
b. Drainage. Marquee roofs shall be properly guttered and connected by downspouts to a
sewer or storm drain so that rainwater will not drip or flow onto public property.
c. Use and construction of marquee roofs. Marquee roofs shall be used for no other
purpose than to form and constitute a roof, and at least 25% of the area of the roof of
every marquee shall be of glass or other incombustible transparent substance.
3. Location.
a. Height above sidewalk. No portion of a marquee shall be less than 10 feet above the
level of the sidewalk or other public or private thoroughfare over which it is erected.
b. Setback from curbline. No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point one
foot inside the curbline.
c. Width. No marquee shall be wider than the entrance or entrances of the building, plus
five feet on each side. However, where the entrances to a building are not more than
20 feet apart, a marquee may be made a continuous single structure between the
entrances.
4. Installation.
a. Bracing, anchorage and supports. Marquees shall be supported solely by the building
to which they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be used as supports.
b. Roof live -load requirement. Marquee roofs, except the glass area required, shall be
designed and constructed to support a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square
foot. Marquees shall be designed to meet the wind pressure requirement of the New
York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.
c. Anchorage to wood structure prohibited. No marquee shall be erected on any building
of wood frame construction unless attached to the masonry, concrete or steel supports
of the building.
5. Signs attached to marquee. Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely
within the border line of the marquee outer edge and shall in no instance be lower that 10
feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No sign or advertising material shall
exceed three feet in height, inclusive of the name of the establishment exhibiting such
marquee. No advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee.
230
6. Illumination required. Marquees projecting over public property, if illuminated, shall be
illuminated by at least 16 candle power of illumination for each 50 square feet or fraction
thereof of area from sunset to at least 11: 00 p.m. every Monday through Saturday night
of each week.
G. Temporary signs.
1. Temporary sign, as regulated by this chapter, shall mean any signs, banner, pennant or
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, vinyl, light fabric cardboard, wallboard
or other light materials with or without frames intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time.
2. Permits and fees. Temporary sign permits may be granted by the Commissioner, and the
applicant shall pay an all-inclusive fee of $30.
3. Construction.
a. Materials and area limitations. No temporary sign of combustible material shall
exceed four feet in one of its dimensions or 75 square feet in area. Such signs in
excess of 60 square feet shall be made of rigid materials such as wall board or other
light materials with frames.
b. Weight limitation. Temporary signs weighing in excess of 50 pounds must be
approved by the Building Department as conforming to the safety requirements of the
New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.
4. Location: projection over public property. No temporary sign shall extend over or into any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare more than four inches from the wall
upon which it is erected and shall not be placed or project over any wall opening.
5. Installation: anchorage and support. Every temporary sign shall be attached with proper
bracing, wire or steel cables. No strings, ropes or wood slats for anchorage or support
purposes shall be permitted.
6. Duration of permits. Permits for temporary signs shall authorize their erection and
maintenance for a period not exceeding 30 days.
7. Advertising permitted. The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain
only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which
such sign is erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a civic,
political or religious nature.
8. The Commissioner may grant special permission for the maintenance of a temporary sign
or signs to a charitable or nonprofitable organization for a period not to exceed 30 days.
No fee is to be charged for such.
9. Political or campaign signs may be installed in accordance with the following provisions:
231
a. Any such sign may not be more than 16 square feet in area and not more than four feet
in height.
b. No such sign may be a roof sign.
c. Applications will be made to the Commissioner by the candidate, the sponsor of a
ballot measure or campaign manager or representative of said candidate or ballot
measure, said application to show the size and location of all proposed signs. Where
the applicant is not the owner of the property where the sign is to be displayed or
installed, the application shall contain the consent of such owner or lessee. No
political signs shall be erected on public property or rights-of-way.
d. All political or campaign signs shall be removed within two weeks after the election
or the event advertised in the sign has occurred. Any political signs remaining after
the event has occurred will be immediately subject to a violation from the Building
Department.
10. Pennants, banners or signs signifying a grand opening of premises shall be permitted for
a period not to exceed 15 days from the date of opening. Pennants and banners shall not
be hung from public utility poles, trees or other public property. Pennants shall not be
permitted for any other purposes.
11. No signs other than signs placed by agencies of the government shall be erected on any
public property unless consent is first obtained from the City of Mount Vernon. No sign
shall be placed on any private property without the consent of the owner thereof. No sign
shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. No sign shall be placed on any utility pole,
except for utility identification or similar purposes.
12. Contractor signs. One contractor sign per frontage, with a maximum size of 48 square
feet, shall be permitted, provided that such signs are located at ground level and shall be
erected no more than five days prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid
permit has been issued and shall be removed within five days after completion of the
project.
13. A temporary sign announcing the anticipated occupancy of a site or building may be
permitted for a period not to exceed three months without the Commissioner' s approval.
Such a sign shall not exceed 24 square feet if it is affixed to a building or wall and not
more than 40% of the window area if an interior sign.
14. Real estate sale and rental signs may be permitted as long as the size of such signs does
not exceed a maximum of five square feet and no more than one sign per tenancy per
frontage at ground level. Such signs shall be subject to permit renewal at six-month
intervals.
15. Barber poles. Barber poles shall not be more than four feet in height and shall bear no
advertising message; any barber pole on City property will require the approval of the
City Council. Barber poles projecting from the face of a building over or into public or
private property shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet six inches measured from
the bottom of said poles.
232
Article XIII — Section 10. Appeals.
A. The Mayor shall appoint a Sign Review Appeals Board (Sign Appeals Board) consisting of
three members, including the Commissioner of Planning and Community Development or
designee from the Planning Department and at least one member who shall have experience
in one of the design professions. The Mayor shall designate a Chair thereof. In the absence of
an appointed chair, the Appeals Board may designate one of its membership to serve as chair.
Members shall serve for a period of two years and shall have all the appellate powers and
duties as may be deemed necessary to carry out this section.
B. Any person affected by any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto may request, by the filing of a petition and payment of the fee set forth in
Section 1, 3. 34 of Article I of the Mount Vernon Building Code,
Editor's Note: So in original.
and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Sign Appeals Board. Such petition
shall set forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor and shall be filed in the office of the
Planning Department within 10 days after date of notification of violation or noncompliance.
The Sign Appeals Board shall have the authority to sustain, reverse determinations made by
the Commissioner or to grant variances.
C. Upon receipt of such petition, the Sign Appeals Board shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice of violation or
noncompliance should be sustained or withdrawn and a variance approved. The hearing shall
be commenced within a reasonable time after the day on which the petition was filed,
provided that upon application of the petitioner, the Sign Appeals Board may postpone the
date of the hearing if, in the judgment of the Sign Appeals Board, the petitioner has
submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
D. After such hearing, the Sign Appeals Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of
violation or noncompliance, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been properly addressed.
If the Sign Appeals Board sustains or withdraws such notice of violation or noncompliance
by approving a variance, such action shall be deemed to be a lawful order.
E. In all cases where said Sign Appeals Board shall grant a variance of any provisions or
requirements of this article, such Sign Appeals Board shall find that:
1. There are special physical conditions, fully described in the findings of the Sign Appeals
Board, applying to the land or building which is the location of the sign requiring said
variance, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building or sign
and do no apply generally to land or buildings or signs in the neighborhood and have not
resulted from any act of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this article, whether
in violation of the provisions hereof or not.
233
2. For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the Sign Appeals Board, the aforesaid
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this
article would deprive that applicant of the reasonable use of said sign, and the granting of
the variance( s) is necessary for the reasonable use of said sign and that the variance( s) as
granted by the Sign Appeals Board is the minimum variance necessary to accomplish this
purpose.
3. The granting of the variance( s) under such conditions as the Sign Appeals Board may
deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
F. If, as part of an application for site plan, special permit, and/ or subdivision approval to the
Planning Board, an applicant requires a sign variance( s) from this article for any detached or
freestanding sign, then the applicant shall apply to the Sign Appeals Board for said sign
variance( s). The Sign Appeals Board shall forward the application for sign variance( s) to the
Planning Board for Planning Board recommendation on the location, position and placement
of the sign( s) prior to any decision by the Sign Appeals Board.
G. In all cases where the Sign Appeals Board grants a variance( s) from the strict application of
the requirements of this article, it shall be the duty of the Sign Appeals Board to attach such
conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the result of its action may be as
nearly as possible in accordance with the spirit and intent of this article.
H. The proceedings at all hearings of the Sign Appeals Board, including the decisions of the
Sign Appeals Board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of
public record in the office of the Department of Planning and Community Development.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Sign Appeals Board may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
Article XIII — Section 11. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase of this chapter
be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect any other portion of this chapter.
234
235

DEC 12 2018 AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER
267, ARTICLE IX, OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF
MOUNT VERNON ENTITLED "ZONING".
WHEREAS, by letter dated December 6, 2018, the Commissioner of the
Department of Planning & Community Development has requested legislation
amending Section 267- 42 A of Chapter 267, Article IX of the Code of the City of
Mount Vernon, entitled " Zoning"; NOW, THEREFORE,
The City of Mount Vernon, in City Council convened, does hereby ordain and
enact:
Section 1. Section 267- 42A, Article IX of Chapter 267 of the Code of the City
of Mount Vernon, entitled " Zoning" is hereby amended as follows:
Article IX. Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 267- 42 Organization.
A. Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as heretofore established by
the City Council pursuant to Section 81 of the General City Law of the State of
New York, is hereby maintained The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of
five [six] members.
Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
New matter underlined
Deleted matter in brackets [ 1
Councllpe
APPROVED AS TO FORM THIS ORDINANCE
ED BY CITY 0
Assistant Corporation Counsel
Dept.
APPROVED
City Clerk
APPROVED
i/ J
Date

