Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[A local law adopting the Code of the Village of Malverne and making
certain substantive changes to existing legislation of the Village
is presently proposed before the Board of Trustees. Upon final
adoption, it will be included here as Article I of this chapter.]
§ 1-1. through § 1-13. (Reserved)
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-1-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986; amended in its entirety
9-16-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987 (Ch. 48 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 1-14. Penalties for violations of Code provisions.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any section, article or chapter of this
Code to the contrary, the following shall apply:
§ 1-15. Purpose; conflict with other penalties.
It is the purpose of the provisions of this article to complement the penalty
provisions of the parts of this Code heretofore promulgated. In the event of
a conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
other part of this Code, the provisions of this article shall prevail. If any part
of this Code does not contain a penalty provision for its violation, or if the
penalty provision of any such part has been herein repealed, the provisions
of this article shall apply to the violation of each such part.
A. The maximum penalty for any violation of any provision of this Code
shall be a fine not in excess of $350 for each violation and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for a
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.1
B. Each week's continued violation of a provision of the State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code (See Chapter 265) or of Chapter 600,
Zoning, shall constitute a separate additional violation.
C. The Board of Trustees may enforce obedience of any provision of the
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (See Chapter 265) or
of Chapter 600, Zoning, by injunction.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:5

ARTICLE III
Code Enforcement
[Adopted 11-6-1985 by L.L. No. 1-19852 (Ch. 12 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 1-16. Mayor authorized to appoint enforcement officials.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall be authorized
to delegate to any officer or agency of the Village the power to adopt
resolutions or to promulgate rules and regulations for carrying into effect or
fully administering the provisions of any local law and to authorize issuance
of an appearance ticket by a public servant who, by virtue of office, title
or position, is authorized or required to enforce any statute, local law, rule
or regulation relating to parking, licensing of occupations or businesses,
fire prevention and safety, health and sanitation, and building, zoning and
planning; provided, however, that a peace officer may be authorized to issue
an appearance ticket relating to enforcement of any statute, local law, rule
or regulation affecting the public health, safety and welfare.
2. Editor's Note: Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
Chapter 7
AMBULANCE CORPS
§ 1-16 MALVERNE CODE § 1-16
1:8
ARTICLE I
Service Award Program
[Adopted 2-17-2005 by L.L. No. 2-20053 (Ch. 17B of the 1972 Code)]
§ 7-1. Referendum.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne, as
authorized by Article 11-AAA of the New York State General Municipal Law,
directs that there shall be a public referendum of eligible voters of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne on March 15, 2005, to determine whether
such service award program shall be established effective January 1, 2005.
§ 7-2. Type of plan.
The type of program shall be a "defined benefit plan" as described in Article
11-AAA.
§ 7-3. Death and disability benefits.
Under the proposed service award program, Malverne Volunteer
Ambulance Corps, Inc. active members shall have the opportunity to earn
pension-like and pre- "entitlement age" death and disability benefits. The
pension-like benefit shall be a lifetime monthly payment "service award,"
with payments beginning upon attainment of age 65, the "entitlement age."
The monthly benefit payment service award shall be equal to $15 ($180 per
annum) for each year of service award program service credit earned. When
an eligible participating volunteer ambulance worker dies before monthly
service award payments have effectively commenced, a death benefit shall
be payable to the volunteer ambulance worker's designated beneficiary (or
estate if no beneficiary is designated). The death benefit shall be actuarially
equivalent to the volunteer ambulance worker's earned service award and
shall be based on his or her earned service credit at the time of death.
When a volunteer ambulance worker shall become totally and permanently
disabled before service award payments effectively commence, a disability
benefit shall be payable. The disability benefit shall be actuarially
equivalent to the volunteer ambulance worker's earned service award based
on his or her earned service credit at the time of application for payment of
the disability benefit.
§ 7-4. Accrual of points.
A year of service award program service credit shall be earned by an active
member of the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc. for each calendar
year after 2004 during which a participating volunteer ambulance worker
earns at least 50 "points" for participating in volunteer ambulance worker
activities under the rules set forth in the attached written service award
3. Editor's Note: This local law passed at referendum 3-15-2005.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:9
program "point system."4 Such point system shall be in accordance with
Article 11-AAA of the New York State General Municipal Law.
§ 7-5. Eligibility.
Up to five years of service credit may be earned under the point system by
a participating volunteer ambulance worker for service prior to 2005 and
after 1999. To be eligible to earn credit for such service, a volunteer must
become a program participant in accordance with the applicable provisions
of Article 11-AAA.
§ 7-6. Continuation of service after age 65.
Should a participant continue to be an active member of the Malverne
Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc. after attaining age 65 and having begun
to be paid monthly service award payments, he or she shall continue to
have the opportunity to earn service credit under the point system. The
additional monthly payments service award earned during a calendar year
after the calendar year of attainment of the entitlement age shall commence
to be paid as of January in the next succeeding calendar year.
§ 7-7. Sponsor and administrator.
In accordance with Article 11-AAA of the General Municipal Law, the
Incorporated Village of Malverne shall be the "sponsor" and the New York
State Comptroller, or his designee(s), shall be the administrator(s) of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Worker Service
Award Program.
§ 7-8. Estimated annual cost.
The total 2005 annual cost, payable in 2006, of funding the Incorporated
Village of Malverne's Volunteer Ambulance Workers Service Award Program
benefits is estimated to be about $35,000 or about 1,500 per ambulance
worker, including the cost of administration. The estimated annual cost to
administer the program payable by the Incorporated Village of Malverne
is about $2,500. The total annual cost for current ambulance workers is
expected to decrease by about $14,000 after five years, when the cost of
service awards earned for volunteer ambulance service before 2005 shall
be fully paid.
§ 7-9. Annual payments.
The cost of service awards earned for volunteer ambulance service before
2005 shall be scheduled to be paid by the Incorporated Village of Malverne
in five consecutive annual payments of $14,000, or the equivalent thereof,
with the first payment to be made during calendar year 2006.
4. Editor's Note: The point system is on file in the Village offices.
§ 7-4 MALVERNE CODE § 7-10
1:10
§ 7-10. Compliance with standards.
All provisions of the Incorporated Village of Malverne Volunteer Ambulance
Worker Service Award Program shall be in accordance with this article and
with Article 11-AAA of the General Municipal Law, as amended from time
to time, as well as with the applicable rules and regulations for volunteer
ambulance worker service award programs promulgated by the New York
State Comptroller.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:11
Chapter 44
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 7-10 MALVERNE CODE § 7-10
1:12
ARTICLE I
Traffic Commission
§ 44-1. Establishment; members; terms.
There is hereby established a Traffic Commission composed of nine
members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of
Trustees. Two members shall be members of the Board of Trustees, unless
the Mayor, in his discretion, elects to be a member of said Traffic
Commission; in such case, only one member of the Board of Trustees
and the Mayor may serve. One member shall be a uniformed officer of
the Malverne Police Department with the rank of Sergeant or above. The
remaining six members shall be residents of the Village. All members of
the Traffic Commission shall be voting members with one vote each. Each
member's term shall be for a period of two years. No member's term shall
continue beyond the term of the Mayor.
§ 44-2. Organization.
The Mayor or her designee shall act as Chair of the Traffic Commission. A
majority thereof shall constitute a quorum, and said Commission may adopt
rules relating to the times and places of its meetings and the conduct of its
duties.
§ 44-3. Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission to cooperate with the
Police Department in the enforcement of this chapter and the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. From time to time, whenever it shall find it necessary or desirable, in
the interests either of expediting the movement of traffic, or of
preventing or eliminating delays in or obstructions to the movement of
traffic, or of preventing or eliminating any particular hazard to life, limb
or property or any special local condition creating or tending to create
such a hazard, or of otherwise protecting or preserving the persons and
property of the residents of this Village and the persons using the
streets thereof, it shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission to adopt
directives and regulations and to amend or repeal any directives or
regulations adopted by it, relating to:
(1) The attaching of green directional arrows to traffic-control signals,
as provided § 44-13 hereof;
(2) The marking of roadways and crosswalks, as provided in § 44-14
hereof;
(3) The placing of markers, buttons or signs at intersections, as
provided in § 44-15 hereof;
(4) One-way streets, as provided in § 44-16 hereof;
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:13
§ 44-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department or other appropriate Village department designated
from time to time by the Board of Trustees shall carry out the directives and
regulations duly adopted by the Traffic Commission.
(5) The exclusion of heavy trucking, as provided in § 44-17 hereof;
(6) Angle parking, as provided in § 44-25 hereof;
(7) Loading zones, as provided in § 44-26 hereof;
(8) Parking adjacent to school property, as provided in § 44-32 hereof;
(9) Parking in narrow roadways, as provided in § 44-33 hereof;
(10) Parking in one-way streets, as provided in § 44-34 hereof;
(11) Parking creating a hazard or delaying traffic, as provided § 44-35
hereof;
(12) Parking on designated streets, either at any time, or on certain
days, or between specified hours or for certain periods between
specified hours, as provided in Article VIII of this chapter.
C. Each directive and regulation of the Traffic Commission, and each
amendment or repeal thereof, shall be in writing, certified by the Chair
of the Commission, and filed in the office of the Village Clerk, who shall
attach the same to this chapter and shall post notice of the same for not
less than 10 days in at least three public places, and such directive,
regulation, amendment or repeal shall take effect at the expiration of
the 10th day of such posting.
§ 44-3 MALVERNE CODE § 44-4
1:14
ARTICLE II
Enforcement of and Obedience to Regulations; Play Vehicles
§ 44-5. Duty of Police and Fire Departments.5
§ 44-6. Compliance with lawful orders and directions.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official when in the
performance of his duty.
§ 44-7. Roller skates and play vehicles restricted.
No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle, sled or similar device shall go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street and except upon streets which the Traffic
Commission may from time to time designate.
§ 44-8. Attachment to motor vehicles prohibited.
No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, bicycle, sled or similar device shall attach the same
or himself to any moving vehicle upon the roadway, nor shall any person
driving or riding upon any vehicle moving upon the roadway permit any
person so to attach himself or to attach such skates, coaster, toy vehicle,
bicycle, sled or device to such moving vehicle.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department to enforce
this chapter and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic
in this Village.
B. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws,
provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department
may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Fire Department; and Ch. 138, Police Department.
§ 44-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-8
1:15

ARTICLE III
Traffic-Control Devices and Signs
§ 44-9. Placement and maintenance.
The Traffic Commission shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make
effective the provisions hereof, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under
this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 44-10. Obedience by drivers.
The driver of every vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official trafficcontrol
device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 44-11. Official signs; schedule of regulations.
§ 44-12. Conspicuous display of signals.
Traffic-control signals shall regulate traffic in accordance with § 44-13
hereof, and also at all intersections between any two such control signals
at which appropriate signs clearly indicating such regulation shall be
conspicuously displayed.
§ 44-13. Signals; meaning and regulations.
A. No provision of this chapter for which signs are hereby required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required,
such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in
place.
B. All motorists shall comply with traffic-control signs including "no UTurn"
signs as enacted by the Traffic Commission. (See Appendix A,
Schedule I.6)
C. Appendix A. Attached as an Appendix A to these statutes is a schedule
list, which is a list of roadways in the Incorporated Village of Malverne
which are regulated for U-turn restrictions, one-way streets, heavy
trucking, stop signs, parking restrictions and loading zones. These
specific locations are regulated by past legislation and resolutions
issued by the Traffic Commission.
A. Whenever traffic is lawfully regulated by a traffic-control signal, the
following colors may be used and none other, and those colors, when
6. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-13
1:17
§ 44-14. Authority of Traffic Commission.7
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized:
lighted, shall be obeyed as required by this section and in accordance
with their meaning as set forth in this section.
B. Red shall require that traffic shall stop and remain standing.
C. Green shall mean that traffic shall move.
D. Amber, when used, shall mean that the colors in the signal are about to
change and shall require that traffic shall stop and remain standing
unless the amber is lighted too late to allow a stop to be made with
safety.
E. Red, when used in a flashing caution signal, shall require that traffic
shall stop and then proceed with caution.
F. Amber, either fixed or flashing, when used in caution signals, shall
mean proceed with caution.
G. The foregoing meanings of amber and red shall not apply to
ambulances, fire vehicles, police vehicles and vehicles operated by a
Chief or Assistant Chief of a Fire Department or a county Fire Marshal
or assistant county Fire Marshal when on emergency trips, provided
such vehicles are driven with caution and adequate warning is sounded.
H. The colors in any such traffic-control signal shall be placed and shall
show, with relation to each other, as follows: red shall be at the top,
green shall be at the bottom and amber, when used, shall be in the
center.
I. Intersections.
(1) At all intersections when traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals, movement shall be made on the green light only, except
that movement on the red light shall be permitted where the
direction of movement shall be indicated by a green arrow which
shall flash or light simultaneously with the red light, but such
movement on the red light shall be made only after the vehicle
moving shall have first come to a full stop and only when
interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic is not occasioned
thereby.
(2) The Traffic Commission is authorized to direct that such green
arrows be attached to the traffic-control signal, so indicating the
movement of traffic on the red light, at any intersection at which it
shall deem such movement necessary or desirable.
7. Editor's Note: On 10-25-1955, the Traffic Commission resolved that the Police Department
is authorized to mark double white lines down the center of the following streets, within
the Village of Malverne, for the control of vehicular traffic: Ocean Avenue, Cornwell
Avenue, Tilrose Avenue and Hempstead Avenue.
§ 44-13 MALVERNE CODE § 44-14
1:18
§ 44-15. Intersection indicators.
A. To direct the marking, by appropriate devices, of marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, of crosswalks at intersections and at other
places.
B. To direct the marking of lanes for traffic on street pavements, in
conformity with the markings adopted from time to time by the New
York State Traffic Commission. It shall be unlawful, except in an
emergency, for any person to drive any vehicle across a double line
marked on the roadway surface by or under the direction of the Traffic
Commission, except where the line consists of a solid line and a broken
line and the broken line is on the same side as the vehicle.
A. The Traffic Commission may direct the placing of markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections, indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections in accordance with
this chapter and the state law.
B. When authorized signs, markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications.
§ 44-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-15
1:19

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets and Heavy Trucking
§ 44-16. Designation of one-way streets.
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to designate streets on which
vehicles shall proceed in one direction only and to direct the erection of
signs giving notice thereof, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle
upon such streets in the direction opposite to that designated when such
signs are erected. (See Appendix A, Schedule II.8)
§ 44-17. Exclusion of heavy trucks.
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to designate streets from
which heavy trucks shall be excluded and to direct the erection of signs
giving notice thereof, and no person shall drive any heavy truck, as defined
by regulations issued by the Commission, upon such streets when such
signs are erected. (See Appendix A, Schedule III.9)
8. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
9. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-17
1:21

ARTICLE V
Right-of-Way
§ 44-18. Rules.
All persons driving motor vehicles upon the streets of this Village shall
observe the following rules:
§ 44-19. Funerals, processions and parades.
No funeral, procession or parade containing 100 or more persons or 25
or more vehicles, except the forces of the United States Army or Navy,
A. When in the performance of duty, the following vehicles shall have the
right-of-way: United States Mail, police, fire, fire patrol, snowplows,
Department of Public Works, emergency repair of public service
corporations, ambulances, the military and vehicles equipped with a
gong or siren whistle operated by a Chief or Assistant Chief of a Fire
Department, provided such gong or siren is being sounded.
B. Every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall grant the
right-of-way at such intersection to any vehicle approaching from his
right, except where otherwise directed by a peace officer or as
otherwise provided by this chapter with respect to intersections where
traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or stop signs.
C. The vehicle having the center line of the highway on its left shall have
the right-of-way. In meeting, both vehicles shall keep to the right, and
this without regard to the center line of the highway. Slowly-moving
vehicles must be kept as near to the curb as practicable.
D. A vehicle must not be so driven as to impede or obstruct the progress of
the apparatus of a Fire Department or any official or employee of a
county, town or village in the discharge of his duty at a fire. The driver
of a vehicle shall not drive through or within the established fire lines or
over a line of fire hose. On the approach of fire apparatus, as evidenced
by suitable and continuous warning, the driver of a vehicle must
immediately draw up such vehicle as near as practicable to the righthand
curb and parallel thereto, and bring it to a standstill until the
apparatus has passed. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle, other than a municipally owned or emergency vehicle on
official business or a vehicle being driven by a member of the Fire
Department in response to a fire alarm, to follow closer than 500 feet
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive into
or to stop any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped
in answer to a fire alarm.
E. Every driver of a vehicle turning to the left at intersections, except
where traffic is being controlled by a peace officer, shall yield the rightof-
way to vehicles proceeding straight across the intersection from the
opposite direction.
§ 44-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-19
1:23
the military forces of this state and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
§ 44-19 MALVERNE CODE § 44-19
1:24
ARTICLE VI
Speeding, Stop Signs, Failure to Yield and Failure to Signal Proper
Turn
§ 44-20. Speeding.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a motorcycle upon a public
highway at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any
person, nor at a rate of speed greater than will permit such person to bring
the vehicle to a stop without injury to another or his property.
§ 44-21. Stop signs.
When stop signs are near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of
a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop
line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a
police officer or traffic-control signal, and then proceed with caution.
§ 44-22. Failure to yield.
§ 44-23. Signalling turning movements.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a motorcycle upon a
roadway in excess of the posted speed limit.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a motorcycle upon a
roadway in excess of 10 miles per hour above the posted speed limit.
C. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a motorcycle upon a
roadway in excess of 20 miles per hour above the posted speed limit.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
roadway.
B. When two vehicles enter an intersection from different roadways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
A. No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection or turn a vehicle to
enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a
direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required, shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein
§ 44-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-23
1:25
to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such signal.
§ 44-23 MALVERNE CODE § 44-23
1:26
ARTICLE VII
Methods of Parking
§ 44-24. Proximity to curb.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with
the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article.
§ 44-25. Angle parking.
§ 44-26. Loading zones.
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to designate loading zones
within the business district and shall direct the erection of appropriate signs
marking the same, and no person shall park any vehicle within said zones at
any time except for the expeditious unloading and delivery of merchandise
or materials. (See Appendix A, Schedule VI, for loading zone restriction
locations.10)
§ 44-27. Parking lights.
A. The Traffic Commission shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall direct the marking or placing of
signs on such streets.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
C. Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by direction of
the Traffic Commission for angle parking, no person shall park or stand
a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway
indicated by such signs or markings.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
during the hours between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before
sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which
shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side, visible from a distance of
500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear.
B. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
10.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-27
1:27

ARTICLE VIII
Parking in Specified Places
§ 44-28. Stopping, standing and parking restrictions.
§ 44-29. Obstruction of free movement prohibited.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic on a one-way street or
alley, or less than 20 feet of the width of the roadway where traffic in both
directions is authorized.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) On a crosswalk.
(6) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(7) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(8) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(9) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within
75 feet of said entrance.
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(11)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
(12) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(13) On a residential lawn area.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb to such distance as is
unlawful.
§ 44-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-30
1:29
§ 44-30. Parking time restricted.
No person, except a physician on an emergency call, shall park a vehicle on
any street for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, without the prior permission of the
police.
§ 44-31. Parking prohibitions.
§ 44-32. Parking adjacent to school property.
§ 44-33. Narrow streets.
§ 44-34. One-way streets.
The Traffic Commission is authorized to direct the erection of signs upon
either side of any one-way street, to prohibit the standing or parking of
vehicles, and when such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a
vehicle upon such side of such street in violation of any such sign.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
B. No automobile, trailer, boat, boat with trailer, other marine apparatus
or plane shall be parked on any roadway or public or private parking lot
within the boundaries of the Incorporated Village of Malverne.11
A. The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to direct the erection of
signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any
school property.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of
street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in
any such designated place.
A. The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to direct the erection of
signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the
roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as
indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed
30 feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
11.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-30 MALVERNE CODE § 44-35
1:30
§ 44-35. Stopping and standing.
§ 44-36. Removal of snow; parking prohibited.
No person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked
upon any Village street after a precipitation of snow thereon of three
inches or more, until such street has been plowed or scraped and rendered
passable, nor shall any person stop, stand or park any vehicle so as to
obstruct equipment clearing the streets of snow.
§ 44-37. Parking at railroad station.
A. The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine and direct
the designation by proper signs of places in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. The Traffic Commission is empowered to designate, from time to time,
municipal parking areas in the Village of Malverne adjacent to any
railroad station and tracks and the approaches thereto, wherein the
parking or standing of vehicles shall be restricted to vehicles owned or
operated by residents of the Village of Malverne. Upon approval of such
designation by the Board of Trustees, the parking or standing of
vehicles in such designated areas shall be permitted only as hereinafter
provided. All such restricted areas shall be marked and indicated by
suitable signs. The following areas are hereby designated for restricted
parking, pursuant to special licenses to be issued by the Village Clerk:
(1) The entire parking area at the westerly end of Reese Park on the
southerly side of the railroad tracks, adjacent to the railroad station
and bounded by Hempstead Avenue, Utterby Road and Church
Street, excluding, however, any portion of the area reserved for the
parking of taxicabs and the drive or roadway running along the
southerly side of the railroad platform.
(2) Parking space for 20 vehicles in the parking area on the north side
of the railroad tracks and contiguous therewith, starting at the
pedestrian crossover leading from such parking area to the railroad
platform on the south side of the railroad tracks and the parking lot
adjacent to the Village Hall and running in a southerly direction
toward the railroad station.
B. No vehicle shall be parked or permitted to stand in any of such
restricted parking areas between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless a license and sticker
bearing the permit number and license number of the vehicle for which
it is issued and the year for which issued has been obtained for the
§ 44-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-37
1:31
vehicle from the Village Clerk, said sticker be affixed to and
conspicuously displayed as directed by the Village Clerk.
C. Any resident of the Village using the railroad as a commuter and
owning a vehicle to be used in connection with commuting to and from
the railroad station may apply to the Village Clerk for such parking
license and sticker in accordance with forms therefor approved by the
Board of Trustees. The fee for such license and sticker shall be set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. Said fee shall be paid to the Village
Clerk before the issuance of such license and sticker.
D. In the event a vehicle for which a license and sticker have been issued is
transferred to another person, the sticker shall be removed and
destroyed, but the licensee may apply for a new sticker if he replaces
his vehicle with another one. Said sticker will be issued without charge
for the balance of the period unused.
E. No person to whom a license or sticker is issued shall transfer such
license or sticker to another person. No person shall display on a
vehicle or operate a vehicle on which is displayed a sticker which has
been issued for another vehicle.
F. The payment of the fee and issuance of the license and sticker shall not
be construed to guarantee the holder a reserved space.
G. The Board of Trustees may suspend a parking license where any
violation of this chapter has been reported, pending a hearing before
said Board or a trial in the Village Court, and may revoke a parking
license upon any violation of this chapter being established through
such a hearing or by a conviction in said court.
H. In the event a person has a license revoked, no license shall be issued to
such person in that calendar year unless the approval of the Board of
Trustees is obtained.
I. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this section or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or
failure to comply shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $30 and
not to exceed $100, or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, either or
both penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court.
§ 44-37 MALVERNE CODE § 44-37
1:32
ARTICLE IX
Parking on Specified Streets
§ 44-38. Provisions applicable at all times.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
§ 44-39. Time limits.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 44-40. Designation of parking restrictions.
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized:
A. Parking time restricted. No person, except a member of the Malverne
Ambulance Corps or a member of the Malverne Fire Department or a
physician while actually on an emergency call, shall park a vehicle on
any street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., of any day,
without the prior approval of the Police Department. The Police
Department is hereby authorized to grant permission to park a vehicle
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that such
permission does not exceed, at any time, more than three consecutive
days, nor more than nine days in any one calendar month. Such
permission, if granted to one member of a household, shall be deemed
to have been granted to all members of that household.
A. To designate streets, blocks or places or zones on any streets and places
in any parking field upon or at which no person shall stop, stand or park
any vehicle at any time between specified hours and/or on specified
days. (See Appendix A, Schedule V, regarding parking restrictions.12)
B. To designate streets, blocks or zones on any streets and places in any
parking field upon or at which no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle at any time between specified hours and/or on specified days.
(See Appendix A, Schedule V, regarding parking time limits.13)
C. To designate streets, blocks or places or zones on any streets and places
in any parking field upon or at which no person shall stop, stand or park
any vehicle longer than a limited period between specified hours and/or
on specified days.
12.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-40
1:33
D. To direct the erection of appropriate signs giving notice of any such
designation.
§ 44-40 MALVERNE CODE § 44-40
1:34
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 44-41. Vehicle operation restrictions.
Every person operating a motor vehicle upon the streets of this Village shall
observe the following rules:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle shall pass on the left
side of the overtaken vehicle and not pull over to the right thereof until
entirely clear of it.
B. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately before crossing the sidewalk and
entering the intersecting roadway, and thereafter shall enter the
roadway with care.
C. It shall be unlawful for the operators of any vehicle to drive the same
when there is in the front seat of such a vehicle such number of persons
as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides or to
interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such
vehicle. The presence of more than three adult persons over the age of
16 years in the front seat of other than a commercial vehicle shall be
deemed such number of persons within the meaning of this subsection.
D. Except where a tow bar or other rigid connection is used, a vehicle shall
not be used to tow more than one other vehicle, and the connection
between the two vehicles shall not be longer than 16 feet. A vehicle
towed by a rope or other nonrigid connection shall have an attendant in
such vehicle when it is being towed.
E. The driver of a vehicle shall cause the emergency brakes to remain set
at all times while the vehicle is unattended.
F. A gong or a siren whistle shall not be attached to or used on any vehicle
other than an ambulance or a vehicle operated by a Police Department,
Fire Department, Chief or Assistant Chief of a Fire Department, county
or assistant county Fire Marshal, Sheriff or by a regular Deputy Sheriff
when engaged in the performance of duty as a peace officer, or by an
authorized public utility company when on emergency calls, or
snowplow, sanding truck or pavement marking machine operated by
the state or by a county, town, city or village.
G. Every driver of an omnibus carrying a passenger or passengers shall
bring his vehicle to a full stop before crossing any railroad-grade
crossing.
H. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying explosive substances or
inflammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at
grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle not less
than 10 feet or more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such track,
§ 44-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-41
1:35
and while so stopped shall look and listen in both directions along such
track for approaching trains or cars before traversing such crossing.
I. The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school omnibus which
has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers
shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop and keep it stationary until
such omnibus shall resume motion, or until signaled by the driver to
proceed, provided a flashing red signal light and a sign designating the
omnibus as a school omnibus in letters at least four inches in height are
displayed on the front and on the rear of such omnibus.
J. No person shall ride upon the rear of any vehicle without the consent of
the driver, nor with any part of his body protruding beyond the sides or
ends thereof.
K. Vehicles on sidewalks and footpaths. No person shall ride, drive or
operate any vehicle along any public sidewalk or footpath intended for
the use of pedestrians. This subsection shall not apply to bicycles
operated by children 10 years of age or under, nor to wheelchairs or
similar devices of invalids or cripples who cannot walk.
L. Passengers on bicycles and motorcycles. No driver of a motorcycle or
bicycle shall carry any other person thereon except on a seat securely
fastened to the machine in the rear of the driver and provided with foot
rests and hand grips or in a side car attached to a motorcycle.
§ 44-41 MALVERNE CODE § 44-41
1:36
ARTICLE XI
Violations and Enforcement
§ 44-42. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of the provisions of the vehicle and traffic law in this code
shall be returnable by summons to the Malverne Village Court.
(1) The first offense shall result in a fine of at least $35 and up to a
maximum amount of $350 or imprisonment of not more than 15
days.
(2) A second violation within 12 months will be punishable by a fine up
to $500 and imprisonment of not more than 15 days.
B. These penalties are to apply generally to all violations of any vehicle
and traffic law provision in this code unless a different penalty has been
enacted relating to a specific provision of the vehicle and traffic law
code. All specific fine assessments for parking and other violations of
this code shall be subject to determination and revision by the passage
of a resolution from the Board of Trustees, including penalties for late
payment of fines after a specific court date. (See Appendix B for present
2016 schedule of fines.14)
C. Removal of vehicles for nonpayment of parking tickets.
(1) Removal authorized. Any vehicle parked on a public highway,
street, and/or thoroughfare; in a municipal parking lot or field; or
on other property owned, leased or under the control of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, may be removed or caused to be
removed by the Police Department of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne where report has been made that three or more
delinquent parking tickets or summonses have been issued to such
vehicle, or to any individual, entity, or corporation in whose name
such vehicle is registered, for violation of any Village parking
ordinance or violation of any rule, regulation or designation of the
Village Traffic Commission, with regard to parking.
(2) A parking ticket and/or summons will be deemed to be delinquent if
such ticket and/or summons is otherwise adjudicated by the return
date of said ticket or summons, or a duplicate ticket has been
answered, plead or otherwise adjudicated by the return date of
such ticket and/or summons but the prescribed fine imposed by
plea of or finding of guilt has not been paid within the time
prescribed by court or rule.
(3) Impoundment and storage of vehicles. Any vehicle removed
pursuant to this article shall be impounded and stored in a place
designated by the Chief of Police or any superior officer acting in
14.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-42
1:37
his stead, and shall be held until it is redeemed or disposed of
pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1224.
(4) Lien. All sums due for delinquent parking tickets and/or summons
from the Incorporated Village of Malverne, as well as all fees for
towing, impounding and storage of any vehicle removed pursuant
to this article, shall be a lien on any vehicle so impounded.
(5) Unclaimed vehicles. Any vehicle removed pursuant to this article,
which is not claimed by its registered owner or the authorized
agent of the owner, pursuant to written authorization, within 10
days of the impounding of such vehicle, shall be deemed to be
abandoned and shall be disposed of pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic
Law § 1224.
(6) Redemption; fee. Any person or entity redeeming any vehicle
removed pursuant to this article shall, prior to obtaining such
vehicle, be required to satisfy all past delinquent parking tickets
and/or summons issued to such vehicle or to any individual, entity,
or corporation in whose name such vehicle is registered, and to pay
an impound fee, in cash or certified funds, in such an amount as to
be determined from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne, together with the
actual cost of all fees for towing and storage of such vehicle.
§ 44-42 MALVERNE CODE § 44-42
1:38
ARTICLE XII
Parking Meters
§ 44-43. Definitions.
Unless otherwise provided herein, the definitions set forth in Title 1, Article
1 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law shall control the
interpretation of this article.
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who
is in actual control of the vehicle.
PARK, PARKING OR PARKED — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, upon a street or in a parking field, except for a reason or cause
beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PARKING FIELD — A parking field owned by or under the direct supervision
and control of the Incorporated Village of Malverne.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with
this chapter, placed or erected for the purpose of regulating parking by
authority of this chapter.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking-meter zone
adjacent to a parking meter, which is duly designated for the parking of a
single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked upon the curb
or surface of the street or parking field adjacent to or adjoining a parking
meter.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any and all streets or portions thereof or
parking fields or portions thereof set aside under the provisions of this
article for the installation of parking meters and upon which parking meters
have been installed and are in operation.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, path,
court or other public way in the Incorporated Village of Malverne.
TRAFFIC COMMISSION — The Traffic Commission of the Incorporated
Village of Malverne.
§ 44-44. Designation of parking meter zones.
The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to designate, from time to
time, as parking meter zones, any areas, streets or portions of streets or
parking fields, or any portion or portions of any parking field situate, lying
and being within the Incorporated Village of Malverne, that it may deem
necessary, and may from time to time make changes in such zones.
§ 44-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-45
1:39
§ 44-45. Designation of metered spaces; dimensions of zones.
The Traffic Commission is hereby directed to fix the number of parking
meter spaces, and the minimum dimensions of each parking meter zone
designated by the Traffic Commission pursuant to § 44-44. The
Superintendent of Public Works is hereby directed and authorized to mark
off and designate each such parking meter space by lines painted or
otherwise durably marked upon the curbing or surface of the street or
parking field. All parking meter spaces shall be so marked that vehicles will
be required to park parallel to the curb or edge of the pavement, unless
otherwise provided by resolution of the Traffic Commission and properly
indicated by signs or markings conspicuously located.
§ 44-46. Installation of meters; specifications.
§ 44-47. Operation.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works shall install parking meters in the
parking meter zones designated under § 44-44, upon the curb, sidewalk
or other surface immediately adjacent to each parking space and not
more than two feet therefrom. The Chief of Police shall be responsible
for the regulation, control, maintenance and use of such parking
meters.
B. Parking meters may be of the type that are set in operation
automatically upon the deposit therein of a coin or coins of United
States currency, or of the type that are set in operation manually after
the deposit of such coin or coins.
C. Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set
that, upon the expiration of the time period registered by the deposit of
one or more coins as provided herein, it will indicate by an appropriate
signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired, and during said
period of time and prior to the expiration thereof will indicate the
interval of time which remains of such period.
D. Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and
hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the
value of the coins to be deposited and the limited period of time for
which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
such meter is located.
A. The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to fix from time to time the
hours during which a parking meter must be set in operation as a
condition of the lawful use of a parking meter space. The operation of
parking meters within the hours so fixed by the Traffic Commission
shall be required each day except Sunday and the following legal
holidays:
Note: Parking meters will be enforced on Francis Street on Sunday.
(1) New Year's Day (January 1).
§ 44-45 MALVERNE CODE § 44-47
1:40
(2) Martin Luther King Jr. Day.
(3) Lincoln's Birthday.
(4) Washington's Birthday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) Veteran's Day.
(10) Thanksgiving Day.
(11) Christmas Day.
(12) Election Day.
B. Except in a period of emergency, as lawfully determined by an officer of
the Fire or Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be
parked in any parking meter space, the operator of such vehicle shall,
upon entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to
be deposited in the parking meter controlling said parking meter space
such proper coin or coins in lawful money of the United States of
America as are required for such parking meter for the period of time
up to the lawful limit that said operator desires to park in said parking
meter space, in accordance with the instructions on said meter; and,
when required by the directions on said meter, the operator of such
vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin or coins, shall also set in
operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with the
directions properly appearing on said meter; and failure to deposit such
proper coin or coins and/or to set the timing mechanism when required
shall constitute a violation of this article.
C. No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any
such parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time
applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is located,
until the parking meter for such space has been set in operation, nor
while such parking meter indicates by signal that the lawful parking
time in such space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act
of parking nor to the necessary time which is required to deposit
immediately thereafter a coin or coins in such meter.
D. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a
continuous period of time longer than that limited period of time for
which continuous parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter
zone in which parking meter is located, irrespective of the number or
amounts of coins deposited in the meter controlling such parking meter
§ 44-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-47
1:41
§ 44-48. Parking fees.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time, by resolution, adjust the rate
at which the fee for the use of a parking meter space shall be paid.
§ 44-49. Defacing meters or coin substitutions prohibited.
It shall also be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person:
§ 44-50. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of a designated official appointed by the Mayor of
Malverne and approved by the Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions
of this article.
§ 44-51. Collections; duty of Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the above individual referenced in § 44-50 to make
regular collections of the money deposited in the parking meters, and it
shall be the duty of such officer or officers so designated to remove from the
parking meters the containers therein containing the coins deposited in said
meters and to deliver such containers to the Village Treasurer. The Village
Treasurer shall remove the moneys from such containers and deposit the
same in a bank designated by the Board of Trustees, pursuant to which
space. In the event of a violation of the prohibition contained in this
Subsection D, a separate and distinct violation of this article shall
result upon the expiration of each sixty-minute period of such unlawful
parking, computed from the time of the first violation. For the purpose
of this Subsection D, the time of the first violation shall be the time
endorsed on the tag or the summons issued upon such first violation.
E. No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter
space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the
parking meter zone in which such meter is located so that any part of
such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond
the marking designating such space, except that a vehicle which is of a
size too large to be parked within a single designated meter space shall
be permitted to occupy two adjoining parking meter spaces when coins
shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space so
occupied, as is required in this article for the parking of vehicles in such
space.
A. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
any parking meter or the usefulness of any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article.
B. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device, metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins of the
United States of America.
§ 44-47 MALVERNE CODE § 44-51
1:42
said bank shall receive the moneys collected from the parking meters, count
the same and account therefor to the Village Treasurer, after crediting
itself with the agreed compensation for such services provided for in such
contract.
§ 44-52. Use of funds.
The coins deposited in parking meters shall be used to cover the cost
of purchase, installation, operation, maintenance, supervision, protection,
inspection, control and use of the parking meters to the extent permitted by
law and for any other municipal purpose permitted by law.
§ 44-53. Penalties for offenses.
§ 44-54. Regulations of Traffic Commission.
Each regulation and directive of the Traffic Commission issued pursuant
to this article, and each amendment or repeal thereof, shall be in writing,
certified by the Chairman of the Commission and filed in the office of the
Village Clerk, who shall attach the same to this article and shall post notice
of the same for not less than 10 days in at least three public places, and
such directive, regulation, amendment or repeal shall take effect at the
expiration of the 10th day of such posting.
§ 44-55. Contract to acquire and install meters.
The Board of Trustees is hereby empowered to contract for the acquisition
and installation of parking meters to be installed pursuant to the provisions
of this article, and to provide for payment therefor exclusively from the
receipts obtained by the Village from the operation of said parking meters.
§ 44-56. Reservation of powers.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the Incorporated
Village of Malverne from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands, loading
zones and other similar uses in said parking meter zones or otherwise in
said Incorporated Village of Malverne.
A. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of the parking and meter usage laws or who shall counsel, aid, abet or
assist in such violation or failure to comply shall be issued a summons
returnable in Malverne Village Court and be subject to a fine of not
more than $250.
B. Failure to pay as herein provided or to appear voluntarily in court in
response to a citation tag or summons will subject the operator or
owner of such vehicle to a warrant for arrest.
§ 44-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-57
1:43
§ 44-57. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All laws or parts of laws inconsistent with the provisions of this article
are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to
the extent of such inconsistency and in all other respects this article shall
be cumulative of other laws regulating and governing the subject matter
covered by this article.
§ 44-58. Severability.
If any section, provision or part thereof in this article shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not so adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 44-57 MALVERNE CODE § 44-58
1:44
ARTICLE XIII
Parking Restrictions for Commercial Vehicles
§ 44-59. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to preserve and promote the character
and appearance and conserve the property values of the Village, the
attractiveness of whose residential area is one of the economic mainstays of
the community; and to that end, it has been found necessary to regulate the
parking of commercial vehicles on streets and in or about dwellings.
§ 44-60. Time limit.
It shall be unlawful for a person, driver or an operator to park a truck or
other commercial vehicles or equipment for hire, including a taxicab, in or
upon any street, road or alley within the Village of Malverne during the
hours of each day for more than four consecutive hours; except, however,
that this section shall not apply to nor prohibit the stopping, standing or
parking of fire-fighting equipment and vehicles or emergency vehicles, or
public utilities and contractors while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of streets or street utilities within the Village, or contractors
providing services to a resident or merchant.
§ 44-61. Parking in or about dwellings.
No commercial vehicle shall be permitted to be kept or parked on an open
lot or in any front, side or rear yard or driveway or upon any open area in or
about a dwelling except temporarily while providing services to a dwelling.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking by an owner or occupant
of a noncommercial motor vehicle in the driveway of a dwelling.
§ 44-62. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE —
Includes every type of motor-driven vehicle:
Ordinarily used for commercial purposes, whether or not
registered as a commercial vehicle;
(1)
(2) Having a gross weight in excess of 18,000 pounds; or
(3) Having a length in excess of 30 feet.
A.
A van with commercial plates shall not be considered a "commercial
vehicle" within the meaning of the foregoing definition if no lettering or
advertising or equipment is visible from the exterior thereof.
B.
§ 44-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-63
1:45
§ 44-63. Penalties for offenses.
Any persons, associations or corporations which or who violate the
provisions of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $300 for each violation. A summons issued for violation
of this article by a police officer or code enforcement officer shall be
returnable in the Malverne Village Court.
§ 44-63 MALVERNE CODE § 44-63
1:46
ARTICLE XIV
Public Parking Facilities
§ 44-64. Purpose.
It is hereby declared that the establishment of public parking areas, from
time to time as may be necessary, is a proper public purpose which the
Village of Malverne, Nassau County, New York, is authorized to accomplish
in order to ensure the orderly growth of the business district of said Village.
§ 44-65. Authorization to improve facilities.
The Village of Malverne, by resolution of the Board of Trustees, is hereby
authorized to improve existing parcels of real property now owned by the
Village for the purpose of providing public parking facilities and is also
hereby authorized to acquire, by purchase or condemnation, parcels of real
property and to improve the same to provide public parking facilities.
§ 44-66. Costs.
The cost of providing such public parking facilities, including the cost of
land acquisition, if any, shall be borne by the entire Village at large as a
general Village charge or entirely by the property owners benefited thereby
or partly as a general Village charge and partly by the owners of land
benefited thereby as shall be provided by the resolution adopted by the
Board of Trustees of said Village authorizing the issuance of obligations
therefor or by such other resolution as said Board of Trustees shall deem
appropriate.
§ 44-67. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the financing
of the providing of all or part of public parking facilities, including the
acquisition of land, if any, and improvements to land so acquired or now
owned by said Village pursuant to the Local Finance Law. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed as changing any existing provision of law
relating to the exercise of said Village's power of condemnation or as
changing any existing provision of law relating to assessment of real
property or benefit assessments for local improvements.
§ 44-68. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 44-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-68
1:47

ARTICLE XV
Trucking and Commercial Vehicle Violations
[Added 6-21-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 44-69. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts the New York State Department of
Transportation Regulations 17 NYCRR 820.0 et seq. (DOT Regulations) and
the Federal Motor Carrier Regulations (CFR) necessary for the enforcement
of the following article with respect to drivers and trucking and commercial
vehicles with the same force and effect as though herein fully set forth
at length. To the extent the DOT Regulations or CFR are amended in the
future, this article shall hereby be amended to conform to same.
§ 44-70. Violations listed.
The following is a list of trucking and commercial vehicle violations which
may be issued by a Malverne police officer or code enforcement officer
based upon observation and inspection of a particular truck or commercial
vehicle. The subject areas are divided into:
§ 44-71. Driver violations.
A. Driver violations;
B. Tire and wheel violations;
C. Load and cargo violations;
D. Brake violations;
E. Light/electrical violations;
F. Emergency/equipment violations;
G. Vehicle violations; and
H. Weight violations.
A. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with an inspection sticker
which is torn, damaged, or illegible.
B. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck which has not been properly
inspected.
C. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without properly inspecting its
emergency equipment.
D. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck while failing to utilize
emergency equipment properly.
E. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck while failing to properly utilize
four-way flashers and road reflectors.
§ 44-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-71
1:49
§ 44-72. Tire and wheel violations.
§ 44-73. Loads and cargo violations.
F. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck while failing to utilize required
equipment.
G. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck while failing to provide proper
access to emergency equipment.
H. It is prohibited to operate a commercial vehicle or truck in such a
condition as to likely cause an accident or a breakdown of the vehicle.
I. Operating an out-of-service commercial vehicle or truck.
J. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with an unauthorized
passenger.
K. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck unsafely in hazardous
conditions.
L. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck by an ill or fatigued driver.
M. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck by a driver who is impaired by
either the consumption of alcohol or under the influence of drugs.
N. The failure of the driver of a commercial vehicle or truck to be wearing
a seat belt while operating the vehicle or truck.
O. A driver of a vehicle who is smoking within 25 feet of a commercial
vehicle or truck containing hazardous materials.
A. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with body ply or belt material
exposed through the tread or sidewall.
B. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with all front tires which do
not have a tread depth of at least 4/32 inch.
C. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with tires other than front tires
which do not have a tread depth or at least 2/32 of an inch.
D. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a flat tire or audible leak.
E. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with parts and accessories
which are not in safe and proper operating conditions including an
underinflated tire.
F. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with cracked rims or wheels or
with nuts or bolts missing or loose.
A. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck which does not have properly
secured cargo or has cargo which is not properly distributed.
B. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with loose dunnage.
§ 44-71 MALVERNE CODE § 44-73
1:50
§ 44-74. Light/electrical violations.
C. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without the tailgate, tailboard,
doors, tarpaulins, spare tire, and other equipment used in its operation,
and the means of fastening the vehicle's cargo being secured.
D. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with tie downs that are either
torn or defective.
E. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without safety chains crossed
and attached to the vehicle near the points of bumper attachments to
the chassis of the vehicle.
F. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without workable coupling
devices and towing methods when two are more vehicles are operated
in combination.
G. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck when its cargo or equipment is
not secured to prevent the cargo from leaking, spilling, blowing, or
falling, or the cargo is not immobilized or secured to prevent shifting
upon or within the vehicle to such an extent that the vehicle's stability
or maneuverability is adversely affected.
H. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a hazardous material
such as an open container of gasoline (uncapped) or other container
unless it is properly classed, described, packaged, marked, labeled, and
in condition for shipment.
I. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without properly operating
brakes acting on all wheels.
J. Operating a commercial vehicle or trunk without a properly operating
trailer breakaway device.
K. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a leaking, damaged,
chaffed, or kinked brake hose.
L. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with brake components which
are not constructed, installed, and maintained to prevent excessive
fading and grabbing, or the means of attachment and physical
characteristics of such brake components do not provide for safe and
reliable stopping of the vehicle.
M. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with brakes that are not
capable of operating.
N. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck equipped with air brakes
without automatic and manual means of operation.
A. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a properly working
brake warning device or ABS light which provides a warning to the
driver when a failure occurs in the vehicle's service brake system.
§ 44-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-74
1:51
§ 44-75. Emergency equipment vehicles.
B. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without required lamps or
reflective devices.
C. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with lamps other than head
lamps which are not securely mounted or within specifications.
D. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with lamps other than head
lamps which do not meet the visibility standards of the CFR.
A. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with an uncovered battery.
B. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a fire extinguisher that
does not comply with rating requirements for the contents of the
extinguisher.
C. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without the proper markings
of the name, address, identification number of the company or
proprietorship, or other required markings on the doors of the vehicle.
D. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without required seat belt
assembly(ies).
E. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without all seats being
securely mounted in the vehicle.
F. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a fractured, defective,
obstructed, or otherwise damaged windshield.
G. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a properly working
defroster or defogger.
H. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with unnecessary holes or
openings.
I. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with pushout windows,
emergency doors, or emergency door markings which are not properly
inspected, repaired, or maintained.
J. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a cracked, loose, sagging,
or broken frame.
K. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with cab doors or door parts
which are missing or broken.
L. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a hood that is not
securely fastened.
M. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a front bumper that is
missing, loosely attached, or protruding beyond the confines of the
vehicle so as to create a hazard.
§ 44-74 MALVERNE CODE § 44-75
1:52
§ 44-76. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity which violates a
provision of Article XV shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500
for each violation. A summons issued for a violation of this article by a police
officer or code enforcement officer shall be returnable in the Malverne
Village Court.
§ 44-77. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Article XV be
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder hereof but
shall be applied in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part hereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
N. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a rear impact guard
(bumper) or rear impact protection device in working order.
O. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without rear vision mirrors.
P. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with a tailgate, tailboard,
doors, tarpaulins, spare tire, other equipment used in its operations and
the means of fastening such vehicle's cargo which are not secured.
Q. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a securely mounted
fuel tank.
R. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a securely fastened
fuel tank cap.
S. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without a properly secured
trailer hitch or coupling device.
T. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck without safe and operating
rubber covers on the gas, brake, and clutch pedals.
U. Operating a commercial vehicle or truck with an oil or grease leak.
§ 44-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-77
1:53

ARTICLE XVI
Trucking and Commercial Vehicle Width, Height, and Length
Violations
[Added 6-21-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 44-78. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts the New York State Department of
Transportation Regulations 17 NYCRR 820.0 et seq. (DOT Regulations) and
the Federal Motor Carrier Regulations (CFR) necessary for the enforcement
of the following article with respect to drivers and trucking and commercial
vehicles with the same force and effect as though herein fully set forth
at length. To the extent the DOT Regulations or CFR are amended in the
future, this article shall hereby be amended to conform to same. No portion
of this article shall be construed as authorizing operation of any vehicle in
violation of any provision of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law or
Transportation Law.
§ 44-79. Restrictions.
A. Except as expressly permitted by federal law, the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law, the regulations of the New York State
Department of Transportation or by special permit granted by the
Mayor, no person shall operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to
be operated or moved on any public road, street or highway
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "road") in the Village of
Malverne any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the weight
of 84,000 pounds gross vehicular weight (GVW) where posted with
official traffic regulation signs. This restriction shall not apply where
the requirement for local delivery will permit no alternative route.
B. Width. The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall not be more than
96 inches, plus safety devices, on any Village road.
C. Height.
(1) The height of a vehicle from the underside of a tire to the top of the
vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be no more than 14 feet.
(2) Any damages to highways, overpasses or highway structures
resulting from the use of a vehicle exceeding 14 feet in height
where such excess height is the proximate cause of the damage
shall be compensated for by the owner and operator of such
vehicle.
D. Length.
(1) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of a load and bumpers, shall
not be more than 42 feet unless otherwise provided in this section.
(2) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 50 feet,
except as provided in this section; provided, however, that the
§ 44-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-79
1:55
length of any trailer or semitrailer being operated in combination
with another trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 29 feet.
(3) The length of a bus having a carrying capacity of more than seven
passengers shall not exceed 47 feet, except that the length of an
articulated bus shall not exceed 65 feet.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to fire other
emergency vehicles.
(5) Any semitrailer with a length not to exceed 50 feet may be operated
on any Village road, provided that the total length of a combination
of vehicles, including such a semitrailer, does not exceed 63 feet.
E. Additional restrictions on length; exceptions.
(1) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and
bumpers, shall not be more than 68 feet.
(2) The provisions of Subsection E(1) shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of a corporation which is subject to the jurisdiction of
the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Public Service
Commission or other regulatory body, which are used in the
construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of its
property or facilities, provided that the length of such vehicles
are regulated by and comply with the safety requirements of
the applicable federal or New York State laws and regulations.
(b) Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other-similar
objects of excess length, provided such vehicles comply with
the safety requirements of applicable federal or New York
State law and regulations.
(c) Fire or other emergency vehicles.
(d) State and/or municipally owned vehicles engaged in snow
plowing, ice clearing or other emergency-type operations.
F. In determining the number of wheels and axles in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two
wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less than 46
inches apart from center to center shall be counted as one axle.
However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the
widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall be
taken in determining the width.
G. Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle
gross weights, the weight, per inch width of tire, on any one wheel of a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic
tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 840 pounds.
§ 44-79 MALVERNE CODE § 44-79
1:56
H. Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle
gross weights, the weight on any one wheel of a single vehicle with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 11,760 pounds.
I. Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle
gross weights, the weight on any one axle of a single vehicle equipped
with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 23,520
pounds.
J. Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle
gross weights, the weight of any two consecutive axles of a single
vehicle or a combination of a vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, and when axles are spaced less than eight feet from
center to center shall not be more than 37,800 pounds, except that,
where axles are spaced eight feet apart or greater, but less than 10 feet,
the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that permitted by
Subsection K(2) of this section and, in addition, shall not exceed 42,000
pounds. Axles shall be counted as provided in Subsection F of this
section.
K. Subject to the provisions of this section governing maximum vehicle
gross weights, a single vehicle, or combination of vehicles having three
axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, may
have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 35,700 pounds, plus 1,000
pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from
the center of the foremost axles to the center or the rearmost axles.
Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of this section. In
no case, however, shall the total weight exceed 84,000 pounds. For any
vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross vehicle weight of
less than 74,550 pounds, the higher of the following shall apply:
(1) The total weight of all axles shall not exceed 35,000 pounds for
each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from the
center of the foremost axles to the center of the rearmost axles; or
(2) The overall weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
shall not exceed the weight produced by application of the
following formula:
(a) W=500 (LxN)/(N-1) + (12xN)+(36)
§ 44-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-79
1:57
§ 44-80. Service of summons.
If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this article,
an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the registrant of the
vehicle, or in the case of a combination of vehicles, to the registrant of the
hauling vehicle, rather than the operator.
Where:
W=overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles, to the nearest 500 pounds.
L=distance in feet from the center of the foremost axle to the
center of the rearmost axle of any group of two or more
consecutive axles.
N=the number of axles in the group under consideration,
except that the two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load not to exceed 34,000 pounds, provided
that the overall distance between the first and last axles of
such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
(b) For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight of 74,550 pounds or greater, this Subsection K(2) shall
apply to determine maximum gross weight which is permitted
hereunder, subject to the provisions of this section governing
maximum gross weights.
L. No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Village of
Malverne other than on pneumatic tires.
M. For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be
ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the tire casing when the
tire is inflated.
N. No person shall operate nor shall any owner permit the operation or
movement of a vehicle or any combination of vehicles over, or through,
any road if the weight of such vehicle, or combination of vehicle and
load, is greater than the posted weight or exceeds the height of the
posted clearance as shown on an official sign.
A. In the event the vehicle is operated by a person other than the
registrant, any appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant
shall be served upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the
registrant for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or
summons. Such operator-agent shall transmit such ticket or summons
to the registrant of the vehicle or hauling vehicle.
B. If the registrant does not appear on the return date, a notice
establishing a new return date accompanied by a copy of the summons
or appearance ticket shall also be mailed by certified mail by the court
to the registrant at the address given on the registration certificate for
§ 44-79 MALVERNE CODE § 44-80
1:58
§ 44-81. Plea requirements.
In any case wherein the charge before the court alleges a violation of
this section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of such
charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a violation of one of the
subsections of this article. No other disposition of plea of guilty to any
other charge in satisfaction of such shall be authorized; provided, however,
that if the prosecuting attorney, upon reviewing the available evidence,
determines that the charge of a violation of this article is not warranted, the
prosecuting attorney may consent, and the court may allow, a disposition
by plea of guilty to that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge;
provided, however, that the court must impose at least the minimum fine, as
authorized in this article, for the offense.
§ 44-82. Schedule of fines.
The schedule of fines for excess total weight are hereto attached.15
§ 44-83. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Article XVI
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder hereof but
shall be applied in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
the vehicle or, if no registration certificate is produced at the time the
appearance ticket or summons is issued, the address of the registrant
on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles or given to the police
officer issuing the appearance ticket or summons.
C. A failure of a corporate registrant to appear or answer upon
arraignment or trial shall constitute a default which may result in the
entry of a civil judgment in an amount corresponding to the amount of
fine for a violation of this article.
D. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to owner-operators of
any motor vehicle or to any motor vehicle or trailer which is registered
in the name of a person whose principal business is the lease or rental
of motor vehicles or trailers, unless the motor vehicle or trailer is being
operated by an employee of the registrant or for a community of
interest other than the lease or rental agreement between the parties to
the lease or rental agreement.
E. Whenever proceedings in court result in a conviction for a violation of
this section, and the court has made the mailing specified herein, the
court shall levy a mandatory surcharge, in addition to any sentence
permitted by law, in the amount of $30. This mandatory surcharge shall
be paid to the Clerk of the Court.
15.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 44-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-83
1:59
or part hereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 44-83 MALVERNE CODE § 44-83
1:60
Chapter 55
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 138.
§ 55-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES — Any commissioner, member of a public
board or commission, trustee, director, officer, employee, volunteer
expressly authorized to participate in a publicly sponsored volunteer
program, or any other person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Village, whether or not compensated,
but shall not include an independent contractor. The term "officers and
employees" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially
appointed personal representative.16
§ 55-2. Applicability.17
Upon compliance by an officer or employee with the provisions of § 55-3
of this chapter, the Village shall provide for the defense of the officer or
employee in any civil action or proceeding, state or federal, arising out of
any alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly occurred while the
officer or employee was acting within the scope of his public employment
or duties. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil
action or proceeding is brought by or at the behest of the Village.
§ 55-3. Defense and indemnification of officers and employees.
A. The Village shall save harmless all officers and employees of the Village
from financial loss and legal expense and shall indemnify and defend
and pay any judgment arising out of any claim, demand or suit arising
on or after April 6, 1987, by reason of administrative acts of such officer
or employee, provided that, at the time damages were sustained, such
officer or employee was acting in the discharge of his or her duties and
within the scope of his or her office and that such damages did not
result from malicious acts or gross negligence of such officer or
employee.
B. The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless shall be conditioned
upon the delivery by the employee to the Village Attorney or the Village
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
17.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:61
§ 55-4. Punitive or exemplary damages, fines and penalties.
[Amended by L.L. No. 3-2006; 7-19-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Village to indemnify or save
harmless any officer or employee with respect to punitive or exemplary
damages, fines or penalties, or monies recovered from an officer or
employee pursuant to Article VII-A of the State Finance Law, except as
provided in Subsection A below:
§ 55-5. Workers' Compensation Law; notice to Village; immunity.
Clerk of a written request to provide for his or her defense, together
with the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, within 10 days after he or she is served with
such document, and the full cooperation of the employee in the defense
of such action or proceeding and in the defense of any action or
proceeding against the Village based upon the same act or omission and
in the prosecution of the appeal.
C. The benefits of this section shall inure only to officers and employees of
the Village and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other
party.
D. This section shall not in any way impair, alter, limit or modify the rights
and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
A. Police officers. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, code or
charter, the Village, to the extent that such insurance is able to be
procured with good-faith efforts, shall provide for the defense and
indemnification in any civil action, administrative proceeding or judicial
proceeding, seeking punitive or exemplary damages arising out of a
negligent act or other tort brought in any state or federal court against
a duly appointed police officer of the Incorporated Village of Malverne,
committed while in the proper discharge of his or her duties and within
the scope of his or her employment. Such proper discharge of duties
and scope of employment shall be determined by a majority vote of the
Malverne Board of Trustees.
B. The Village shall seek to procure such insurance in an amount of at
least $5,000,000.18
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to affect, alter or
repeal any provisions of the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. This chapter shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to
give notice to the Village under any provision of law.
18.Editor's Note: Original Section 3c), establishing a sunset date of May 31, 2007, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-3 MALVERNE CODE § 55-5
1:62
§ 55-6. Liability insurance.
The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, undertake to purchase liability
insurance for its officers and employees for acts within the purview of this
chapter.
Chapter 68
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
C. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred
upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the Village by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 55-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-6
1:63

ARTICLE I
Emergency Management Commission
[Adopted 7-11-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001 (Ch. 13, Sec. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 68-1. Commission established; members; Coordinator;
compensation. [Amended 4-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
Pursuant to Executive Law § 23, there is hereby created in the Incorporated
Village of Malverne an Emergency Management Commission consisting
of an Emergency Management Coordinator, who may be a member of
the Village Board of Trustees; the Chief of Police or his designate; the
President of the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps or his designate;
the Superintendent of the Building Department or his designate; the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designate; the
Chief of the Malverne Volunteer Fire Department or his designate; the
Chief of the Malverne Police Reserves or his designate; a representative of
CERT or his designate; and a member of the Village Board of Trustees. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor for a
term of two years; however, if the appointee is not a member of the Board
of Trustees the appointment will require Board approval. The Emergency
Management Coordinator shall serve as the Chairperson of the Commission.
The members of the Commission, except those who serve ex-officio, shall be
allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties under this article but shall receive no additional compensation
for services rendered pursuant to this article.
§ 68-2. Meetings; staff.
The Commission, on call of the Chairperson, shall meet at least twice
each year and at such other times as may be necessary. The agenda and
meeting place of all regular meetings shall be made available to the public
in advance of such meetings, and all such meetings shall be open to the
public. The Commission shall establish quorum requirements and other
rules and procedures regarding conduct of its meetings and other affairs.
The Village Clerk and/or Deputy Village Clerk shall serve as secretary to
the Commission and provide staff services as may be necessary through the
Village Clerk's office.
§ 68-3. Disaster preparedness plans.19
The Emergency Management Commission is authorized to prepare disaster
preparedness plans.
A. The purpose of such plans shall be to minimize the effects of disaster
by:
(1) Identifying appropriate local measures to prevent disasters;
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:65
(2) Developing mechanisms to coordinate the use of local resources
and manpower for service during and after disasters and the
delivery of services to aid citizens and reduce human suffering
resulting from a disaster; and
(3) Providing for recovery and redevelopment after disasters.
B. In preparing such plans, cooperation, advice and assistance shall be
sought from local government officials, regional and local planning
agencies, police agencies, fire departments and fire companies, local
civil defense agencies, commercial and volunteer ambulance services,
health and social services officials, community action agencies, the
chief administrator of the courts, organizations for the elderly and the
handicapped, other interested groups and the general public. Such
advice and assistance may be obtained through public hearings held on
public notice, or through other appropriate methods.
C. Plans for disaster preparedness developed by the Emergency
Management Commission, or any revisions thereto, shall be submitted
to the New York State Disaster Preparedness Commission by December
31 of each year to facilitate state coordination of disaster operations.
D. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Disaster prevention and mitigation. Plans to prevent and minimize
the effect of disasters shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Identification of hazards and assessment of risk.
(b) Recommended disaster prevention and mitigation projects,
policies, priorities and programs, with suggested
implementation schedules, which outline federal, state and
local roles.
(c) Suggested revisions and additions to building and safety codes
and zoning and other land use programs.
(d) Such other measures as reasonably can be taken to protect
lives, prevent disasters and reduce their impact.
(2) Disaster response. Plans to coordinate the use of resources and
manpower for service during and after disasters and to deliver
services to aid citizens and reduce human suffering resulting from
a disaster shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Centralized coordination of resources, manpower and services,
utilizing existing organizations and lines of authority and
centralized direction of requests for assistance;
(b) The location, procurement, construction, processing,
transportation, storing, maintenance, renovation, distribution
or use of materials, facilities and services which may be
required in time of a disaster;
§ 68-3 MALVERNE CODE § 68-3
1:66
(c) A system for warning populations who are or may be
endangered;
(d) Arrangements for activating municipal and volunteer forces,
through normal chains of command so far as possible, and for
continued communication and reporting;
(e) A specific plan for rapid and efficient communication and for
the integration of local communication facilities during a
disaster, including the assignment of responsibilities and the
establishment of communication priorities and liaison with
municipal, private, state and federal communication facilities;
(f) A plan for coordination evacuation procedures, including the
establishment of temporary housing and other necessary
facilities;
(g) Criteria for establishing priorities with respect to the
restoration of vital services and debris removal;
(h) A plan for the continued effective operation of the civil and
criminal justice systems;
(i) Provisions for training local government personnel and
volunteers in disaster response operations;
(j) Providing information to the public;
(k) Care for the injured and needy and identification and
disposition of the dead;
(l) Utilization and coordination of programs to assist victims of
disasters, with particular attention to the needs of the poor, the
elderly, individuals with disabilities, and other groups which
may be especially affected;
(m) Control of ingress and egress to and from a disaster area;
(n) Arrangements to administer state and federal disaster
assistance;
(o) Procedures under which the county, city, town, Village or other
political subdivision and emergency organization personnel
and resources will be used in the event of a disaster;
(p) A system for obtaining and coordinating disaster information,
including the centralized assessment of local disaster effects
and resultant needs;
(q) Continued operation of governments of political subdivisions;
(r) Procedures under which the Village and emergency
organization personnel and resources will be used in the event
of a disaster; and
§ 68-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:67
(s) Utilization and coordination of programs to assist individuals
with household pets and service animals following a disaster,
with particular attention to means of evacuation, shelter and
transportation options.
(3) Recovery. Local plans to provide for recovery and redevelopment
after disasters shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Recommendations for replacement, reconstruction, removal or
relocation of damaged or destroyed public or private facilities,
proposed new or amendments to zoning, subdivision, building,
sanitary or fire prevention regulations and recommendations
for economic development and community development in
order to minimize the impact of any potential future disasters
on the community.
(b) Provision for cooperation with state and federal agencies in
recovery efforts.
(c) Provisions for training and educating local disaster officials or
organizations in the preparation of applications for federal and
state disaster recovery assistance.
§ 68-3 MALVERNE CODE § 68-3
1:68
ARTICLE II
Continuity of Government
[Adopted 7-6-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005 (Ch. 13, Sec. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 68-4. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to New York State Executive Law Article 2-B, § 27, and the New
York State Defense Emergency Act, Section 9134-a, the Village of Malverne
is authorized to provide for its continuity when, in the event of an attack
and/or a disaster, and the emergency conditions caused thereby, an elected
official is unable to discharge the powers and duties of such office, or is
absent from the political subdivision. The Village hereby recognizes the
importance of the continuity of government during such disasters and
provides for such continuity in this article.
§ 68-5. Persons eligible to succeed Mayor.
If, as a result of an attack, as defined in New York Unconsolidated Laws
Section 9103, and/or a disaster, either natural or man-made, the Office of
the Mayor becomes vacant and the Deputy Mayor is unable to discharge
the powers and duties of the Office of Mayor, or is absent from the Village,
then the officer of the Village who is a) highest in order of the following list,
b) not otherwise unable to discharge such powers and duties, and c) not
absent from the Village shall act as Mayor:
§ 68-6. Term of office of successor.
An individual who is acting as the Mayor under this article shall continue
to do so until the vacancy in the Office of the Mayor shall be filled either
by appointment as provided in Village Law Article 3, or by election or by
the qualification of the Deputy Mayor. The removal of a disability or the
A. The Trustee designated as "Emergency Management Coordinator" at
the immediate previous organizational meeting of the Village.
B. The remaining Trustees in order of total length of service on the Board
of Trustees (including any time served previously as Mayor). In the
event that any two or more Trustees have the same length of service,
such order shall be determined by lot.
C. The Village Clerk.
D. The Village Attorney.
E. The Chief of Police.
F. The Chief of the Fire Department.
G. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
H. The Building Inspector.
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-6
1:69
termination of an absence from the Village of an officer higher on the list
contained in § 68-5 of this article shall terminate the service in the office of
Mayor of such Individual who is acting as Mayor.
§ 68-7. Filing.
This article shall become effective immediately after one certified copy
thereof has been filed with the Village Clerk of the Village of Malverne; one
certified copy thereof has been filed in the office of the State Comptroller;
and three certified copies thereof have been filed in the office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 68-6 MALVERNE CODE § 68-7
1:70
Chapter 74
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 79.
§ 68-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-7
1:71

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-4-1957 (Ch. 17 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 74-1. Establishment.
Section 10-1008 of the Village Law is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 10-1008. Incorporation of Fire Department.
A. The members of the Norwood Hook and Ladder and Hose Company,
heretofore organized as a membership corporation and maintained in
pursuance of law, constitute a corporation by the name of the "Fire
Department of the Incorporated Village of Malverne, New York."
B. The term "Fire Department of a Village," as used in this article, refers
to such corporation.
§ 74-2. Election of officers.
Section 10-1010 of the Village Law is hereby amended in its entirety to read
as follows:
§ 10-1010. Election of company and department officers and
delegates; qualifications; term of office.
A. The members of the Fire Department of the Village shall hold an annual
meeting on the first Thursday after the first Tuesday in April in each
year. At such meeting the members shall elect by ballot from their
own number as officers of the Norwood Hook and Ladder and Hose
Company four Captains and four Lieutenants. They shall also elect by
ballot from their own number at such meeting the following officers of
the Fire Department of the Village:
(1) Chief.
(2) First Deputy Chief.
(3) Second Deputy Chief.
(4) Eight Wardens, one of whom shall be designated a Warden
Secretary and another a Warden Treasurer.
(5) One Financial Secretary.
(6) One Corresponding Secretary.
(7) One Sergeant-at-Arms.
(8) Three delegates to the Fourth Battalion District of the Nassau
County Fire Commission.
B. Immediately following such elections, the person acting as Secretary of
the annual meeting shall certify the results of the election in writing to
the Board of Trustees.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-2
1:73
C. No member shall be elected to any such office unless at the time of such
election he is a member in good standing of the Fire Department, an
elector of the Village (except that neither the Corresponding Secretary,
the Sergeant-at-Arms nor any Company officer need be an elector) and
fulfills such further qualifications as may be imposed by the bylaws
of the Company and the Fire Department of the Village. No member
elected to any such office shall be entitled to office nor assume his
duties until his election has been approved and confirmed by the
Board of Trustees. Before commencing his duties, each member so
elected, approved and confirmed shall take the oath of office, to be
administered by the Mayor or other member of the Board of Trustees
designated by the Mayor.
D. The term of office of each member so elected shall commence on the
date of confirmation of his election by the Board of Trustees and shall
continue for a term of one year or until his successor is elected to
office and confirmed. Any officer may serve any number of terms. Any
vacancies occurring for any such office shall be filled by the Council
of the Fire Department of the Village for the unexpired portion of the
term, subject to confirmation and approval by the Board of Trustees.
§ 74-3. Bylaws.
Section 10-1012 of the Village Law is hereby amended in its entirety to read
as follows:
§ 10-1012. Bylaws.
The Council of the Fire Department of the Village shall promulgate bylaws
governing generally the operations and affairs of the Fire Department of
the Village, the duties of its officers and of the officers of the Company and
their qualifications and the conduct of the members of the Fire Department
of the Village. Such bylaws shall not become effective until approved by a
majority of the members of the Fire Department of the Village at a regular
or special meeting of the members and until ratified and approved by
the Board of Trustees. The Council shall have the power to amend such
bylaws, but no such amendment shall become effective until approved by
the members and certified and approved by the Board of Trustees in like
manner as the original bylaws. Such bylaws may be modified, amended,
repealed, revoked in whole or in part or suspended in whole or in part,
at any time, and from time to time, by the Board of Trustees. Action of
the Board of Trustees in promulgating, modifying, amending, repealing,
revoking or suspending the bylaws of the Fire Department of the Village
shall become effective without any vote or other action of the members of
the Fire Department of the Village or of the Council.
§ 74-4. Council.
A. The first sentence of § 10-1014 of the Village Law is hereby amended to
read as follows: "The Chief, First Deputy Chief, Second Deputy Chief
§ 74-2 MALVERNE CODE § 74-4
1:74
§ 74-5. Annual meeting.
Section 10-1016 of the Village Law is hereby amended by substituting
"Chief" for the word "secretary" where the same appears in said section.
§ 74-6. Nomenclature.
Wherever "Chief Engineer," "First Assistant Engineer," "Second Assistant
Engineer," "Third Assistant Engineer" or "Fourth Assistant Engineer"
appear in Article 10 of the Village Law, they shall be deemed to mean
"Chief," "First Deputy Chief," "Second Deputy Chief," "Third Deputy Chief"
and "Fourth Deputy Chief," respectively.
§ 74-7. Additional duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon them by § 10-1018 of the Village
Law, the Chief, First Deputy Chief and Second Deputy Chief of the Fire
Department of the Village shall be responsible for the performance of all
duties imposed upon them by the bylaws of the Fire Department.
and the eight Wardens shall constitute the Council of the Fire
Department of the Village."
B. The last sentence of § 10-1014 of the Village Law is amended to read as
follows: "A majority of the members of such Council shall constitute a
quorum and may, subject to the provisions of § 10-1012 hereof, make
and prescribe bylaws for the proper management of the affairs and the
disposition of the funds of the Fire Department, may call meetings of
the members and designate one or more days in each year for public
exercise, inspection and review."
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-7
1:75

ARTICLE II
Service Award Program
[Adopted 1-23-199520]
§ 74-8. Type of award.
The type of service award program shall be a defined benefit program as
described in § 219 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 74-9. Annual cost; defined benefit; qualifications.
A. The estimated annual cost of the service award program shall be
$75,000 in the first year, $60,000 in the second to 20th year thereafter,
including an annual administration fee of $640. The initial annual
contribution to fund this program is estimated to be $75,000, and the
estimated annual cost thereafter per participant will vary from $1,400
for a sixty-five-year-old participant to $330 for a twenty-one-year-old
participant.
B. The defined benefit award to be paid to eligible volunteer fire fighters
shall be $20 per month for each qualified year of active fire-fighting
service not to exceed 30 years, payment to commence when the eligible
volunteer fire fighter reaches age 65 but not sooner than one year after
adoption of the plan. The maximum benefit shall be $600 per month
after 30 years of service; the minimum benefit shall be $100 per month.
Payment of the award shall be in the form of the life annuity with tenyear
certain payment or its actuarial equivalent.
C. The service award program will provide for the crediting of years of
active fire-fighting service for periods prior to the establishment of such
program to a maximum of five years per participant. To qualify for past
service a person must meet the "Rule of 50," whereby the total of age
and years of service must be 50 or greater after completing one year of
eligible fire-fighting service.
D. In the event that an active volunteer fire fighter becomes disabled and
such disability prevents the active fire fighter from pursuing such
volunteer's normal occupation and if the disability is total and
permanent as certified by the Workmen's Compensation Board or other
authority approved by the Village Board of Trustees, the volunteer fire
fighter will be entitled to receive his/her accrued benefits described in
this section regardless of age or length of service.
E. In order to qualify for a year of fire-fighting service, the fire fighter must
satisfy the minimum requirements of participation of earning 50 points
in such year, such points to be awarded pursuant to § 217, Subdivision
(c), of the General Municipal Law.
20.Editor's Note: This article was approved at referendum 3-21-1995.
§ 74-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-9
1:77
Chapter 79
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 74.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 194.
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
§ 79-1. Bureau established. [Amended 4-15-1953]
A Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Incorporated Village of Malverne is
hereby established, consisting of not less than three members nor more
than 15 members, to be operated under the supervision of the Council of
the Fire Department of the Incorporated Village of Malverne.
§ 79-2. Members; appointment; terms.
The members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall all be members of
the Fire Department and shall be appointed by the Council of the Fire
Department, each for a term expiring on the third Tuesday in April following
the date of their appointment.
§ 79-3. Bylaws.
The Council of the Fire Department may, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees, adopt, amend or repeal bylaws not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, relating to the operations of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and the conduct of its meetings and business.
§ 79-4. Removal of members.
Any member of the Bureau of Fire Prevention may be removed for the same
reason and in the same manner that an officer of the Fire Department may
be removed.
§ 79-5. Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of all members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances of the state, county and Village
covering the following:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The storage and use of explosives and inflammables.
(3) The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire-alarm
systems and fire-extinguishing equipment.
(4) The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
§ 74-9 MALVERNE CODE § 79-5
1:78
§ 79-6. Investigations.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the Village by which property has
been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether
the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall be
begun immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire, and if it appears to
the officer making such investigation that such fire is of suspicious origin,
the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be immediately notified of the fact, and
it shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the
proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such
matters and shall further cooperate with such authorities in the collection
of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
§ 79-7. Inspections.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall inspect as often as may be necessary,
but not less than once a year, all buildings, premises and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose
of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause
fire, or any violation of the provisions of any local law or statute affecting
fire hazard, and shall inspect as often as may be necessary all specially
hazardous manufacturing processes, storages or installations of acetylene
or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and inflammable materials, and
all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems, and shall make
such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws governing
the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire.
§ 79-8. Correction of fire hazards; service of order.
(5) The means and adequacy of exit, in case of fire, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls,
theaters and amphitheaters, where persons live or congregate from
time to time for any purpose.
(6) Investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of each fire.
B. They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are
set forth in this chapter, and as are now or may be conferred from time
to time by law.
A. If the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall find in any building or upon any
premises or any other place combustible or explosive matter or
dangerous accumulations of rubbish, or unnecessary accumulations of
wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly inflammable material
especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
property, or shall find obstructions to any fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations
of the Fire Department or egress of the occupants in case of fire, or in
case such Bureau of Fire Prevention shall find any building or structure
which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes, or by reason of
§ 79-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-8
1:79
§ 79-9. Annual report.
Between the first and the fourth days of March in each year, the annual
report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made and filed in the office
of the Clerk of the Village of Malverne. It shall contain a record of all
proceedings under this chapter and a statement of such other matters or
statistics as may be required by statute or as the Bureau of Fire Prevention
may deem proper.
§ 79-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-196821]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.
Chapter 120
LOCAL LAWS, PUBLICATION OF
which lack of conditions or from any other cause is especially liable
to fire and is so situated as to endanger property and the occupants
thereof, or shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or
inflammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or the
occupants thereof, it shall order the same to be removed or remedied
within 24 hours, and unless such order is complied with, the Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall cause the owner or occupant to be prosecuted
in the proper court for violation of any local laws of the Village of
Malverne or any law of the State of New York, of which violation such
owner or occupant may be guilty; or if, in the opinion of such Bureau
of Fire Prevention, the act or neglect of such owner or occupant does
not constitute any violation of any local law of the Village of Malverne
or any law of the State of New York, such Board of Fire Commissioners
shall bring to the attention of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Malverne at its next meeting the facts, circumstances and conditions in
connection with such act or neglect.
B. The service of any order mentioned in this chapter may be made upon
the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering
a copy of the same to such occupant personally or by delivering the
same and leaving it with any person in charge of said premises or, in
case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place on the front door of said premises. If,
however, it may be necessary to serve such order upon the owner of the
premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving
with such owner a copy of such order or, if such owner is absent from
the Village, by mailing a copy of such order to the owner's last-known
address.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 79-8 MALVERNE CODE § 120-1
1:80
§ 120-1. Publication of notice; contents.
If the Board of Trustees, by a majority vote of the members thereof present
at any meeting, shall determine that it will consider the passage of any
proposed local law presented to it, it shall fix a day, hour and place for
a public hearing thereon within 30 days after such presentation, and the
Village Clerk shall give public notice thereof in the name of the Board
of Trustees within 20 days after such presentation by causing said notice
to be published once, at least three days prior to the date fixed for such
hearing, in the official newspaper of the Village of Malverne or, if the Board
of Trustees shall so direct, in any newspaper of general circulation in said
Village. Such notice shall contain the title of said proposed local law and
a copy thereof or, if the Board of Trustees shall so direct, a brief summary
of the provisions thereof sufficient to explain its general purpose and effect
prepared by the Village Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney.
§ 120-2. Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Trustees on such proposed
local law on the date and at the hour and place specified in such notice.
§ 120-3. Filing.
Proof by affidavit of the publication of such notice of public hearing and the
minutes of said hearing or a transcript of the proceedings thereat shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
Chapter 138
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 74.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3
1:81

ARTICLE I
Special Police Officers
[Adopted 12-17-195822 (Ch. 30, Art. I, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 138-1. Authority to appoint; scope of duties and authority; term
and compensation.
In accordance with General Municipal Law § 10, the Mayor of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne shall have power to appoint such number
of special police officers for the Village as she or he may deem necessary
to preserve the public peace in case of riot, conflagration, dangerous traffic
congestion or other public emergency. Such special police officers shall be
empowered to act only when called to duty by the Mayor or the Chief of
Police of said Village for service during a riot, conflagration, dangerous
traffic congestion or other public emergency. Such special police officers
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and the appointment of any
special police officers may be rescinded by the Mayor at any time, with or
without cause. The amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to a special
police officer shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. Such special police
officers shall, in the performance of their duties, be under the sole control
of the regularly appointed and constituted officers of the Malverne Police
Department. They shall have the power to make arrests only for public
intoxication, traffic violations, disorderly conduct or other offenses against
peace and good order.
22.Editor's Note: Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-1
1:83

ARTICLE II
Retirement
[Adopted 12-6-1967 (Ch. 30, Art. II, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 138-2. Retirement program; mandatory retirement age.23
The Incorporated Village of Malverne does hereby elect to make available
to the members of the Police Department of said Village all the advantages
and benefits provided by § 384-d of the Retirement and Social Security Law
of the State of New York, and every member contributing on the basis of this
section shall be separated from the service on the last day of the calendar
month next succeeding the calendar month in which he attains age 62.
§ 138-3. Liability for additional costs.
The Incorporated Village of Malverne does hereby elect to assume all the
additional costs on account of services for an officer or member of the
Malverne Police Department rendered to said Village of Malverne prior to
the effective date of such election.
§ 138-4. Back costs.
The Incorporated Village of Malverne does hereby elect to assume all of
the back costs on account of services of an officer or member of said
Department which will be required in order to effectuate the retirement of
those members who file an election pursuant to this section at the end of
a twenty-year period as against any contributions already made under the
twenty-five-year retirement plan, and including the cost of the necessary
actuarial reevaluation on account of services rendered prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 138-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-4
1:85
Chapter 154
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
records management officer to have sufficient historical or other value to
warrant their continued preservation by the local government.24
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microforms, electronic data or any other materials, regardless
of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or in
connection with the transaction of official Village of Malverne business.25
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Village of
Malverne primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing, training,
promotion and other managerial use and records disposition, including
records preservation, records disposal and records centers or other storage
facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Village of
Malverne agency for official use or to the public.
The removal from the Village of Malverne, in accordance with the
records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods which
may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or
The transfer of records to the records center/archives for
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of
records determined to have historical or other sufficient value
warranting continued preservation.
(2)
A.
The transfer of records from one Village of Malverne agency to any
other Village of Malverne agency.
B.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 138-4 MALVERNE CODE § 154-2
1:86
§ 154-2. Establishment of program; records management officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Incorporated Village of Malverne and headed by a records
management officer (RMO). The officer will be responsible for
administering the noncurrent and archival public records and storage areas
for the Village of Malverne in accordance with local, state and federal
laws and guidelines. The Village Clerk shall serve ex officio as the records
management officer.
§ 154-3. Powers and duties of records management officer.
A. The records management officer shall have all the necessary powers to
carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival
public records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of
the Village of Malverne.
B. The records management officer shall:
(1) Continually survey and examine public records to recommend their
classification so as to determine the most suitable methods to be
used for the maintaining, storing and servicing of archival material:
(a) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York
State Records Retention and Disposition Schedules thereby
subject to disposition;
(b) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention; or
(c) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
(2) Establish guidelines for proper records management in any
department or agency of the Village of Malverne in accordance
with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
(3) Report annually to the chief executive official and the governing
body on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including but not
limited to the cost/benefit ratio of programs effectuated by the
department.
(4) Operate a records management center for the storage, processing
and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records of all Village of
Malverne departments and agencies.
(5) Establish a Village of Malverne archives and perform the following
functions:
(a) Advise and assist Village of Malverne departments in reviewing
and selecting material to be transferred to the Village of
Malverne archives for preservation.
§ 154-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-3
1:87
§ 154-4. Records Advisory Board.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the records management officer. The Board shall
consist of three ex-officio members: the Mayor, Village Clerk and Village
Historian. The Board shall meet periodically and have the following duties:
§ 154-5. Custody of records.
(b) Continually survey and examine public records to determine
the most suitable methods to be used for the creating,
maintaining, storing and servicing of archival materials.
(c) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival
records.
(d) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records
in the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(e) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(f) Provide information services to other Village of Malverne
offices.
(g) Collect archival materials which are not official Village of
Malverne records but which have associational value to the
Village of Malverne or a close relationship to the existing
archival collection. Such collecting shall be subject to archive
space, staff and cost limitations, and to the potential
endangerment of such materials if they are not collected by the
archives.
(h) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records
are to be identified at the point of generation.
A. Provide advice to the records management officer on the development
of the records management program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. Review retention periods proposed by the records management office
for records not covered by State Archives schedules.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and be the
final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
A. A Village of Malverne department is the legal custodian of its records
and shall retain custody of records deposited in the records center.
§ 154-3 MALVERNE CODE § 154-5
1:88
§ 154-6. Recovery of records.
The Village Attorney may take steps to recover local government records
which have been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 154-7. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Village of Malverne unless approval has been obtained from the records
management officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
by the records management officer without the express written consent of
the department head having authority.
Chapter 165
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Records transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under the
custody and control of the archives rather than the department which
created or held them immediately prior to being transferred to the
archives.
B. Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation
of the RMO, with the approval of the head of the department which has
custody of the records and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
C. Records may be permanently removed from the archives at the request
of the RMO or the head of the department which had custody of the
records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to the
archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-7
1:89

ARTICLE I
Mayor and Trustees
[Adopted 3-17-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982 (Ch. 10 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 165-1. Establishment of annual salary; pay period.
In the Incorporated Village of Malverne, the annual compensation of the
Mayor and Trustees shall be established annually by resolution of the Board
of Trustees at the public hearing on the tentative budget pursuant to Village
Law. The annual compensation of the Mayor and Trustees shall be payable
in equal monthly installments.
§ 165-2. When effective.
The rate of annual compensation of the Mayor and of the Trustees of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne as provided in § 165-1 shall take effect at
the commencement of the following fiscal year, subject to the provisions of
the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:91
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 194
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 74. Building construction — See Ch. 265.
§ 194-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and
regulations applicable to alarm users as defined in this chapter. The
provisions of other codes of the Village of Malverne pertaining to building
construction and fire prevention are not superseded but are in addition to
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 194-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to
signal the presence of a condition requiring urgent attention or response by
the Village Police Department.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the Village, except for a proprietary system or an alarm
system on motor vehicles. Where a person other than the owner leases or
occupies the premises and maintains the alarm system, that person shall be
the "alarm user."
CALENDAR YEAR — The twelve-month period commencing January 1 and
terminating on December 31.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Malverne Police Department.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of the signaling portion of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, loss of externally supplied
electrical power for less than four hours, improper installation, improper
maintenance, improper usage or an error or negligence on the part of the
owner, lessee or occupant of the premises wherein the system is installed,
or through the error or negligence of employees, guests or agents of the
owner, lessee or occupant of the premises. An error or negligence of the
owner shall include insufficient or inadequate instruction to tenants,
employees, agents, children or others concerned with or having access to
the operation of the alarm system. A false alarm shall include all alarm
signal activation incidents in which investigation by Police Department
personnel reveals no evidence of the existence of an emergency condition.
Those alarm signals which investigation reveals were triggered by physical
§ 165-2 MALVERNE CODE § 194-2
1:92
damage to the protected premises as a result of a hurricane, tornado,
earthquake or other violent natural phenomena and line trouble signals
received via dedicated telephone lines are excluded from the definition of
"false alarm."
PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation and unincorporated
association.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm system which transmits its signals to a
location within the protected premises and is monitored by the proprietor of
the premises or his agents. When such a system monitors conditions which
may require a response by Police Department personnel, then it becomes
an alarm system as defined in this chapter.
§ 194-3. Filing of information; fees.
A. Every alarm user who maintains an alarm system in the Village, except
those installed in motor vehicles, shall, within 10 days of the installation
thereof, or within 60 days of the enactment of this chapter, file the
following information with the Village Police Department:
(1) Type of alarm system.
(2) Street address and the nearest cross street of the building which
houses the alarm.
(3) In the case of commercial premises, the name, address and
telephone number of an authorized representative and/or an
alternative who will be able to respond when called by police to
deactivate the alarm system.
(4) In the case of a private residence, the name, address and telephone
number of a person who is not a resident of the private residence in
question and who will be able to deactivate the alarm system.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
business or corporation installing, servicing and/or maintaining the
alarm system.
B. Such filing requirements are applicable to all alarm systems, whether
the same are or are not directly connected to the police headquarters or
are merely audible alarms. Such filing must be made within the time
period specified above, even though there shall have been previous
notification of the existence of such alarm systems to the Police
Department or any other department of the Village.
C. There shall be a fee as set from time to time by resolution adopted by
the Board of Trustees for each alarm system, payable at the time of
registration, and all alarm system filings are to be renewed every three
years.
§ 194-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-3
1:93
§ 194-4. False alarms.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or to permit the activation
of a false alarm signal. The alarm user shall be held wholly responsible for
all false alarms originating from the alarm user's system and shall be fully
liable for all penalties arising therefrom.
§ 194-5. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 200
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 229. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
D. Notification of change. The alarm user shall be responsible for notifying
the Chief of Police in writing in writing of any changes in the above
information at least 10 days prior to the effective date of such change.
E. The filing of the above information does not create any special
relationship or obligation on the part of the Village to respond to any
alarm.
A. An alarm user shall pay to the Village a fine for each and every false
alarm to which the Village Police Department responds as follows:
(1) First false alarm during the calendar year: no fine.
(2) Second false alarm during the calendar year: not to exceed $25.
(3) Third false alarm during the calendar year: not to exceed $50.
(4) Fourth false alarm and all thereafter during the calendar year: not
to exceed $100.
B. If an alarm user fails to file the information required by § 194-3 of this
chapter, or fails to notify the Chief of Police of any changes in that
information within the time required, the alarm user shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.26
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-3 MALVERNE CODE § 194-5
1:94
ARTICLE I
Consumption and Possession in Public
[Adopted 2-7-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979 (Ch. 12 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 200-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby
declares and finds it to be in the public interest to provide for the regulation
of certain conduct in public places within the Village of Malverne.
§ 200-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 200-3. Restrictions; presumptive evidence. [Amended 9-7-1983 by
L.L. No. 2-1983]
Unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees or the provisions of
this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume liquor, wine, beer
or other alcoholic beverage on any public sidewalk, street, highway, parking
A. For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquid intended for human consumption
containing more than 1/2 of 1% by volume of alcohol.
COMMUNITY EVENT — A fair, picnic, block party or other community
gathering in any public place.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following: drinking from
the container; possession with movement of the container to the mouth;
and any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume in
any public place.27
OPEN BOTTLE, CAN OR OTHER CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass
or other receptacle suitable for or used to hold any liquid, which has
been uncapped, uncorked, the tab removed or the top sliced, cut or
broken, or its original condition altered in such a way that the liquid
can flow out of it.28
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group
of persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street,
road, sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of amusement,
playground, park or beach located within the Village of Malverne,
except that a public place shall not include those premises duly licensed
for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or
within their own private property.
B. Words singular in form may include the plural, and words plural in form
may include the singular, and words in the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and neuter genders.
27.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
28.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:95
lot, public park or other public place within the Village of Malverne, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to carry or
transport any open bottle or open container containing liquor, wine or beer
or any alcoholic beverage on any public sidewalk, street, highway, parking
lot, public park or other public place within the Village of Malverne with
the intent to consume the same. The existence of an open bottle or open
container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage in any
vehicle while in or on any public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot,
public park or other public place within the Village of Malverne shall be
presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of all occupants of
such vehicle and that they possess the same with the intention of consuming
its contents.
§ 200-4. Permits for community events.
A. At least 10 calendar days prior to the proposed date of a community
event, any person may apply to the Village Clerk, on his own behalf or
on behalf of an organization, for a permit to possess and consume an
alcoholic beverage as defined herein during or in the conduct of a
community event.
B. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant and the address and telephone number.
Where the applicant is an organization, the name and address of
the organization and its officers shall be given.
(2) The purpose of the community event, the date when it is proposed
to be held, the approximate time the community event will start
and terminate and the place where it shall take place.
(3) Any other pertinent information the Village Clerk shall deem
necessary.
C. Where the Village Clerk shall determine that the proposed community
event is of such character, size and location as to be appropriate to and
in harmony with the surrounding area and that the public health,
morals, safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood
will not be endangered by the granting of a permit, he shall issue a
permit, conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply
with the terms thereof.
D. Upon a denial by the Village Clerk of an application made pursuant to
this article, the applicant may appeal the determination of the Village
Clerk to the Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal for
hearing by the Board of Trustees. Upon receipt of a request for said
hearing, the Mayor shall designate two or more members of the Board
to conduct said hearing as a review board. Said hearing shall be held on
a date and at a place and hour designated by the Mayor.
E. The Board of Trustees or Village Clerk may waive the requirements of
this section where, in either opinion, any irregularity or noncompliance
§ 200-3 MALVERNE CODE § 200-4
1:96
§ 200-5. Conflicting provisions.
In the event that any provision of this article is inconsistent with any federal
or state statute, law, rule or regulation, then said statute, law, rule or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 200-6. Penalties for offenses.29
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
would not endanger the public health, morals, safety and general
welfare of the neighborhood immediately surrounding the place where
the community event is to be held and where strict compliance would
result in unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:97
Chapter 208
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 208-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating the establishment of amusement centers
and the operation of amusement center games. It is intended to protect
property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate,
enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, reduce
hazards and curb the deterioration of community environment.
§ 208-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any part of a building, structure, room or
enclosure within which is located, maintained or operated for the
amusement, patronage or recreation of the public for which a fee, charge
or other consideration is imposed an amusement game of any description
and particularly but not by way of limitation the type commonly known as
"bagatelle," "baseball," "football," "pinball" and "electronic video games."
AMUSEMENT CENTER GAME — Any game involving an element of skill
or chance which is operated or may be operated by the insertion of a
coin or any other object and particularly but not by way of limitation the
type commonly known as "bagatelle," "baseball," "football," "pinball" and
"electronic video games," for which a fee, charge or other consideration
is imposed, directly or indirectly; also, any machine or apparatus, whether
manually, mechanically, electrically or otherwise operated and whether or
not affixed or attached to or installed in any premises or place, in or upon
which machine or apparatus a game involving any element of chance, skill
or knowledge may be played by one or more persons, singly or collectively,
for which a fee, charge or other consideration is imposed.
§ 208-3. Permit required.30
No person shall maintain or operate an amusement center game without
first having obtained a permit to do so.
§ 208-4. Fees.31
The fee for the permitting of an amusement center game shall be as set from
time to time by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-6 MALVERNE CODE § 208-5
1:98
§ 208-5. Maximum number of games.32
No more than two such amusement center games or devices shall be
permitted under this chapter for maintenance, exhibition or use in or upon
the same premises at any one time, except by special permission of the
Board of Trustees. Any permittee having three or more permitted games or
devices in or upon the same premises on the effective date of this chapter
may continue to maintain and operate such permitted games or devices
for up to one year from the effective date of this chapter, after which date
no more than two such permitted games or devices may be permitted or
operated.
§ 208-6. Age restriction.33
No person under 12 years of age shall be permitted to operate any such
device, by the permittee or any person in charge of the premises on which
any such permitted device is located, during school hours unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian over the age of 16 years.
§ 208-7. Penalties for offenses.34
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code. In addition to these penalties, the Mayor may revoke the
permit(s) for any and all of the permitted amusement games or devices on
the permittee's premises.
Chapter 215
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-7
1:99

ARTICLE I
Keeping of Certain Animals
[Adopted 10-15-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976 (Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1972
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 215-1. Restrictions.
§ 215-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
A. No person shall, within the limits of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne, harbor or keep any horse, pony, cow, calf, hog, goat or sheep,
except on a currently existing working farm.
B. No person shall, within the limits of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne, harbor or keep any poultry, chicken, duck, goose or pigeon,
except on a currently existing working farm.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-2
1:101

ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted 7-5-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989 (Ch. 3, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 215-3. Definitions.35
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Male or female members of the species Canis familiaris.
OWNER — The owner of record or any person who owns, possesses or
harbors any dog. If the owner of a dog shall be under the age of 16 years,
the parent or guardian of such person shall be deemed the owner.
§ 215-4. Leash required.36
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring or keeping or having
custody of a dog within the Incorporated Village of Malverne to permit such
dog to be off the premises of the owner, unless restrained by a leash not
exceeding six feet in length and held by a person capable of physically
controlling the dog.
§ 215-5. Enticing, seizing or disturbing dogs prohibited.37
No person shall entice any dog or other animal out of the house of its owner
or harborer or seize or molest any dog or other animal while held or led by
any person or while properly registered.
§ 215-6. Sanitation requirements; noise restrictions.
A. Sanitation requirements.
(1) No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk, or on any public property whatsoever or on any private
property without the permission of the owner of said property.
(2) The restriction in this subsection shall not apply to that portion of
the street lying between the curblines, which shall be used to curb
such dog under the following conditions:
(a) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove,
in a sanitary method, all feces deposited by such dog.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:103
§ 215-7. License required.39
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog in the Village
unless such dog is licensed by the Village Clerk in accordance with Article
7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 215-8. License fees.40
The annual fees for licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be as set
forth from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees.
§ 215-9. Dog Control Officer.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Malverne shall, from time to time,
appoint a person to act as Dog Control Officer pursuant to Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
§ 215-10. Keeper of pound.
(b) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area
shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner by the person,
owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. No person shall have, keep or permit to be kept on any premises, either
residential or commercial, owned or occupied in whole or in part by him
or her, within the limits of the Village, any dog or animal which, by its
howling, whining, and/or barking, shall disturb a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities. Such howling, whining and/or barking shall be a
disturbance if such howling, whining and/or barking can be heard over
the adjacent property line of said premises and shall occur for a
continuous period of 15 minutes within a one-hour period. [Amended
8-17-2000 by L.L. No. 3-200038]
A. The Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, appoint a person to act
as keeper of the public pound or contract for such services and likewise
may appoint or contract for a dog catcher and dog disposal.
B. It shall be the duty of the keeper of the public pound of the Village of
Malverne or any police officer of said Village or any authorized person
to distrain or cause to be distrained and impounded any unleashed dog,
as provided in § 215-4, in violation of this article or any provisions
thereof; any unidentified dog off its owner's property; any unlicensed
dog; any dangerous dog as defined in Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 108, or any dog posing an immediate threat to public safety. The
keeper of said pound or other authorized person shall be entitled to
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 215-6 MALVERNE CODE § 215-10
1:104
§ 215-11. Redemption and disposition of seized dogs.42
The owner of a dog seized may redeem the dog within five days by
producing to the person seizing the dog a license for the dog and paying a
fee commensurate with the cost of impoundment, together with a surcharge
in an amount set from time to time by the Board of Trustees, for the cost of
the seizure. If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog,
and the dog shall be sold or destroyed by the keeper of the pound or other
authorized representative. In the case of sale, the purchaser must pay the
purchase price to the Clerk or Dog Control Officer.43
§ 215-12. Limit on number of dogs. [Added 8-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
§ 215-13. Penalties for offenses.44
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
receive the fee provided by the current contract for each dog so
distrained and delivered.41
A. No person shall have, keep or permit to be kept on any premises, either
residential or commercial, owned or occupied, in whole or in part by
him or her, within the limits of the Village more than three adult dogs.
B. For the purpose of this section, any dog over the age of six months shall
be considered an adult dog.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Original § 3-16 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this section
and dealt with the changing of fees by resolution of the Board of Trustees, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 215-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:105
Chapter 229
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 200.
Loitering — See Ch. 399.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
§ 229-1. Special permission required; types of events.
An assembly of persons on an outside public space, such as a street,
sidewalk or parking lot, for the purpose of recreation, entertainment,
celebration and/or solemn commemoration, which involves the partial or
total obstruction or closing of the public space, or which involves 50 or
more persons, requires special permission of the Board of Trustees. Request
for such permission shall be by application to the Village Clerk, on a form
supplied by the Village, submitted no later than 30 calendar days prior to
the event, except that an application submitted less than 30 calendar days
prior to an event may be considered by the Trustees, in their discretion,
upon proof that the applicant could not have foreseen the necessity for the
event prior to the date on or about which the application was submitted.
Such events include, but are not limited to, processions, parades, fairs,
parties, concerts and/or athletic activities. Such events do not include
groups in vehicles being used solely for transportation, such as in
connection with a funeral or a wedding, groups using vehicles in their
usual manner, including bicycles and motorcycles, for the sole purpose
of transportation through the Village; activities sponsored by the Village;
authorized training exercises of Village employees; processions of
individuals going from one inside place to another in short duration, such
as in connection with a school commencement or a religious service. In
granting or denying the special permission, the Trustees shall consider the
recommendations of the Chief of Police, the Superintendent of Public Works
and/or any other Village or governmental department or agency, as well
as their own assessment of inconvenience to the public and/or economic
burden to the Village which may likely occur as a result of the event.
§ 229-2. Special regulations.
The Board of Trustees reserves the right to regulate the time and place
of activities for which special permission is requested pursuant to § 229-1
above, balancing the interests of the group requesting to use an outside
public space to conduct its activity with the safety to persons and places
in the Village and the expectation of the Village residents to the quiet
enjoyment of their homes.
§ 215-13 MALVERNE CODE § 229-2
1:106
§ 229-3. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Village police officer, code enforcement officer, Building Inspector, Deputy
Building Inspector and/or any such other person or agency as may be
designed by authority of the Board of Trustees.
§ 229-4. Penalties for offenses.45
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code. Each violation
shall constitute a separately punishable offense and a continued violation
of the same offense shall be counted as a separately punishable offense for
each calendar day upon which the violation continues.
§ 229-5. Conflicting provisions.
Whenever any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other
provision of this chapter or with any other statute or local law covering the
same subject matter, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
A. As a condition of granting permission to conduct an activity which
requires special permission pursuant to § 229-1 above, the Trustees
may:
(1) Based upon a reasonable assessment of risk, require the applicant
to provide evidence of a policy of insurance, in an amount to be
determined by the Trustees, against harm to persons and/or
property, and to name the Village as an additional insured on the
policy;
(2) Based upon a reasonable assessment of economic burden to the
Village, require the applicant to agree to reimburse the Village for
all or part of the cost of assigning additional Village employees to
duties associated with the event; and/or
(3) Require the applicant to agree to have published in a local
newspaper the date, time, place and nature of the event.
B. Special permission to engage in an activity described in § 229-1 above
will not be granted, or will be revoked, should the Trustees become
aware that any part of the activity would violate federal, state and/or
local law.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-5
1:107
Chapter 258
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 44.
§ 229-5 MALVERNE CODE § 229-5
1:108
ARTICLE I
Operating Restrictions; Helmets
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 258-1. Riders under one year of age prohibited; penalties for
offenses.
No person operating a bicycle shall allow a person who is under one year
of age to ride as a passenger on a bicycle nor shall such person be carried
in a pack fastened to the operator. A first violation of the provisions of this
section shall result in no fine. A second violation shall result in a civil fine
not to exceed $50.
§ 258-2. Passenger requirements.
No person operating a bicycle shall allow a person one or more years of age
and less than 14 years of age to ride as a passenger on a bicycle unless:
§ 258-3. Helmet required for operation.
No person one or more years of age and less than 14 years of age shall
operate a two-wheeled bicycle unless such person is wearing a helmet
meeting the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
Z90.4 bicycle helmet standards) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's
Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. For the purpose of
this section, "wearing a helmet" means having a helmet of good fit fastened
securely upon the head with the helmet straps. For purposes of this section,
a two-wheeled bicycle shall include a two-wheeled bicycle equipped with
training wheels.
§ 258-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. Such passenger is wearing a helmet meeting the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4 bicycle helmet
standards) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's (1984 Standard)
Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. For the
purposes of this section, "wearing a helmet" means having a helmet of
good fit fastened securely upon the head with the helmet straps; and
B. Such passenger is placed in a separate seat attached to the bicycle and
such seat shall have adequate provision for retaining the passenger in
place and for protecting the passenger from the moving parts of the
bicycle.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this
article shall pay a civil fine not to exceed $50.
B. A law enforcement officer shall only issue an appearance ticket for a
violation of the provisions of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article if the
violation by the person under 14 years of age occurs in the presence of
§ 258-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:109
§ 258-5. Waiver of fines.
§ 258-6. Liability.
The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this article shall
not constitute contributory negligence or assumption of the risk, and shall
not in any way bar, preclude, or foreclose an action for personal injury or
wrongful death by or on behalf of such person, nor in any way diminish or
reduce the damages recoverable in any such action.
such person's parent or guardian and where such parent or guardian is
18 years of age or over. The appearance ticket shall only be issued to
such parent or guardian and shall not be issued to the person under the
age of 14.
A. The court shall waive any fine for which a person who violates the
provisions of Subsection A of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article would be
liable if such person supplies the court with proof that between the date
of violation and the appearance date for such violation such person
purchased or rented a helmet which meets the requirements of
Subsection A of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article. Further, the court shall
waive any fine for which a person who violates the provisions of
Subsection B of § 258-2 of this chapter would be liable if such person
supplies the court with proof that between the date of violation and the
appearance date for such violation such person purchased or rented a
seat which meets the requirements of Subsection B of § 258-2 of this
article. Such waiver of fine shall not apply to a second or subsequent
conviction under Subsection A or B of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article.
B. The court may waive any fine for which a person who violates the
provisions of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article would be liable if the
court finds that, due to reasons of economic hardship, such person was
unable to purchase a helmet or seat in order to comply with the
provisions of § 258-2 or § 258-3 of this article.
§ 258-4 MALVERNE CODE § 258-6
1:110
Chapter 265
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 194.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 393.
Signs — See Ch. 491.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512.
Water — See Ch. 586.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 258-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:111

ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Adoption of State Codes
§ 265-1. Short title; state code references.
§ 265-2. Scope.
§ 265-3. Word usage and definitions.
A. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Building Code."
B. The New York State Building and Fire Codes as referenced are available
on the New York State Division of Code Enforcement and
Administration website [http://www.dos.ny.gov/DCEA (Free On-Line
Codes)]. The words "New York State Building Codes" or "state codes" as
used in this chapter shall refer to the New York State Building Code,
Residential Building Code, Fire Code, Existing Building Code,
Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Energy Conservation Code, and
Property Maintenance Code, as applicable. It is not the intention for any
work stated in this code to be in violation of any state codes.
A. Matters covered; interpretation.
(1) All matters concerning, affecting or relating to the construction,
alteration or removal of buildings or structures erected or to be
erected in the Village are presumptively provided for in this
chapter, except insofar as such provisions are contained in the
Village Law, the Labor Law, the New York State Building Code, or
the rules promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this
article by the Superintendent of Buildings.
(2) This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be
construed liberally to secure the beneficial interests and purposes
thereof.
B. All new work to conform. No wall, structure, building or part thereof
shall hereafter be constructed, nor shall the plumbing or drainage or
other equipment of any building, structure or premises, so far as
provided for in this chapter, be constructed or altered in the Village,
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No building
already erected or hereafter to be built in said Village shall be altered in
any manner that would be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the New York State Building or Fire Code or any rule or
approval of the Superintendent of Buildings made and issued
thereunder; but nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the raising or
lowering of any building to meet a change of grade in the street on
which it is located, provided that the building is not otherwise altered.
C. Buildings affected. All provisions of this chapter shall apply with equal
force to municipal buildings as they do to private buildings, except as
may be specifically provided for by law.
§ 265-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-3
1:113
A. Usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "person"
includes a corporation as well as an individual; "writing" includes
printing and printed or typewritten matter; "oath" includes affirmation,
"signature" or "subscription."
B. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein
indicated:
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or any
enlargement, whether by extending on any side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
APPROVED — As applied to any material device or mode of
construction, approved by the Superintendent of Buildings under the
provisions of this chapter, or any other authority designated by law to
give approval in the matter in question.
CURB —
GENERAL CONTRACTOR — Of, pertaining to, or affecting all persons
or things belonging to a group, category or system; a person who
contracts to furnish supplies or perform work at a certain price,
especially in construction.
HEIGHT — As applied to a building or structure, the measurement
from the mean level of the ground surrounding the building to a point
midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided
that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar
projections shall not be included in the height.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building as hereafter defined in the
Multiple Dwelling Law.
OCCUPIED — As applied to any building, shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
OWNER — Includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser,
devisee and any person entitled to an interest in the property in
question.
When used in defining the height of a building, the mean curb
level at that front of the building which faces on the street of the
greatest width or, if the greatest width occurs on more than one of
the streets on which the building faces, the mean curb level at the
point of the building which faces on the street of the greatest width
and having the highest curb.
(1)
When used in fixing the depth of an excavation, the curb level at
that point of the curb which is nearest to the point of the excavation
in question.
(2)
§ 265-3 MALVERNE CODE § 265-3
1:114
§ 265-4. General contractor registration, licensing and conduct.
§ 265-5. Storage garages.
No permit for a storage garage shall be issued for any building, shed or
enclosure:
STORY — That part of a building comprised between any floor and the
floor or roof next above.
A. On the first day of every biennial fiscal year of the Village, every general
contractor carrying on his trade, business or calling in the Village shall
register his name and address at the office of the Building Department
in the Village in which he performs work under such rules as the
Department may prescribe.
B. The general contractor must produce his Nassau County Consumer
Affairs license.
C. The fee for the license shall be determined by a resolution issued by the
Board of Trustees.
D. Workers compensation insurance, disability insurance and liability
insurance (with coverages set by resolution of the Board of Trustees)
must be current and certificates of insurance must be filed naming the
Incorporated Village of Malverne as certificate holder and additional
insured as required by the Village.
E. The erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure between
7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. at any time, and at any time on Sunday, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety as determined
by applicable laws in the Code of the Village of Malverne, shall be
prohibited.
A. Which is occupied as a tenement house, hotel or lodging house.
B. Where paints, varnishes or lacquers are manufactured or kept for sale.
C. Where dry goods or other highly inflammable materials are
manufactured or kept for sale.
D. Where rosin, turpentine, hemp, cotton or any explosives are stored or
kept for sale.
E. Which is situated within 20 feet of the nearest wall of a building
occupied as a school, theater or other place of public amusement or
assembly.
§ 265-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-6
1:115
§ 265-6. Garages in buildings having multiple dwelling
occupancies.46
A permit shall not be issued in a building occupied as a multiple dwelling
unless the ground-floor area of the garage does not exceed 5,000 square
feet and unless the occupants are the applicant or his employees or the
applicant and one other tenant, or the applicant's employee and one other
tenant, and provided that not more than two stories above the garage are
occupied or used as living apartments, which apartments shall be separated
from the garage by fire-retarding walls and floors, not pierced except by
one opening, protected by a fireproof self-closing door, and provided that
there shall be an entrance to the living apartments directly from the street
without passing through the garage. In case the building is occupied by
two families and on two stories above the garage, a fire escape or other
secondary means of escape must be provided for each story above the
garage.
§ 265-7. Construction or alteration permit required; notice to
demolish; exception for ordinary repairs.
A. For construction or alteration. Before the construction or alteration of
any building, wall or structure, or any part of either, or any sidewalk,
platform, staging or flooring to be used for standing or seating
purposes, and before the construction or alteration of the plumbing,
electrical wiring or drainage of any building, structure or premises is
commenced, the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect or
builder employed by such owner or lessee in connection with the
proposed construction or alteration, shall submit to the Superintendent
of Buildings a detailed statement, in duplicate, of the specifications, on
appropriate blanks to be furnished to the Department of Buildings, and
such plans and structural-detail drawings of the proposed work as the
Superintendent of Buildings may require. Such statements constitute
an application for a permit to construct or alter and shall be
accompanied by a further statement in writing, sworn to before a
notary public or a Commissioner of Deeds, giving the full name and
residence of each of the owners of said building or proposed building,
structure or proposed structure, premises, wall, platform, staging or
flooring, and by a diagram of the lot or plot on which such construction
or alteration is to be made, showing the exact location of any proposed
new construction and all existing buildings or structures that are to
remain.
B. Authorization of owner. If the construction, alteration or plumbing,
electrical wiring or drainage, or the alteration thereof, is to be made or
executed by any other person than the owner of the land in fee, the
person intending to make such construction or alteration, or to
construct such plumbing, electrical wiring or drainage shall, either as
owner or lessee or in any representative capacity, accompany the
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-6 MALVERNE CODE § 265-7
1:116
§ 265-8. Approval of permit application; compliance with
submissions.
application to build or alter with a statement in writing, sworn to as
aforesaid, giving the full name and residence of each of the owners
of the land, building or proposed building, structure or proposed
structure, premises, wall, platform, staging or flooring, and reciting
that he is duly authorized to perform said work. Such statement may be
made by the agent or architect of the person hereinbefore required to
make the same.
C. Notice to demolish. Before any existing building or part of an existing
building is demolished, a statement, in writing, on appropriate blanks
to be furnished by the Department of Buildings, constituting a notice to
demolish shall be submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings by the
owner, giving the full name and residence of each of the owners of the
building to be demolished, the name and business address of the person
who is to do the work and such other information respecting the
building as the Superintendent of Buildings may require. Such notice
shall be submitted not less than 48 hours before the work of demolition
is commenced.
D. Place of filing. All applications, notices and sworn statements required
by this section and copies of the approved plans shall be kept on file in
the office of the Superintendent of Buildings. Applications shall be
promptly docketed as received.
E. Amendments. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the filing of
amendments to any application at any time before the completion of the
work for which the permit was sought, and such amendments, after
approval, shall be made part of the application and filed as such.
F. Ordinary repairs excepted. Ordinary repairs to buildings or structures,
or to the plumbing, electrical wiring or drainage thereof, may be made
without notice to the Superintendent of Buildings, but such repairs
shall not be construed to include the cutting away of any wall or any
portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any beams or supports, or the
removal, change or closing of any stairway or required means of exit, or
the alteration of any house sewer, private sewer or drainage system or
the construction of any waste pipe.
G. In any event that an application remains dormant for a period of 90
days, it shall be deemed null and void unless an extension is approved
by the Superintendent of Buildings.47
A. Approval of applications. It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any
building, structure, wall, platform, sidewalk, staging or flooring, or any
part thereof, or any plumbing, electrical wiring and drainage, until the
application and plans required by § 265-7 of this article shall have been
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-8
1:117
§ 265-9. Conditions of building permit.
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings. The Superintendent of
Buildings shall approve or reject any application or plan, or amendment
thereto, filed with him pursuant to the provisions of this article, within
a reasonable time, and, if approved, shall promptly issue a permit
therefor.
B. Approval in part. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the Superintendent of Buildings from approving and issuing a permit
for the construction of part of a building or structure, when plans and
detailed statements have been presented for the same, before the
entire plans and detailed statements of said building or structure have
been submitted or approved.
C. Signature to permit. Every permit issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings under the provisions of this chapter shall have his signature
affixed thereto, but this shall not prevent the Superintendent from
authorizing any subordinate to affix such signature.
D. Compliance with plans. The construction or alteration of any building,
structure, platform, staging or flooring, or of any plumbing, electrical
wiring or drainage, shall be in accordance with the approved detailed
statement of specifications and plans for which the permit was issued,
or any approved amendment thereof. The Superintendent will require a
certified copy of the approved plans to be kept at all times on the
premises during construction, from the commencement of work to the
completion thereof.
E. Adherence to diagram. The location of any new building or structure, or
of any extension of an existing building or structure, shown on the
diagram filed as required by § 265-7 of this article, or on any approved
amendment thereof, shall be strictly adhered to. It shall be unlawful to
reduce or diminish the area of any lot or lots, a diagram of which has
been filed with an application to construct or alter and has been used as
the basis for a permit, unless the building or structure for which the
permit was issued complies in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter for buildings or structures located on plots of such diminished
area; provided, however, that this shall not apply to any case in which
the lot area is reduced by reason of any street opening or widening or
other public improvement.
A. A building permit shall be effective for a period of one year after
issuance to authorize the commencement and continuation of work in
accordance with the application, plans and specifications on which it is
based. If substantial work pursuant to the permit is commenced within
one year after the date of its issuance, and such work actively continues
until completion, the permit shall remain in effect during such period of
time. In the event no substantial construction is performed in any
period of 60 days or more during the term of a permit, the permit shall
be deemed abandoned unless extended by the Superintendent of
§ 265-8 MALVERNE CODE § 265-9
1:118
§ 265-10. Revocation of permit.
The Superintendent of Buildings may revoke a building permit previously
issued in the following instances:
Buildings pursuant to this subsection. Notwithstanding any of the
foregoing, a building permit shall not remain effective for a period in
excess of one year from the date of issuance unless extended pursuant
to this subsection. For good cause shown and at the discretion of the
Superintendent, and upon payment of a fee as established by resolution
of the Board of Trustees, the Superintendent may grant a maximum
of two extensions of a permit for periods not exceeding six months
each. Any further extensions shall require the approval of the Board
of Trustees, which may be issued only upon written application and
payment of any required extension fee.48
B. The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the
applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and in accordance with the applicable building
laws, ordinances or regulations. All work shall conform to the approved
application, plans and specifications.
C. The building permit card shall be displayed prominently on the job site
at all times during the progress of construction so as to be readily seen
from adjacent thoroughfares.
D. No contractor, developer, home repair company, or other commercial
company shall commence construction or landscaping work in the
Village prior to 8:00 a.m. or continue to engage in work after 6:00 p.m.
in order to regulate unnecessary noise during evening and early
morning hours when residents are generally asleep or return home
from work.49
A. Where he or she finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
B. Where he or she finds that the building permit was issued in error, and
should not have been issued, in accordance with applicable laws.
C. Where he or she finds that the work performed under the permit is not
being prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application,
plans or specifications.
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
49.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-11
1:119
§ 265-11. Fees.
Before any permit shall be granted for the construction or alteration of any
building, structure or sidewalk, the applicant shall pay to the Village of
Malverne a fee to be determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A schedule of fees shall be kept by the Superintendent of Buildings at the
Building Department.
§ 265-12. Certificates of occupancy.50
See also Chapter 600, Zoning, § 600-5.1.
A. No building hereafter erected shall be occupied or used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose whatever until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Superintendent of Buildings, certifying that such building
conforms substantially to the approved plans and specifications and the
requirements of this chapter applying to buildings of its class and kind.
B. No building, whether new or altered, shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatever, until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Superintendent of Buildings,
certifying that the work for which the permit was issued has been
completed substantially in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and the provisions of this chapter applying to such
alteration, and, when the occupancy or use of the building has
continued during the work of alteration, the occupancy or use of the
building shall not continue for more than 30 days after completion of
the alteration unless such certificate shall have been issued.
(1) No certificate of occupancy will be issued unless Village-approved
concrete sidewalks and curbs have been installed.
(2) Application for a second kitchen in a one-family house.
(a) No application or plan for the installation of a second kitchen
in a one-family house will be entertained when the applicant is
the builder.
(b) No application may be submitted except by the owner who will
be in occupancy or possession during the period of the grant,
and occupancy shall be limited to lineal ancestors or
descendants.
(c) Each application for a second kitchen in a one-family house will
be treated as a special exception to be heard before the Board
of Trustees at a public hearing duly advertised twice in the
official newspaper of the Village, and the applicant must pay a
fee in an amount set from time to time by the Board of Trustees
when making the application. The applicant must also notify
property owners within 200 feet of the affected property.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-11 MALVERNE CODE § 265-12
1:120
§ 265-13. Rules.
(d) Two sets of plans indicating room sizes and disposition of all
rooms must be furnished by the applicant. All questions on a
questionnaire to be supplied by the Village Clerk must be
answered and submitted with said plans.
(e) Upon approval for the second kitchen, a declaration of
restrictive covenants in proper form for recording in the office
of the County Clerk of the County of Nassau, subject to the
approval of the Village Attorney, must be submitted within 30
days of the approval of any grant from the Board of Trustees.
The applicant will pay the appropriate fee to record said
declaration. The form of the covenant will be furnished by the
Department of Buildings.
C. Existing buildings. Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance
of the present occupancy and use of any now-existing building, except
as may be specifically prescribed by this chapter or as may be
necessary for the safety of life or property. Upon written request from
the owner, the Superintendent of Buildings may, if he so desires,
demand that said owner present a certificate of stability from a
recognized professional engineer or registered architect, certifying as
to the structural stability of the structure.
D. Temporary occupancy. Upon request of the owner or his authorized
representative, the Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy for part of a building, provided that such
temporary occupancy or use would not in any way jeopardize life or
property.
E. Contents of certificate. In addition to the certification, when required
by this section, as to compliance with approved plans and specifications
and provisions of this chapter, all certificates of occupancy shall state
the purposes for which the building may be used in several parts, the
maximum permissible live loads on the several floors, the number of
persons that may be accommodated in the several stories, in case such
number is limited by any provision of this chapter or the approved
specifications, and all special stipulations of the permit, if any.
F. Issuance and filing. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued within 30
days after written application therefor, if said building at the date of
such application shall be entitled thereto. A record of all certificates
shall be kept in the Department of Buildings and copies shall be
furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary interest in the
building affected.
A. Authority to adopt. The Superintendent of Buildings shall have the
power to adopt such rules with respect to the materials and mode of
construction, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, as may be
necessary to secure the intent and purposes of this chapter and a
§ 265-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-13
1:121
§ 265-14. Approved materials, appliances and methods of
construction.
Whenever any materials, appliances or methods of construction have been
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings as conforming to tests
prescribed by this chapter or the New York State Building Code, or to any
rules adopted thereunder, a list of such materials, appliances and methods
of construction shall be kept on file in the Department of Buildings, properly
indexed and open to public inspection during business hours.
§ 265-15. Right of entry of officers and employees.
§ 265-16. Stop-work orders; penalties for offenses.
proper enforcement of its provisions. For any provisions of this chapter
referring to the rules or requiring approvals of materials or modes
of construction, such Superintendent shall adopt, when this section
becomes effective or as the necessity may arise, such rules as are
required or will establish the conditions of approval.
B. Amendment and repeal. The Superintendent of Buildings may amend or
repeal any rule by the same procedure prescribed for the adoption of
new rules.
A. Any Building Inspector shall be authorized, in the performance of his or
her duties, to conduct inspections of premises, or parts of premises, at
such times and in such manner as the Building Inspector may find
convenient or necessary, with the consent of the person in possession or
occupancy.
B. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the person in
possession or occupancy, the Building Inspector shall be authorized to
obtain a warrant or court order to make an inspection, provided that
reasonable or probable cause is shown.
C. In case of an emergency, the Building Inspector may, without a warrant,
enter any premises, or parts of premises, to inspect the same, at any
time, without the permission of the person in possession or occupancy.
A. Whenever the Superintendent of Buildings has reasonable grounds to
believe that work on any building, structure or site is being prosecuted
in violation of the provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances
or regulations or not in conformity with the provisions of the
application, plans or specifications on the basis of which the building
permit was issued or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify
the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the person
performing the work to suspend all work, and any such persons shall
forthwith stop such work and suspend all building activities until the
stop-work order has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in
writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed, either
§ 265-13 MALVERNE CODE § 265-16
1:122
§ 265-17. Abandonment of project.
In the event of the abandonment of any building project, it shall be the
duty of the holder of the permit or the owner of the premises, his agent
or duly authorized representative to backfill any open excavation up the
street or ground level. In case the construction of the building or structure
has proceeded beyond the cellar excavation, all incomplete structures or
openings shall be completely boarded up in a manner satisfactory to the
Superintendent of Buildings so as to prevent access to the building
structure, in order to limit and prevent danger to persons or property and
possible fire hazards and to present a neat appearance.
§ 265-18. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections.
by delivering it personally to him or by posting the same upon a
conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a
copy of the same by certified mail.
B. Penalty for failure to comply with stop-work order. Any person, owner,
or owner's agent or the person performing the work who shall fail to
comply with a stop-work order issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $1,000 nor
more than $5,000 for a conviction of a first offense; upon conviction of a
second violation where the offense is committed within five years of the
first conviction, a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than $10,000;
and upon conviction of a third or subsequent violation where the
offense is committed within five years of the first and second
convictions, which shall constitute a misdemeanor, a fine of not less
than $4,000 nor more than $15,000 or imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day, or part thereof,
such violation continues following notification by the Village or service
of a summons shall constitute a separate offense punishable in like
manner.51
A. Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Superintendent of
Buildings or an inspector designated by the Superintendent of
Buildings at the following intervals:
(1) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) and all
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-18
1:123
§ 265-19. Tests.
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material,
construction, equipment or assembly does not comply with the
requirements of the applicable building laws, local laws or regulations, the
Superintendent of Buildings may require the same to be subjected to tests
at the applicant's expense, in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
§ 265-20. Complaints.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village Code,
or any other local law, rule or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Superintendent of Buildings may deem to be appropriate:
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 12 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A, fire safety and property maintenance inspections of any
building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may also
be performed by the Superintendent of Buildings or an inspector
designated by the Superintendent of Buildings at any time upon the
request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an authorized
agent of such owner; receipt by the Superintendent of Buildings of a
written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply
with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or receipt by the
Superintendent of Buildings of any other information, reasonably
believed by the Superintendent of Buildings to be reliable, giving rise to
reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to
comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; provided,
however, that nothing in this Subsection B shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. 52The fee specified in or determined in accordance with this code must
be paid prior to or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to
this section. This Subsection D shall not apply to inspections performed
by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection.
52.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, OFPC inspections, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-18 MALVERNE CODE § 265-20
1:124
§ 265-21. Penalties for offenses.
In accordance with § 382 of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York:
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in this code.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting, such
abatement or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. In addition to and not in limitation of any power otherwise granted by
law, every local government and its authorized agents shall have the
power to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist
in, on or about any building in violation of the Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and to issue appearance summons for violations of
the Uniform Code, returnable in the Malverne Village Court for
resolution.53
B. Any person, having been served, either personally or by registered or
certified mail, with an order to remedy any condition found to exist in,
on, or about any building in violation of the Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, who shall fail to comply with such order within the
time fixed by the regulations promulgated by the Secretary of State
pursuant to Subdivision 1 of § 381 of Article 18 of the Executive Law,
such time period to be stated in the order, and any owner, builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent or his/her agents or any other person taking part or
assisting in the construction of any building who shall knowingly violate
any of the applicable provisions of the Uniform Code or any lawful order
of a local government, a county or the Secretary made thereunder
regarding standards for construction, maintenance, or fire protection
equipment and systems, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 per day of violation, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or
both.
C. Where the construction or use of a building is in violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code or any lawful order obtained thereunder,
a Justice of the Supreme Court at a special term in the judicial district
in which the building is located may order the removal of the building
or an abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. An
application for such relief may be made by the Secretary of State, an
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-21
1:125
§ 265-22. Abatement of violations.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to
prevent illegal acts or conduct of a business in or about any premises, and
these remedies shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 265-23. Failure of enforcement officer does not legalize
nonconforming practice.
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Superintendent of
Buildings or on the part of any employee of the Building Department shall
legalize the erection, construction, alteration, removal, use or occupancy of
a building or structure that does not conform to the applicable building or
plumbing laws or regulations or that does not conform with the provisions
of an application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a building
permit or plumbing permit was issued or that does not conform to the
applicable provisions of the Malverne Village Code.
appropriate municipal officer, or any other person aggrieved by the
violation.
§ 265-21 MALVERNE CODE § 265-23
1:126
ARTICLE II
Exit Facilities
§ 265-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLOOR AREA — Any floor space enclosed on all sides by either the exterior
walls, fire walls or fire partitions.
HORIZONTAL EXIT — The connection of any two floor areas, whether in the
same building or not, by means of a vestibule, or by an open-air balcony or
bridge or through a fire partition or fire wall.
SPRINKLERED — Equipped with an approved system of automatic
sprinklers throughout the building.
STAIR EXIT — A direct connection of any floor area to a stairway
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this article for required
stairs.
UNSPRINKLERED — Not equipped with an approved system of automatic
sprinklers throughout the building.54
§ 265-25. Applicability.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in this article, the provisions hereof
shall apply to buildings hereafter erected, except multiple dwellings.
§ 265-26. Required exits.
A. Kind. Every building hereafter erected shall have one or more exits, as
required in this section, consisting of interior or exterior stairs, fire
towers or horizontal exits, constructed and arranged as specified in this
article, with the necessary hallways and doorways.
B. Number of occupants.
(1) For the purpose of this article, when the number of persons to be
accommodated by the exits is not stated in the application for a
permit to construct, such number of persons within any floor area
shall be taken, according to the use of such floor area, as one
person per what is determined by the New York State Building and
Fire Codes, current edition, which will govern for number of
occupants.
(2) It shall be unlawful to occupy any floor area by a greater number of
persons than that for which exits have been provided, in
accordance with this article.
C. Required number.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-26
1:127
§ 265-27. Interior stairs.
(1) From rooms. Every room having an occupancy of more than 49
persons and/or having a travel distance exceeding the New York
States codes shall have at least two doorways, remote from each
other, leading to an exit or exits. Three or more exits shall be
provided if required by the New York State Building and Fire
Codes.
(2) From ground floor. Every floor area having direct exit by doorways
or hallways to a street and having an occupancy of more than 49
persons shall have at least two means of exit. Three or more exits
shall be provided if required by the New York State Building and
Fire Codes.
(3) From floor areas. All floors shall have exits, stairways, and/or other
means of egress to a public way as per the New York State Building
and Fire Codes.
D. Location. Exits shall be located as per the New York State Building and
Fire Codes.
E. Stairway exits. Every required stairway shall lead to a street or open
public way. Stairways shall lead to a roof as per the New York State
Building and Fire Codes.
F. Engineers' ladders. Every building, including multiple dwellings,
factories, theaters and motion-picture theaters, in which high-pressure
steam boilers are placed below the curb level shall have stationary iron
ladders or stairs from such story leading directly to a manhole through
the sidewalk or other outside exit, unless exit is provided by an
enclosed stairs or a horizontal exit.
A. Construction.
(1) Strength. All stairs, platforms, landings and stair halls shall be of
sufficient strength to safely sustain a live load of not less than 100
pounds per square foot.
(2) Materials. All stairs and stairways serving an exit shall be
constructed of materials as per the New York State Building Codes.
(3) Support for treads and landings. When treads or landings are slate
marble, stone or composition, they shall be supported for their
entire length and width by a solid steel plate at least 1/8 of an inch
thick, securely fastened. When stairs are of fireproof construction,
the treads and landings may be solidly supported for their entire
length and width by the materials of which such stairs are
constructed. The treads and landings shall be constructed and
maintained in such a manner as to prevent persons from slipping
thereon.
§ 265-26 MALVERNE CODE § 265-27
1:128
B. When to be enclosed.
(1) Fireproof enclosures. Interior required stairways shall be enclosed
with fireproof partitions or walls of approved masonry when
required by the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
(2) Non-fireproof enclosures. In buildings with interior required
stairways which are not enclosed in fireproof partitions or walls of
approved masonry, the stairways shall be enclosed in partitions of
minimum wood studs fire-stopped at every story with
noncombustible material covered with approved plasterboard on
both sides, or of other approved equally slow-burning material and
construction.
(3) Stairs of ornamental character. Nothing in this section shall require
the enclosure of the flight of a required stairs, when ornamental in
character, from the main entrance floor to floor next above,
provided that such stairs are not the only required stairs, that all
other required stairs in the same story are enclosed as prescribed
in this section and that some other required stairs are accessible
from the upper part of the stairs in question.
(4) Open stairwells. Except as otherwise provided in this section and
the New York State Building and Fire Codes, not more than two
stories in any building shall be connected by an open well or
unenclosed stairway.
(5) Opening in enclosures. No openings shall be permitted in the stair
enclosures required by this section other than doorways, and such
windows as are necessary for proper lighting. The doorways shall
be equipped with approved self-closing fire doors, except that in
non-fireproof enclosures, substantial self-closing hardwood, metal
or metal-covered doors may be used. Windows opening on the
interior of the building shall be stationary fire windows.
C. Width. No stairs or stairway required by this article as an exit shall have
an unobstructed width less than what is required as per the New York
State Building and Fire Codes. The aggregate width of stairs in any
story of the building shall be such that the stairs or stairway may
accommodate at one time the total number of persons ordinarily
occupying or permitted to occupy the largest floor area served by such
stairs or stairways above the flight or flights of stairs under
construction, on the basis of what is required by the New York State
Building and Fire Codes.
D. Treads and risers. The treads and risers of stairs shall be as per the
New York State Building and Fire Codes.
E. Landings. All landings shall have minimum dimensions required by the
New York State Building and Fire Codes.
§ 265-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-27
1:129
§ 265-28. Exterior stairways.
§ 265-29. Fire towers; balconies.
Interior stairways constructed and arranged as follows shall be known
as "fire towers." The enclosing walls shall be of what is required by the
New York State Building and Fire Codes. Access to the stairway shall be
provided at each story served by a fire tower through outside balconies
or fireproof vestibules having solid floors or incombustible materials and
provided with substantial railings. Such balconies or vestibules shall be
level with the floors of the buildings and platforms of the stairs connected
by them, and shall be separated therefrom by self-closing fire doors. The
clear width of such connecting balconies and vestibules shall be not less
than that required for a hallway sized per the New York State Building and
Fire Codes. The stairs in fire towers shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this article relating to interior stairs.
§ 265-30. Horizontal exits.
No horizontal exit shall be deemed satisfactory under this article unless
the floor area on either side or such horizontal exit is sufficient as per
the New York State Building and Fire Codes. When vestibules or open-air
balconies are used, they shall conform to the requirements for vestibules
or open-air balconies or fire towers. When bridges are used, they shall be
constructed of incombustible material. All doorways or windows opening
on such vestibules, balconies or bridges shall be equipped with self-closing
fire doors or automatic fire windows. When there is a difference in level
between the connected floor areas, gradients shall be provided of not more
than one foot in 10 feet.
F. Handrails. All guardrails and hand railings shall have minimum
dimensions and be located in all areas as per the New York State
Building and Fire Codes.
G. Space under stairs. The space under any stairs built in whole or in part
of combustible materials shall be left entirely open and kept clear and
free from encumbrance. The underside shall be finished as required by
the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
A. Required stairs which may be permitted on the outside of a building
shall be constructed of materials that are allowable as per the New York
State Building and Fire Codes. Doors and windows opening on such
stairs shall be protected as required by the New York State Building and
Fire Codes.
B. Metal mesh or other rigid guards at least six feet high shall be provided
on each unenclosed side of such stairways throughout.
§ 265-27 MALVERNE CODE § 265-31
1:130
§ 265-31. Hallways.
When serving as an exit from or in connection with one or more stairways,
the clear width of any hallway or passageway shall be not less than the
aggregate required clear width of all stairs leading to it. The clear width of
every hallway or passageway leading to an exit shall be not less than what
is required by the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
§ 265-32. Doorways; obstructions prohibited.
§ 265-33. Miscellaneous requirements.
§ 265-34. Alterations.
No building shall hereafter be altered so as to reduce the number or
capacity of exits to less than that required for buildings hereafter erected.
A. Width. The aggregate clear width of doorways serving as an exit from
any room or floor area to a hallway, stairs or other means of exit shall be
not less than what is required by the New York State Building and Fire
Codes.
B. Hanging of doors. The doors of any doorway required by this section
shall be so hung and arranged that, when opened, they shall not in any
way obstruct the required width of hallway, stairs, or other means of
exit and, in the case of doorways leading directly to a street, shall not in
any position project more than what is required by the New York State
Codes. Doorways serving as exits to a street from required stairways of
any building, or to a yard, court or open passageway communicating
with a street, shall have the doors, including the doors of vestibules, so
hung as to swing outwards when opening; but this requirement shall
not be construed to prohibit the use of doors swinging both inwards and
outwards, nor of sliding doors in stables and garages; and in the
shipping and receiving rooms of business buildings, nor any other
requirements of or exceptions to the New York State Building and Fire
Codes.
C. Exits to be kept clear. No doorways, hallway, passageway, stairs or
other means of exit required by this article shall be obstructed or
reduced, except as to handrails, beyond its required width in any
manner whatsoever.
A. Exit signs. All exits from floor areas shall be plainly marked by approved
exit signs if required by the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
B. Lighting. Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting by artificial
light of all stairways, hallways and other means of exit required by this
article.55
55.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Exits to be kept clear, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I). See now § 265-32C above.
§ 265-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-34
1:131
New exits hereafter installed in any building shall be installed in conformity
to the requirements for exits in new buildings, unless such exits are
installed to comply with a notice issued under the provisions of § 265-20 of
this chapter.
§ 265-35. Existing buildings.
Every building now existing which is not provided with exit facilities as
prescribed in this article for new buildings, and in which the exit facilities
are inadequate for the safety of the occupants, shall be provided with
such good and efficient fire escapes, stairways or other means of egress
in case of fire as shall be directed by the Superintendent of Buildings; and
said Superintendent shall have authority within said Village to direct fire
escapes and other means of egress to be provided upon and within such
buildings or any of them, except as may be otherwise provided by law. If
the owner of any building affected by any order issued under this section,
or his agent, shall, within 48 hours, Sundays and holidays excluded, after
personal service of such order has been made, file with the Superintendent
of Buildings a written appeal from such order, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall appoint a Board of Survey for unsafe buildings, upon the
findings of which a new order shall be based and issued.
§ 265-36. Fire escapes.
A. Construction. All fire escapes hereafter erected shall be constructed of
incombustible materials and of sufficient strength to safely sustain a
superimposed load of 100 pounds per square foot. The owner or lessee
of any building upon which a fire escape is erected shall keep the same
in good repair.
B. Encumbrances prohibited. No person shall at any time place any
encumbrance of any kind whatsoever before or upon any fire escape,
balcony or ladder.
C. Duty of fire fighters and police officers. Any fire fighter or police officer
who shall discover any fire escape, balcony or ladder of any fire escape
encumbered in any way shall forthwith report the same to the
commanding officer of his company or department, who shall forthwith
cause the occupant of the premises or apartment to which said fire
escape, balcony or ladder is attached or for whose use the same is
provided to be notified, either verbally or in writing, to remove such
encumbrance and keep the same clear.
D. Penalties for offenses. If said notice shall not be complied with to effect
the removal forthwith of such encumbrance and keeping said fire
escape, balcony or ladder free from encumbrance, then the
commanding officer shall apply to the Superintendent of Buildings or
Code Enforcement Officer for a summons for the occupant of the
premises or apartment of which the fire escape forms a part, and, on
conviction, the occupant shall be fined, as per Village law, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 265-34 MALVERNE CODE § 265-36
1:132
ARTICLE III
Safeguards During Construction or Demolition
§ 265-37. Enforcement.
Except as may be otherwise provided by any law, the provisions of this
article shall be enforced by the Superintendent of Buildings, and all
safeguards required by the provisions of this article or by any rules
authorized hereunder shall be subject to the supervision of the Department
of Buildings. The Superintendent of Buildings shall from time to time adopt
such rules, consistent with the provisions of this article, as may be
necessary to secure fully the protection of persons and property. In case
any safeguard shall not be provided as prescribed by this article, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall cause a notice to be served personally
upon the persons whose duty it may be to provide the same or upon the
owners of the buildings affected requiring such safeguard, and specifying
the manner in which the same shall be erected. If such safeguard is not
provided as required in such notice within three days after the service
thereof, the Superintendent of Buildings shall have full power and authority
to provide or cause the same to be provided as herein specified. All
expenses connected with same may become a lien on the property which
will be recorded on the owner's tax and assessment file.
§ 265-38. Sidewalk sheds.
Whenever any building, or part thereof, within 10 feet of the building line,
is to be erected or raised to exceed 40 feet in height, or whenever such
a building more than 40 feet in height is to be demolished, the owner or
the person doing or causing such work to be done shall erect and maintain
during such work a substantial shed over the sidewalk in front of said
buildings, and extending, so far as practicable, from building line to curb.
On streets 50 feet or less in width and on streets having sidewalks less
than 15 feet in width, such sheds may extend beyond the curb to such
extent as may, on the recommendation of the Superintendent of Buildings,
be approved by the Village Board of Trustees, provided that when such
sheds extend to within 15 feet of the opposite building line, the written
approval of the lessees, tenants or occupants of the two stories or parts of
stories next above the curb of the buildings along the opposite building line
shall have been obtained before such approval is issued. Such shed shall
remain in place until the building is enclosed or, in case of demolition, until
the building has been reduced to 20 feet in height. Every such shed shall be
kept properly lighted at night.
§ 265-39. Temporary fences.
In any building operation that does not require a sidewalk shed as provided
in § 265-38 of this article, the owner or person doing or causing such work
to be done shall, unless relieved by a general rule of the Superintendent
of Buildings or a special permit from him, erect and maintain in front of
the building during such building operation a substantial fence, not less
§ 265-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-39
1:133
than eight feet high, of wood or other suitable material. Such fence may
extend not more than six feet into the highway and shall be built solid for its
full length, except for such openings, provided with sliding doors or doors
swinging inwards, as may be necessary for a proper prosecution of the
work.
§ 265-40. Roofs and skylights of adjoining buildings.
When any building is to be carried above the roof of an adjoining building,
proper means for the protection of the skylights and roof of such adjoining
building shall be provided by the person constructing or causing the
construction of such building, at his own expense, provided that if the
owner, lessee or tenant of the adjoining building should refuse permission
to have the roof and skylights so protected, the responsibility and expense
for the necessary protection shall devolve on the person refusing this
permission.
§ 265-41. Scaffolding.
All scaffolds used in connection with the erection, alteration or demolition
of any building shall be constructed in a manner to secure the safety of the
workers on them and of all persons passing under or near them. All scaffolds
used on or about buildings at a height of more than 20 feet above the street
or ground level, or a floor, except scaffolding wholly within the interior of
a building and covering the entire floor space of any room therein, shall
be provided along the outer edges and ends with substantial railings or
enclosures of wire mesh or other suitable material extending at least three
feet six inches above the working platform.
§ 265-42. Floors to be filled in or covered over.
If the floors of any building are to be of fireproof construction, the floor
filling shall be completed as the building progresses. If the floors consist of
wood beam, the under-flooring, when double flooring is to be used, shall be
laid on each story as the building progresses; when double floors are not
to be used, the floors two stories below the story where the work is being
performed shall be kept planked over. If the floor beams are of iron or steel,
the entire tier of iron or steel beams on which the structural iron or steel
work is being erected, except such spaces as may be reasonably required
for the proper construction of such iron or steel work and for the raising
or lowering of materials to be used in the construction of such building or
such spaces as may be designated by the approved plans for stairways and
shafts, shall be thoroughly planked over.
§ 265-43. Protection of floor openings.
All floor openings within a building in the course of construction shall be
enclosed or fenced in on all sides by a barrier of suitable height, except on
those sides which may be used for the handling of materials hoisted through
such openings or at which stairs or ladders land, provided that such sides,
§ 265-39 MALVERNE CODE § 265-43
1:134
other than landings, shall be guarded by an adjustable barrier not less than
three feet nor more than four feet from the floor and not less than two feet
from the edge of such opening.
§ 265-44. Weather protection.
Whenever permission has been given, under any of the provisions of this
chapter, to enter any adjoining building, the person who receives such
permission or who is responsible for the work requiring such permission
shall provide for such adjoining building adequate protection against the
weather.
§ 265-45. Cellar drainage.
Before the foundation walls of any building are completed, provision shall
be made to prevent water accumulating in the excavation or cellar, to the
injury of the foundation, and, if there is a sewer in the street, the cellar shall
also be connected therewith.
§ 265-46. Overloading prohibited.
No building or part thereof, or any temporary support or scaffolding in
connection therewith, shall be loaded during erection, alteration or
demolition in excess of its safe carrying capacity.
§ 265-47. Precautions during demolition.
In demolishing any building or part thereof, story after story shall be
completely removed. No material shall be stored upon a floor of any
building in the course of demolition, but old material shall be lowered to the
ground immediately upon displacement. The material to be removed shall
be properly wet to lay the dust incident to its removal.
§ 265-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-47
1:135

ARTICLE IV
Excavations and Foundations
§ 265-48. Excavations.
A. Safeguarding generally. Until provisions for permanent support have
been made, all excavations shall be properly guarded and protected by
the person causing the excavation to be made so as to prevent the same
from becoming dangerous to life or limb and shall be sheet-piled,
braced or shored, where necessary, to prevent the adjoining earth from
caving in.
B. Support of neighboring walls.
(1) When the excavation exceeds 10 feet. Whenever an excavation is
intended to be, or shall be, carried to the depth of more than 10 feet
below the curb, the person causing such excavation to be made
shall at all times, if afforded the necessary license to enter upon the
adjoining land, and not otherwise, at his own expense, preserve and
protect from injury any wall, building or structure, the safety of
which may be affected by said excavation, and support the same by
proper foundations, whether said wall, building or structure is
down more or less than 10 feet below the curb. If the necessary
license is not accorded to the person making such excavation, then
it shall be the duty of the owner refusing to grant such license to
make such wall, building or structure safe and to support the same
by proper foundations; and, when necessary for that purpose, such
owner shall be permitted to enter upon the premises where such
excavation is to be made.
(2) When the excavation does not exceed 10 feet. If such excavation is
not intended to be, or shall not be, carried to a depth of more than
10 feet below the curb, the owner of any wall, building or structure,
the safety of which may be affected by said excavation, shall
preserve and protect the same from injury and support the same by
proper foundations and, when necessary for that purpose, shall be
permitted to enter upon the premises where such excavation is to
be made. In case such wall, building or structure, however, is so
located that the curb to which it is properly referred is at a higher
level than the curb to which the excavation is referred, such part of
any necessary underpinning or foundation as may be due to the
difference in curb levels shall be made and maintained at the joint
expense of the person causing the excavation to be made and the
owner of such wall, building or structure.
C. Support of party wall. In case an adjoining party wall is intended to be
used by the person causing the excavation to be made and such party
wall is in good condition and sufficient for the uses of the existing and
proposed buildings, the person causing the excavation to be made shall,
at his own expense, preserve such party wall from injury and support
§ 265-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-48
1:137
the same by proper foundations, so that said party wall shall be and
remain practically as safe as before the excavation was commenced.
D. Superintendent of Buildings may act. If the person whose duty it shall
be under the provisions of this chapter to properly guard and protect an
excavation, or to prevent adjoining earth from caving in or to preserve
or protect any wall, building or structure from injury, shall neglect or
fail to do so after having had a notice of 24 hours from the
Superintendent of Buildings, such Superintendent may enter upon the
premises and employ such labor, and furnish such materials and take
such steps as, in his judgment, may be necessary to prevent the same
from becoming unsafe or dangerous, at the expense of the person
whose duty it is to keep the same safe and secure. The Village of
Malverne or any person doing the work, or any part thereof, under and
by direction of the Superintendent of Buildings, may bring and maintain
an action against the person last herein referred to, to recover the value
of the work done and materials furnished in and about the premises, in
the same manner as if he had been employed to do the work by the
person. Alternatively; all costs incurred as a result of the excavation
process by the Village to protect and safeguard the area may be
assessed on the property tax roll in the event the owner has failed to
safeguard the area as requested by the Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 265-48 MALVERNE CODE § 265-48
1:138
ARTICLE V
Chimneys and Heating Appliances
§ 265-49. Definitions; notice of installation.
§ 265-50. Heat-producing devices.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHIMNEY — That part of a building which contains one or more flues
for transmitting the products of combustion from some fireplace or
heating device to the outer air, and includes the fireplace when there is
one.
DUCT — A passage constructed of sheet metal or other approved
incombustible material and used only for the transmission of air,
whether fresh, heated or vitiated.
FLUE — A passage, enclosed on all sides with solid masonry or
reinforced concrete, and used only for the transmission of air, whether
fresh, heated or vitiated, or the products of combustion from solid fuel
or liquid fuel, and designated respectively as a "vent flue" or "smoke
flue."
SMOKE PIPE — A passage constructed of metal and used as an
intermediate connection between a heat-producing device and a
chimney or metal stack for the transmission of the products of
combustion.
B. Notice of installation. In case heat-producing appliances or furnaces
are hereafter placed in any building, or flues or fireplaces are installed,
changed or enlarged, and such installation or alteration necessitates
any change in any structural parts of the building, due notice shall be
given to the Superintendent of Buildings by the person doing such work
or causing the same to be done, and a permit secured from him if
necessary. In all instances, all work shall be in conformance to the New
York State Building and Fire Codes.
A. For the purpose of this article, heat-producing devices shall be graded
as:
(1) Low, including baker's ovens; boiling vats; candy furnaces; clay,
coke and gypsum tripoli kilns; coffee-roasting ovens; cooking
ranges; core ovens; cruller furnaces; drying furnaces by spent
materials; feed-drying ovens; fertilizer-drying ovens; forge
furnaces; gas-producers gypsum kilns; hardening furnaces (below
dark red); hot-air engine furnaces; hot-air heating furnaces; hot
water and low-pressure steam heating boilers; japanning ovens;
ladle-drying furnaces; lead-melting furnaces; rosin-melting
furnaces, steratype furnaces; sulphur furnaces; type-foundry
furnaces; wood-drying furnaces; wood-impregnating furnaces.
§ 265-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-50
1:139
§ 265-51. Chimneys.
(2) Medium, including alabaster gypsum kilns; charcoal furnaces;
direct fire-heated feed driers; direct fire-heated fertilizer driers;
direct fire-heated pulp driers, galvanizing furnaces; glass factory
lehrs and glory holes; hardening furnaces (cherry to pale red); lime
kilns; porcelain biscuit kilns; smokehouses; steam boilers, other
than low-pressure heating boilers; water-glass kilns; wooddistilling
furnaces; wood gas retorts.
(3) High, including annealing furnaces; Bessemer retorts; billet and
bloom furnaces; blast furnaces; bone-calcining furnaces; brass
furnaces; carbon-point furnaces; cement, brick and tile kilns; coal
and water gas retorts; cupolas; earthenware kilns; gas blow
furnaces; glass-smelting furnaces; glass kilns; open-hearth
furnaces; ore-roasting furnaces; porcelain baking and glazing kilns;
pot arches; puddling furnaces; regenerative furnaces;
reverberatory furnaces; stacks, carburetor or superheating
furnaces in water gas works; welding furnaces; wood carbonizing
furnaces.
B. In doubtful cases, the Superintendent of Buildings shall by a rule
designate the grade of any heat-producing device, being governed in
doing so by the degree and amount of heat transmitted.
A. Construction. Except as in this article otherwise provided, every
chimney hereafter erected shall be of brick or stone laid in cement
mortar, or of reinforced concrete, extending above the highest point of
the roof and at least four feet above the highest point of contact with
the roof. Every chimney shall be properly capped with terra-cotta,
stone, cast iron or other approved incombustible, weatherproof
material, except that on buildings 40 feet or less in height, the top
courses of a brick chimney may be finished off by being carefully
bonded and anchored together to serve as coping.
B. Supports. All chimneys shall be wholly supported by stone, brick or selfsupporting
fireproof construction. No chimney shall rest or be built
upon any wood construction.
C. Flues for low-grade devices. The smoke flues of stoves, cooking ranges,
hot-air, hot-water and low-pressure steam heating furnaces, and all
other heat-producing devices graded as "low," shall be encased in
brickwork or concrete not less than eight inches thick, except for smoke
flues exclusively used for ordinary stoves, ranges, or open fireplaces,
when no combustible studding, furring or sheathing is placed against it,
such brickwork or concrete may be reduced to not less than four inches.
In chimneys of stone, the stone work of such flues shall be four inches
thicker than required for brick. Every flue coming under the provisions
of this subsection, hereafter erected, shall be of well-burnt terra-cotta
pipe from the bottom of the flue or from the throat of the fireplace if the
flue starts from a fireplace, for the entire height of the chimney. Such
§ 265-50 MALVERNE CODE § 265-51
1:140
lining pipes shall be built in as the flues are carried up, laid end to
end in cement mortar so as to make a smooth flue. Where two or more
smoke flues are contained in the same chimney, the withes shall be
either brick not less than four inches thick or concrete or grout not
less than one inch thick; provided, however, that every third with shall
consist of brick.
D. Flues for medium-grade devices. The smoke flues of high-pressure
steam boilers, smokehouses and all other heat-producing devices
graded as "medium" shall be encased in brickwork or concrete not less
than eight inches thick, or stonework not less than 12 inches thick, and
in addition shall be lined with not less than four inches of firebrick, laid
in fire mortar, for a distance of at least 25 feet from the point where the
smoke connection of the device enters the flue.
E. Flues for high-grade devices. The smoke flues of cupolas, brass
furnaces, porcelain baking kilns and all other heat-producing devices
graded as "high" shall be built with double walls, each not less than
eight inches in thickness, with an air space of not less than two inches
between them. The inside of the interior walls shall be of firebrick not
less than four inches in thickness.
F. Certain flues required. In every building hereafter erected exceeding
40 feet in height, where one or more smoke flues start from the cellar or
lowest story, at least one such flue shall have an internal cross-sectional
area of not less than 96 square inches and shall start not less than three
feet below the ceiling. No flue hereafter erected shall have smoke pipe
connections in more than one story of a building.
G. Flues to be clean and chimney safe. Upon the completion of any new
building or an alteration in any flues of an existing building, the flues
shall be properly cleaned and left smooth on the inside. Any chimney
which shall be deemed unsafe by the Superintendent of Buildings shall
be repaired and made safe or taken down.
H. Unlawful use of flues. It shall be unlawful to use as a smoke flue any flue
hereafter erected or placed in any building or any flue now existing and
not already used as a smoke flue, unless it conforms to the
requirements of this section. Nothing in this article, however, shall
prevent the use of approved metal flue linings for the repair or
alteration of flues in residence buildings.
I. Raising adjoining chimneys.
(1) Whenever a building, wall or structure is hereafter erected,
altered, enlarged or raised so that any of the walls, whether
independent or partly along a property line or within three feet
thereof, extends above the top of any chimney, smoke flue or
smokestack of an adjoining building or structure, the owner of the
building, wall or structure so erected, altered, enlarged or raised
shall, at his own expense, carry up, either independently or in his
own building, wall or structure, all chimneys, smoke flues and
§ 265-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-51
1:141
§ 265-52. Fireplaces.
smokestacks of such adjoining building or structure within 10 feet
of any portion of the wall extending above such chimney, flue or
stack. The construction of such chimneys, flues or stacks shall
conform to the requirements of this article applying thereto, but in
no case shall the interior area of any flue or stack as raised be less
than that of the existing flue or stack. All such chimneys, flues or
stacks shall be carried above the walls in question to the heights
prescribed and shall furthermore be so constructed, supported and
braced as to be at all times safe.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner of the building, wall or structure to
be erected, altered, enlarged or raised to notify in writing, at least
10 days before such work is begun, the owner of the chimneys,
flues or stacks affected, of his intention to carry up such chimneys,
flues or stacks as herein provided, and unless released in writing,
he shall carry up such chimneys, flues or stacks simultaneously
with the walls.
A. Firebacks. The firebacks of all fireplaces hereafter erected shall be not
less than eight inches in thickness of solid masonry. A lining of firebrick
or other approved material at least two inches thick shall be provided
unless the fireback is 12 inches in thickness.
B. Trimmer arches. All fireplaces and chimney breasts where mantels are
placed, whether intended for ordinary fireplace use or not, shall have
trimmer arches of fireproof construction supporting hearths. The
arches and hearths shall be at least 20 inches in width measured from
the face of the chimney breast. Trimmer arches shall be of brick, stone,
terra-cotta or reinforced concrete. The length of the trimmer arch shall
not be less than the width of the chimney breast, and the length of the
hearth shall be not less than the width of the mantel. The hearths shall
be of brick, stone, tile or other approved fireproof material. The
combined thickness of trimmer arch and hearth shall at no point be less
than six inches. Wood centers under trimmer arches shall be removed
before plastering the ceiling and underneath.
C. Heaters. No heaters shall be placed in a fireplace which does not
conform to the foregoing requirements of this section.
D. Mantels. No wood mantel or other woodwork shall be hereafter placed
within eight inches on either side nor within 12 inches of the top of any
open fireplace. If a coal-burning heater is placed in a fireplace, any
mantel that may be provided shall be of incombustible material. No
combustible summer piece or fireboard shall be used in connection with
any open fireplace. All spaces back of combustible mantels shall be
solidly filled in with incombustible material.
§ 265-51 MALVERNE CODE § 265-52
1:142
§ 265-53. Metal smokestacks.
§ 265-54. Cupola chimneys.
Chimneys of cupola furnaces, blast furnaces and similar devices shall
extend at least 20 feet above the highest point of any roof within a radius
of 50 feet thereof and be covered on the top with wire netting or another
approved spark-arrester. No woodwork shall be within three feet of any part
of such device or its chimney.
E. False fireplaces. False fireplaces using summer pieces or fireboards
shall not be placed in any building except against an unfurred masonry
or fireproof partition.
A. Construction. Metal smokestacks must be constructed in accordance
with the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
B. Height. All such stacks serving high-grade heat-producing devices shall
extend to a height of not less than that required by the New York State
Building Codes.
C. Independent stacks. All such stacks hereafter erected outside and
independent of any building shall be supported on a substantial
masonry foundation.
D. Exterior stacks. Any such stacks or any part thereof hereafter erected
on the immediate exterior of the building it serves shall be braced to
such building at least every 20 feet. It shall have a clearance of not less
than four inches from the walls of a fireproof or non-fireproof building
and not less than 24 inches from the walls of a frame building; and a
clearance of not less than 24 inches in any direction from any wall
opening, fire escape or exit facility, unless such stack is insulated in
some approved manner, in which case the clearances herein provided
may be reduced by an amount fixed by the Superintendent of Buildings
when approving the insulation.
E. Interior stacks. Any such stack or part thereof hereafter erected within
any building shall be enclosed in walls of approved masonry; or, if in a
fireproof building, such stack or part thereof shall be enclosed in walls
of brick, terra-cotta blocks or concrete not less than eight inches thick,
with a space left between the stack and the enclosing walls sufficient to
render the entire stack accessible for examination and repair. The
enclosing walls shall be without openings above the story at which it
starts.
F. Prohibition. Smokestacks shall not be carried up inside of vent stacks or
flues connected to ranges, unless such vent stacks or flues are
constructed as required by this article for smokestacks or smoke flues.
§ 265-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-55
1:143
§ 265-55. Underground flues.
Underground smoke flues shall be covered with at least 12 inches of solid
masonry, or an approved equivalent insulation. If clean-out openings are
installed, they shall be provided with approved double iron doors or covers,
of which the two parts are 12 inches apart, with the intervening space filled
with insulating material. No combustible flooring shall be laid over any such
flues.
§ 265-56. Ranges.
§ 265-57. Registers.
All registers used in hot-air furnace heating systems, placed in any
woodwork or incombustible floor, shall rest upon stone or iron borders
firmly set in plaster of paris or gauged mortar. All register boxes used in
any such heating system shall be made of tin plate or galvanized iron with
a flange to fit the rabbet in the border. The register box shall be enclosed in
a tin or galvanized iron casing turned under the border and spaced at least
two inches from the sides of box. Such casing shall extend from the border
to and through the ceiling below in the case of a floor register and through
the partition in the case of a wall register. When a register box is placed in
the floor over a portable furnace, the space on all sides between the casing
and the register box shall be not less than four inches. Every hot-air furnace
shall have at least one register without a valve or louvers.
§ 265-58. Vent flues.
Flues hereafter erected for the removal of foul air or the transmission of
heated air shall be encased in masonry not less than four inches thick and
shall be lined with terra-cotta or other approved incombustible material.
Not more than one gas-burning device shall be direct-connected with any
flue, not shall any such device be connected to any flue used as a smoke
flue.
§ 265-59. Ducts.
A. Commercial kitchen ranges. When kitchen ranges are to be installed in
any building hereafter erected, all commercially used installations shall
be with an exhaust hood and fire suppression system as per the New
York State codes.
B. Hoods over ranges. All hoods and ducts for same placed over
commercially used ranges shall be constructed of incombustible
materials as per the New York State Mechanical Code.
A. General. Except as may be otherwise specifically permitted or
prescribed, the transmission of air through buildings for heating or
ventilation shall be by means of ducts constructed in conformity with
the New York State Mechanical Code.
§ 265-55 MALVERNE CODE § 265-59
1:144
§ 265-60. Smoke pipes.
B. Casing. No casing, furring or lath of wood shall be placed against or
cover a duct of any kind; but this shall not prevent the placing of
woodwork on a covering over such ducts of metal lath and plaster,
plaster board, provided the thickness of the covering is not less than 7/8
of an inch or minimum per code.
C. In partitions. Ducts hereafter placed in combustible partitions shall be
placed in accordance with the New York State Building Codes.
D. In floors. Ducts hereafter placed between the flooring and ceiling of
non-fireproof floors shall be in accordance with the New York State
Building Codes.
E. In closets. Ducts hereafter placed in closets or similar concealed spaces
shall be double with a one-and-one-half-inch air space, or shall be
covered with approved noncombustible material as per the Building
Codes. When constructed double, the outside pipe shall be not less than
No. 18 United States gauge, and not less than one inch from any
woodwork.
F. Passing through partitions and floors. Ducts hereafter placed to pass
through combustible partitions or floors shall be constructed double,
with a one-and-one-half-inch air space open at one end, or shall be
covered with approved incombustible insulation not less than one inch
thick.
G. Horizontal ducts. Ducts used for hot-air furnace heating hereafter
placed under cellar ceilings shall be at least six inches below wood floor
beams, wood lath plaster ceilings or other combustible materials; but if
such combustible construction is protected by metal lath and plaster or
any other material in accordance with the New York State Building
Code, the distance may be not less than three inches.
H. Cold-air ducts. The cold-air ducts of any heating system shall be of
metal or other approved fireproof material.
I. Hot-air-ducts. No hot-air furnace duct shall be placed in any floor,
partition or enclosure of combustible construction, unless it is at least
eight feet distant in a horizontal direction from the furnace.
A. Restriction. No smoke pipe shall pass through any floor or through any
non-fireproof roof. The construction and installation of any smoke pipe
shall be in conformity with the New York State Building Code.
B. Clearance. The distance between any smoke pipe or metal breeching
and any combustible material or construction shall be not less than 18
inches in the case of low-grade heat-producing devices, nor less than 36
inches for medium- or high-grade heat-producing devices, except that,
when such smoke pipes or breechings are protected with not less than
two inches of material approved in the New York State Building Code,
§ 265-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-60
1:145
§ 265-61. Steam and hot-water pipes.
or in some other approved manner, such clearances may be reduced
by 1/2, and that, in the case of smoke pies used in ordinary ranges
and stoves in multiple dwellings or other residence buildings having
not more than 15 sleeping rooms, such clearances may be not less than
nine inches when the combustible material or construction is protected
by material approved in the New York State Building Code, not less
than 18 inches when not so protected.
C. Protection through partitions. Smoke pipes from ordinary ranges and
stoves in residence buildings may pass through combustible partitions,
provided every such pipe is guarded by a double metal ventilated
thimble 12 inches larger in diameter than the pipe, or by a metal tube
built in brickwork or other approved fireproof materials, not less than
eight inches thick on all sides of the tube.
A. Protection. Steam or hot-water pipes shall not be placed nearer than
one inch to any woodwork unless the woodwork is covered with metal,
in which case the distance shall not be less than one-half inch. Every
steam or hot-water heating pipe passing through a combustible floor or
partition shall be protected by a metal tube one inch larger in diameter
than the pipe. Any such pipe passing through stock shelving shall be
covered with not less than one inch of approved insulation. All wood
boxes or casing enclosing steam or hot-water heating pipes, or wood
covers to recesses in walls in which such pipes are placed, shall be lined
with metal.
B. Pipe coverings. Any coverings or insulation used on steam or hot-water
pipes shall be of incombustible material.
§ 265-60 MALVERNE CODE § 265-61
1:146
ARTICLE VI
Roofing and Roof Structures
§ 265-62. General.
Except when otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, all
construction other than water tanks hereafter placed above the roof of any
part of any building shall be of materials in accordance with the New York
State Codes.
§ 265-63. Roofing.
§ 265-64. Cornices and gutters.
§ 265-65. Leaders.
All buildings shall be provided with proper leaders for conducting water
from the roofs. In no case shall the water from leaders be allowed to
flow upon the sidewalk, but it shall be conducted by pipe or pipes to the
appropriate storm drainage system. If there is no storm drainage in the
A. Materials. Except as otherwise in this chapter specifically provided,
every roof hereafter placed on any building or part thereof shall be
covered with an approved roofing of brick, concrete, tile, slate, metal,
slag, gravel or other approved incombustible material.
B. Planking. When wood planking or sheathing is permitted in roof
construction, it shall not, in any case, extend across any side or party
walls.
C. Repairs. No roofing on any existing roof shall be renewed or repaired,
except in conformity with the requirements of this section; provided,
however, that when the renewal or necessary repairs do not constitute
more than 1/4 of the roofing in any one roof surface, the new work may
be made to conform to the existing roofing.
A. Construction. All cornices, inclusive of those on show windows, and
gutters hereafter placed on the exterior of any building, except
buildings that are permitted to be of frame construction, shall be of
incombustible materials. When constructed of sheet metal, they shall
be riveted in the seams at intervals of not more than five inches.
Cornices shall be secured to the walls with metal framing or anchors
spaced not more than four feet apart, and extending not less than four
inches into the wall at top and bottom.
B. Repairs. All cornices or gutters that may now be or that may hereafter
become unsafe shall be taken down and, if replaced, shall be
constructed to conform to the requirements for new cornices, except
that when any such cornice or gutter is not damaged to a greater extent
than 1/2, it may be repaired with the same material as originally
constructed.
§ 265-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-65
1:147
street, then the water from the leader shall be conducted by proper pipe or
pipes below the surface of a street gutter, or to a storm drain pool.
§ 265-66. Skylights.
§ 265-67. Scuttles.
Unless provided with some other means of access to the roof, every building
more than 15 feet high, except dwellings with peak roofs, shall have in the
roof a scuttle, with a substantial iron ladder leading thereto. All scuttles
shall be covered on the top and edges with sheet metal or other approved
incombustible material. The scuttle openings shall be at least two feet by
three feet in size.
§ 265-68. Slanting roofs; dormers.
§ 265-69. Tanks.
A. Construction. All skylights hereafter placed in any building shall have
the sashes and frames thereof constructed of metal, except that
skylights in foundries or buildings where acid fumes are present as an
incident to the occupancy of the building may be of wood, in the
discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings. The frames and other
parts of metal skylights shall be riveted or otherwise securely fastened,
in addition to soldering, and shall be securely anchored to the
supporting structure.
B. Glazing. Skylights placed over shafts of any kind shall be glazed with
glass as per the New York State Energy Conservation Code.
C. Protection. Every skylight in which plain glass is used shall be
protected or glazed in accordance with the New York State Building
Code.
A. Construction. Every mansard or other slanting roof having a pitch of
more than 60°, hereafter placed on a non-fireproof building over 40 feet
high, shall be constructed of fireproof materials.
B. Dormer windows. Every dormer window hereafter erected shall be
constructed in the same manner as the roof on which it is placed. The
sides and top shall be covered with any of the materials approved for
roofing.
A. Supports. Tanks of more than 500 gallons' capacity, hereafter placed in
or on any building, shall be supported on masonry, reinforced concrete
or steel construction of sufficient strength and carried to a proper
foundation, and must be enclosed on all sides by brick or masonry so as
to conform to the construction of the main building.
B. Emergency outlet. Every such tank shall have in the bottom or on the
side near the bottom a pipe or outlet not less than four inches in
§ 265-65 MALVERNE CODE § 265-69
1:148
§ 265-70. Cooling towers.
Cooling towers hereafter erected above any roof shall be of incombustible
material, except the drip bars, which may be of wood.
diameter, fitted with a suitable quick-opening valve for discharging the
contents in an emergency.
C. Location. Such tanks shall not be placed over nor near a line of stairs or
an elevator shaft, unless there is a solid roof or floor underneath the
tank.
D. Covers. All unenclosed roof tanks shall have covers, with proper slope.
E. Hoops. When hoops are used in the construction of tanks they shall be
of metal, round in section.
§ 265-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-70
1:149

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Requirements
§ 265-71. Cellar ceilings.
In any building hereafter erected or altered so as to change its occupancy,
except one-story buildings outside of the fire limits and buildings occupied
exclusively for residence purposes by one or two families, the wood beams
over the cellar, or over the lowest story if such story is partly below the
curb or the surrounding ground level, when the curb level has not been
established, shall be covered with metal lath and plaster, plaster board or
other approved incombustible material.
§ 265-72. Cellar floors.
In all buildings hereafter erected, the cellar floor or any floor resting
directly on the ground shall consist of concrete no less than four inches
thick.
§ 265-73. Cellar partitions.
In all non-fireproof buildings, except buildings occupied exclusively for
residence purposes by one or two families, permanent partitions in the
cellar, or in any story more than 1/2 below the curb, shall be constructed
of incombustible materials, unless such partitions enclose only coal or wood
bins and do not extend to the ceiling.
§ 265-74. Waterproofing.
In all buildings hereafter erected, the exterior walls below the ground
level and floors below the curb level resting directly on the ground shall,
when required, be waterproof in accordance with the rules adopted by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 265-75. Floor lights.
Floor lights shall be constructed of metal frames and bars or plates,
reinforced concrete or other approved incombustible material. If any glass
in same measures more than 16 square inches, it shall be provided with a
mesh of wire either in the glass or under the same. Floor lights shall be of
the same strength as the floors in which they are placed. Glass shall not be
less than 3/4 of an inch in thickness.
§ 265-76. Cutting beams.
No beams shall be cut or pierced in any manner that would cause the beam
to be of insufficient strength for its load.
§ 265-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-77
1:151
§ 265-77. Bay and show window construction.
Bay windows and show windows that extend beyond the exterior walls,
hereafter constructed or placed on any fireproof or non-fireproof building
within the fire limits, shall be constructed of incombustible materials and
in such manner as will meet with the approval of the Superintendent of
Buildings.
§ 265-77 MALVERNE CODE § 265-77
1:152
ARTICLE VIII
Frame Buildings
§ 265-78. Frame construction.
The wood framework of all frame buildings shall be made of and
constructed in conformity with the New York State Building Code, including
sills, posts, girts, plates and floor beams.
§ 265-79. Roofing.
Any roofing hereafter placed on any frame building within the fire limits
shall be of incombustible materials and in conformity with the New York
State Building Code.
§ 265-80. Minor structures; sheds.
§ 265-81. Temporary structures.
A. Within the Village, sheds that do not require a permit shall not be
constructed or built which exceed 12 feet in height or cover an area
exceeding 100 square feet and shall not be placed nearer than two feet
to any property line. All such structures shall be subject to inspection by
the Superintendent of Buildings, and any violation of these provisions
or any provision of the New York State Building Code will result in a
violation summons in the Malverne Village Court, with penalties as
outlined in the enforcement provision of the code.56
B. It is impermissible to construct any outhouse or builders' shanties
without the permission of authority of the Superintendent of Buildings
pertaining to any related construction project.
A. Meaning. Temporary structures shall be taken to mean platforms,
reviewing stands, gospel tents, circus tents and other structures that
are erected to serve their purpose for a limited time.
B. Permit. Temporary structures shall not be erected until a permit,
specifying the purpose and the period of maintenance, shall have been
obtained from the Superintendent of Buildings.
C. How located. Within the fire limits, no temporary structure which is
enclosed in any manner shall be placed on any lot nearer than four feet
to the lot line.
D. Removal. Every temporary structure shall be removed at the expiration
of the period for which the permit was issued, unless such permit is
renewed.
E. Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful to use any temporary structure for
any other purpose than that designated in the permit.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-82
1:153
§ 265-82. Miscellaneous frame structures.
Frame structures which are of an unusual character and to which the
provisions of this chapter do not directly apply, including, among others,
buildings for fair and exhibition purposes, towers for observation,
amusement devices, greenhouses and lumber sheds and temporary
structures of any kind, shall be erected in conformity to such rules,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter and securing the general
intent thereof, as may be adopted by the Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 265-83. Residence garages.
A. A garage, to contain no more than two automobiles, may be built as part
of a residence, provided that the walls separating the garage from the
residence portion of the house are built of fire-rated materials and/or
assembly per the New York State Residential Building Code.
B. One door opening may be permitted from the residential portion to the
garage, provided that said door is an approved self-closing fireproof
door per the New York State Residential Building Code.
C. All plans for interior walls and ceilings of such garage must be
submitted for approval to the Superintendent of Buildings in order to
ensure proper fireproof materials are utilized and the construction
complies with the New York State Residential Building Code.
§ 265-82 MALVERNE CODE § 265-83
1:154
ARTICLE IX
Buildings of Public Character
§ 265-84. Public safety.
In all buildings of a public character, such as hotels, churches, theaters,
restaurants, railroad depots, public halls and other buildings used or
intended to be used for purposes of public assembly, amusement or
instruction, and including department stores and other business and
manufacturing buildings where large numbers of people are congregated,
the halls, doors, stairways, seats, passageways and aisles, and all lighting
and heating appliances and apparatus shall be arranged as the Fire
Commissioner shall direct, to facilitate egress in cases of fire or accident
and to afford the requisite and proper accommodation for the public
protection in such cases.
§ 265-85. Aisles and passageways.
All aisles and passageways in said buildings shall be kept free from camp
stools, chairs, sofas and other obstructions, and no person shall be allowed
to stand in or occupy any of said aisles or passageways during any
performance, service, exhibition, lecture, concert, hall or any public
assemblage.
§ 265-86. Enforcement.
The Superintendent of Buildings may at any time serve a written or printed
notice upon the owner, lessee or manager of any said buildings, directing
any act or thing to be done or provided in or about the buildings and
the several appliances therewith connected, such as halls, doors, stairs,
windows, seats, aisles, fire walls, fire apparatus and fire escapes, as he may
deem necessary.
§ 265-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-86
1:155

ARTICLE X
Motion-Picture Theaters
§ 265-87. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, as used in this article, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MOTION PICTURE — A display on a screen or other device of pictures or
objects in motion or rapidly changing scenery, whether or not such display
shall be accompanied by a lecture, recitation or vocal or instrumental
music.
MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any public hall or room in which motion
pictures are displayed, in which the seating capacity does not exceed 600
persons and in which there is no stage or scenery.
OPEN-AIR MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any public place or space in the
open air in which motion pictures are exhibited and in which there is no
stage or scenery.
§ 265-88. Plans.
Before the erection, construction or alteration of a building or part thereof
to be used as a motion-picture theater, there must be filed with the
Superintendent of Buildings the detailed statement of the specifications
therefor required by § 265-2B of this chapter. The plans must show clearly
and fully the location and width of all aisles, passageways, exits, stairways
and fire escapes; the arrangement of seats; the size of floor beams, walls
and supports; the location and construction of the enclosure for the motionpicture
machinery and other apparatus; a diagram of the lot or plot upon
which the theater is to be erected or constructed, showing the outlets from
all exits; and such other statements, plans and details as may be required
by the Superintendent of Buildings having jurisdiction.
§ 265-89. Location restrictions.
No motion-picture theater as defined aforesaid shall be constructed in a
frame building nor in a hotel, multiple dwelling or lodging house, nor in a
factory or workshop, except where the theater is separated from the rest of
the building by unpierced firewalls and floors, and in no case shall such a
theater be constructed or operated above or below the ground floor of any
building.
§ 265-90. Construction.
In all motion-picture theaters as defined aforesaid, to be hereafter
constructed, the following requirements shall be complied with:
A. Ceilings. The ceilings of all theaters and of all rooms used in connection
therewith shall be plastered with three coats of first-class plaster on
wire mesh or metal lath or covered with 5/8-inch plaster boards, and
§ 265-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-90
1:157
§ 265-91. Means of egress.
plastered or covered with metal or equivalent in accordance with state
codes. If there is a basement or cellar, the ceiling under the floor of the
theater must be plastered with three coats of first-class plaster or wire
mesh or expanded metal lath, or may be covered with metal on 5/8-inch
plaster boards or equivalent in accordance with state codes.
B. Floor loads. The flooring of that portion of the building devoted to the
uses or accommodation of the public must be of sufficient strength to
bear safely a live load in accordance with state codes.
C. Galleries and stairways. A gallery may be permitted, except in a theater
constructed on a lot less than 20 feet in width, but it shall not include
more than 25% of the total seating capacity of the theater. Entrance to
an exit from the gallery shall in no case lead to the main floor of the
theater, and the gallery shall be provided with a stairway or stairways
equipped with handrails on both sides. Stairways over five feet wide
shall be provided with center handrails. The risers of the stairways shall
not exceed seven inches, and the treads, excluding noses, shall not be
less than 11 inches. There shall be no circular or winding stairways. The
total width of the stairways shall not be less than what is in accordance
with the state codes. Stairways shall be constructed of fireproof
material, and such material and the bearing capacity of such stairways
shall be approved by the Superintendent of Buildings.
D. Gradients. To overcome any difference of level between corridors,
lobbies and aisles in a theater, gradients of not over one foot in 10 feet,
or steps having a rise not over seven inches and a width of not less than
11 inches, shall be used.
E. Walls. If the walls of the theater contain wooden studs, they shall be
covered either with expanded metal lath or wire mesh and plastered
with three coats of first-class plaster, or with metal on 5/8-inch plaster
boards, or code-approved equal, and all joints shall be properly filled
with mortar/spackle.
A. Aisles. All aisles in a motion-picture theater or in a gallery thereof must
be at least three feet eight inches in the clear.
B. Chair space. All chairs in such theater, except those contained in the
boxes, must not be less than in accordance with state codes from back
to back and must be firmly secured to the floor; no seat shall have more
than in accordance with the state code intervening between it and an
aisle, and the space occupied by each person shall be separated from
the adjoining space by means of an arm or other suitable device.
C. Exits. A building to be erected or to be altered for use as a motionpicture
theater must be provided with exits in accordance with the New
York State Building and Fire Codes.
§ 265-90 MALVERNE CODE § 265-91
1:158
§ 265-92. Booth for projecting machine and film.
§ 265-93. Existing theaters.
§ 265-94. Open-air motion-picture theaters.
The seating capacity of each open-air motion-picture theater as
hereinbefore defined in this article shall be such as shall be prescribed
by the Village Board. All such theaters shall conform to the following
requirements:
D. Exit passageway to street. In any such building, if an unobstructed exit
to a street cannot be provided at the rear thereof as herein specified,
either an open court or a fireproof passageway or corridor must be
provided, extending from the rear exit to the street front in accordance
with the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
E. Fire escapes. Galleries must also be provided with exits in accordance
with the New York State Building and Fire Codes.
A. Apparatus for projecting motion pictures shall be contained in a
fireproof booth or enclosure constructed as required by law. The booth
in which the picture machine is operated shall be provided with an
opening, in its roof or in the upper part of its side walls, leading to the
outdoor air, and with a vent flue which shall have a minimum crosssectional
area of 50 square inches and shall be fireproof. When the
booth is in use, there shall be a constant current of air passing outward
through said opening or vent flue at the rate of not less than state code
requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to portable
booths and booths in open-air theaters, as well as to motion-picture
theaters.
B. Booths will not be required in small auditoriums or meeting rooms
where noninflammable films and type of machines are used for
projecting pictures.
A. All the provisions in this article shall apply to existing places of
entertainment where motion pictures are exhibited.
B. An existing place of entertainment seating 300 persons or less, where
motion pictures are exhibited in conjunction with any other form of
entertainment, must comply before a reissuance of its license, with the
provisions of §§ 265-95 and 265-96 of this chapter related to theaters
seating more than 300 persons. But, if such existing place of
entertainment shall discontinue all other forms of entertainment except
the exhibition of motion pictures, it may be licensed in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection A and the New York State Building Code.
A. Aisles. The number and width of all aisles shall be as prescribed by the
Village Board, but no aisle shall be less than state code requirements.
B. Exits. All exits shall be in accordance with state code requirements.
§ 265-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-94
1:159
C. Seats. Seats must be stationary, with backs in accordance with the
codes a distance apart and so arranged that no seat shall have more
than what is in accordance with the code between it and an aisle. Chairs
must be either securely fastened to a wood or concrete floor or all
chairs in a row must be fastened together, and at least four rows must
be securely fastened to one frame; except that where refreshments are
served, tables and unattached chairs or benches used with them may be
permitted.
D. Floors. The floor must be constructed either of wood with sleepers or
concrete.
E. Other regulations. In addition to the foregoing requirements, the
provisions of § 265-91B, D and § 265-92 of this article shall apply to all
open-air motion-picture theaters.
§ 265-94 MALVERNE CODE § 265-94
1:160
ARTICLE XI
Theaters and Other Places of Amusement
§ 265-95. Applicability.
Every theater or open house or other building intended to be used for
theatrical or operatic purposes, or for public entertainment of any kind,
hereafter erected for the accommodation of more than 300 persons shall
be built to comply with the requirements of this article. No building which
at the time of the passage of this chapter is not in actual use for theatrical
or operatic purposes, and no building hereafter erected not in conformity
with the requirements of this section, shall be used for theatrical or operatic
purposes or for public entertainments of any kind until the same shall have
been made to conform to the requirements of this article and the New York
State Building Code.
§ 265-96. Approval required.
No building described in the preceding section of this article shall be
opened to the public for theatrical or operatic purposes or for public
entertainments of any kind until the Fire Commissioner and the
Superintendent of Buildings shall have approved the same in writing as
conforming to the requirements of this article and the New York State
Building Code.
§ 265-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-96
1:161

ARTICLE XII
Elevators
§ 265-97. Compliance required.
§ 265-98. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Includes any essential change to the elevator car,
counterweights, rails, machinery, safeties or other equipment or direct
motive power, except that any repair work made necessary by the ordinary
operation of the elevator shall not be deemed an alteration.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes all mechanically operated devices which
are used to convey persons in any direction as a form of amusement.
DUMBWAITER — Shall apply to such special form of freight elevator,
whether power-driven or manually operated, the dimensions of which do not
exceed nine square feet in horizontal section nor four feet in height.
ELEVATOR — Any device within or in connection with a building or
structure used for carrying persons or things upward or downward.
ESCALATOR — Shall apply to a moving, continuously inclined stairway or
runway designed for elevating or lowering passengers.
EXISTING INSTALLATIONS — Shall apply to an elevator, machinery or
equipment used in connection therewith, either already installed, in process
of installation or for which plans are on file with the Superintendent of
Buildings prior to August 26, 1918.
FREIGHT CONVEYOR — Shall apply to a device used for elevating or
lowering freight in a vertical or inclined direction on a continuously moving
carrier, without the services of an operator thereon.
FREIGHT ELEVATOR — Includes any elevator designed and used for the
carrying of things and of such persons only as are necessary for its safe
operation or the handling of things carried by it.
FUTURE INSTALLATIONS — Shall apply to any elevator, machinery or
equipment used in connection therewith installed after these rules become
effective.
A. Every elevator, escalator, freight conveyor or amusement device within
the Village of Malverne, in addition to conforming to all provisions of
the Labor Law, Building Code or other laws or ordinances as are
applicable thereto, shall comply with the requirements of the rules
outlined in the New York State Building Code.
B. Existing and future installations shall at all times be maintained by the
owner in a safe condition and in conformity with the requirements of
the rules of the New York State Building Code.
§ 265-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-98
1:163
HAND-POWER ELEVATOR — Shall apply to such forms of passenger or
freight elevators which are manually operated, the dimensions of which
exceed nine square feet in horizontal section.
PASSENGER ELEVATOR — Includes any elevator designed and used for
carrying persons, other than those necessary for its safe operation or for
the handling of things carried by it.
POWER-DRIVEN ELEVATOR — Shall apply to any form of elevator except
those operated by hand power, gravity in both directions or through friction
grip on the pull rope.
SIDEWALK-TYPE ELEVATOR — Shall apply to such special form of freight
elevator, either power-driven or manually operated, the platform of which
does not exceed 50 square feet in area and is suspended or supported at
one or more points on the underside.
§ 265-99. Permit required.
No passenger or freight elevator shall hereafter be installed or altered in
any building nor shall any amusement device be hereafter constructed or
altered until the owner or lessee, or agent, architect or contractor of either
shall have submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings, in such form as
the Superintendent of Buildings may prescribe, an application accompanied
by plans and drawings showing the proposed construction and mode of
operation, and such application has been approved by the Superintendent
and a permit has been issued by him. Repairs to elevators and amusement
devices may be made without filing such application, except when such
repairs include a change in the type of elevator or of its motive power or
when any change in safety devices or operating mechanism is made.
§ 265-100. Certificate of safety inspection.
Whenever a passenger or freight elevator or an amusement device is
hereafter installed or constructed, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
lessee to operate or permit the operation or use of the same until a
certificate shall have been obtained from the Superintendent of Buildings
that such elevator or amusement device has been inspected and has been
found to be safe. The Superintendent of Buildings shall, within a reasonable
time after being requested to do so, inspect or cause to be inspected any
elevator or amusement device hereafter installed or constructed, and if the
same is found to be safe and in conformity to the requirements of this
article and the rules adopted hereunder, shall issue a certificate to that
effect. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary use, under a
certificate issued by the Superintendent of Buildings, of any elevator during
construction, provided a notice is conspicuously posted on or in connection
with such elevator to the effect that such elevator has not been officially
approved.
§ 265-98 MALVERNE CODE § 265-101
1:164
§ 265-101. Identification of passenger elevators; records.
Every passenger elevator shall be given a serial number for purposes
of identification. In the case of elevators hereafter installed, such serial
number shall be assigned when the first certificate is issued, and, in the
case of existing elevators, as soon as inspection can be made for that
purpose. A docket of all passenger elevators shall be kept, giving under
the corresponding serial number a description of its location sufficient for
identification, together with such other information, a type of construction,
together with such other information as the Superintendent of Buildings
may deem desirable, such as type of construction, motive power, rise, rated
speed, inspection, etc. The owner or lessee or agent of either shall cause
such number, together with the most recent certificate of inspection, to be
attached or posted in the elevator car in the manner prescribed in the rules.
§ 265-102. Inspection.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall cause an inspection of all passenger
elevators to be made at least once in every three months, and of freight
elevators and amusement devices at least twice in each year. Upon notice
from the Superintendent of Buildings, or his duly authorized representative,
any repairs found necessary to such elevators or amusement devices shall
be made without delay by the owner or lessee and, in case defects are
found to exist in the continued use of such elevator or amusement device as
are dangerous to life or limb, then the use of such elevator or amusement
device shall cease, and it shall not again be used until a certificate shall
be first obtained from said Superintendent of Buildings that such elevator
or amusement device has been made safe. After every inspection which
shows any elevator or amusement device to be safe and in conformity
with the requirements of this article and the rules adopted hereunder, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a certificate to that effect.
§ 265-103. Riding in freight elevators restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the operator or those
necessary to handle freight, to ride on, or for the owner or lessee of any
elevator knowingly permit any person to ride on, any elevator other than
a passenger elevator. Every freight elevator shall have a notice posted
conspicuously thereon as follows: "This is not a passenger elevator. It is
unlawful for any person other than the operator or those necessary to
handle freight to ride on this elevator."
§ 265-104. Operators.
Except as may be specifically provided in any other law or ordinance,
every passenger elevator, except full automatic push-button elevators and
escalators, must be in charge of a competent operator of reliable and
industrious habits, not less than 18 years of age, with sufficient previous
experience in running an elevator under the instruction of a competent
person. No operators of amusement devices known as electrically operated
§ 265-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-104
1:165
scenic railroads shall be employed who have not attained the age of 21
years and who have not secured a certificate of competency from the
Superintendent of Buildings. If the Superintendent shall find that the person
engaged in running an elevator is incompetent or not qualified, the owner
or lessee of such elevator shall, upon notice from the Superintendent of
Buildings, at once discontinue the operation of such elevator by such
operator. No person shall employ or permit any person to operate any
passenger elevator who does not possess the qualifications prescribed
therefor by this or any other law.
§ 265-105. Accidents.
The owner or lessee, or person in charge of any passenger or freight
elevator or amusement device shall immediately notify the Superintendent
of Buildings of each and every accident to a person or damage to apparatus
on, about or in connection with such elevator or amusement device, and
shall afford the Superintendent of Buildings or his representative every
facility for investigating such accident or damage. The Superintendent of
Buildings shall, without delay, after being notified, make an investigation,
and shall place on file in the Department of Buildings a full and complete
report of such investigation. Such report shall give in detail all material
facts and information available and the cause or causes so far as they can be
determined, and shall be open to public inspection at all reasonable hours.
When an accident involves the failure or destruction of any part of the
construction or operating mechanism of a passenger elevator or amusement
device, said passenger elevator or amusement device shall not be used until
it has been made safe, and the Superintendent of Buildings may, if deemed
necessary, order the discontinuance of the same until a certificate has been
issued by him for its use, but no part of the damaged construction or
operating mechanism shall be removed from the premises until permission
to do so has been granted by the Superintendent of Buildings or his
representative.
§ 265-106. Alterations.
§ 265-107. Change of classification.
A. In making alterations to existing installations, the parts changed or
altered must conform in every respect to the rules governing future
installations, and where parts of the elevator are damaged from any
cause, the damaged parts must be completely renewed, at the
discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings.
B. Where hand-power elevators are changed to power-driven elevators,
they shall conform to every rule governing power-driven elevators,
except in accordance with the state codes.
A. In future, no freight elevator shall be used for passenger service unless
such elevator conforms to the rules governing future installations of
passenger elevators insofar as they relate to safety equipment, hoist
§ 265-104 MALVERNE CODE § 265-107
1:166
ropes, carrying capacity, car enclosures, including gates and
emergency exit shaft openings and doors and motive power.
B. In existing installations where such change of classification is made and
the hatchway is unenclosed, a substantial enclosure of lawful partitions
extending from floor to ceiling and flush with the hatchway shall be
constructed, with all openings protected by proper shaft doors.
§ 265-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-107
1:167

ARTICLE XIII
Plumbing and Other Systems of Piping
§ 265-108. Rules; applicability to existing installations.
§ 265-109. Shut-off valves.
Every building hereafter erected and also every existing building, other
than residence buildings occupied exclusively by one or two families and
having not more than 15 sleeping rooms, which may be supplied from some
outside source with gas, vapor or fluid, except potable waters, shall have
a conveniently accessible stopcock or other suitable device fixed to the
supply pipes leading into the building at a place outside of the building,
so arranged as to allow the supply to be shut off. Such stopcock or other
device shall be so marked as to indicate either the contents and purposes of
the supply pipe to which it is attached or the company to which the device
belongs, and, in addition, shall comply with any state code requirements.
§ 265-110. Tests of plumbing and drainage.
No person shall use or permit the use of any new system of plumbing and
drainage hereafter installed in any building before the same has been tested
under the supervision of the Building Department and in accordance with
its rules, to ensure the tightness of the system, nor until a proper and
adequate water supply has been provided. The Superintendent of Buildings
shall, within a reasonable time after being requested to do so, cause to be
inspected and tested any system of plumbing and drainage that is ready for
such inspection and test, and if the work is found satisfactory and the test
requirements are complied with, he shall issue a certificate to that effect.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the inspection and test of part of
A. The plumbing and drainage systems, water-supply pipes, gas piping,
steam or hot-water heating or power systems, refrigerating systems
and other systems of pipes or apparatus for holding or conveying
gasses, vapors or fluids hereafter installed and maintained in or upon
any building in the Village shall conform to such rules as may be
provided by law, including the New York State Plumbing Code, or may
be found necessary for the protection of life, health or property, and
adopted by the Superintendent of Buildings. No person shall use or
permit the use of any system, piping or apparatus installed or
maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article or the
rules adopted hereunder.
B. Nothing herein contained or in the rules adopted hereunder shall
require the alteration or reconstruction of any existing work that was
lawfully installed, nor prevent repairs to the addition of new fixtures to
existing work in conformity with the practice followed in the original
installation; provided, however, that when such repairs involve the
removal or alteration of more than 1/2 of the existing work affected by
the repairs, the rules in force at the time of such repairs shall apply.
§ 265-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-110
1:169
a system or the issuance of a partial certificate, nor prevent the use of
such part of a larger system, provided that such part constitutes by itself a
complete system, properly tested and supplied with water.
§ 265-111. Tests of gas piping.
No person shall use or permit the use of any new system or an extension
of an old system of gas piping in any building before the same has been
inspected and tested under the supervision of the Building Department
and in accordance with its rules, to ensure the tightness of its system.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall, within a reasonable time after being
requested to do so, cause to be inspected and tested any system of gas
piping that is ready for such inspection and test, and if the work is found
satisfactory and the test requirements are complied with, he shall issue a
certificate to that effect. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the use of
existing systems of gas piping without further inspection or test, unless the
Superintendent of Buildings has reason to believe that defects exist which
make the system dangerous to life or property.
§ 265-112. Registration of plumbers; license application; fee.
A. On the first day of each biennial calendar year, every employing or
master plumber carrying on this trade, business or calling in the Village
shall register his name and address at the office of the Building
Department in the Village in which he performs work under such rules
as the Department may prescribe. Such registration may be cancelled
by the Village Board for a violation of the rules and regulations for
plumbing or drainage of such Village duly adopted, or in force pursuant
to the provisions of this article, or whenever the person so registered
ceases to hold a certificate from the Examining Board of Plumbers or to
be actually engaged in the business of master or employing plumber,
after a hearing before said Superintendent, upon prior notice of not less
than 10 days.
B. No person, corporation or copartnership shall engage in or carry on the
trade, business or calling of employing or master plumber in the Village
unless the name and address of such person and the president,
secretary or treasurer of the corporation, or of each and every member
of the copartnership, shall have been registered as above provided.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or copartnership in the
Village of Malverne, unless said person, corporation or copartnership
shall have complied with the requirements of this section, to hold
himself or themselves out to the public as a master or employing
plumber by the use of the word "plumber" or "plumbing" or words of
similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery or in any other
manner whatsoever.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or copartnership in the
Village of Malverne to engage in or carry on the trade, business or
calling or employment of master plumber unless such person,
§ 265-110 MALVERNE CODE § 265-112
1:170
§ 265-113. Permit required.
No plumbing work shall be started until a permit has been obtained from
the Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 265-114. Drawings and descriptions; repairs and alterations.
corporation or copartnership has conspicuously posted in the window
of the place where such business is conducted a metal plate or sign
appropriately lettered or marked "licensed plumber" in accordance
with rules adopted by the Superintendent of Buildings.
E. No person, corporation or copartnership registered as provided in this
section, or who holds a certificate from the Examining Board of
Plumbers, shall, for the benefit any person engaged in the plumbing
business who is not so registered, apply for, receive or make use of any
permit granted to him by reason of being so registered, or holding such
certificate from the Examining Board of Plumbers.
F. A plumber hereafter must pass a practical and theoretical test as to his
knowledge of the plumbing rules of the Town of Hempstead, Town of
North Hempstead, Town of Oyster Bay and/or a Village-approved
governing authority, except as provided for in Subsection G of this
section.
G. Application for license. Any person desiring a master plumber's license
shall make application in writing to the Department of Buildings. At the
time of making the application, the duly licensed master plumber shall
submit a certified or photostatic copy of a certificate of competency and
license issued by the Examining Board of Plumbers of the Town of
Hempstead, Town of North Hempstead, Town of Oyster Bay and/or of a
Village-approved governing authority.
H. The fee for a plumbing license shall be required as determined by
resolution issued by the Board of Trustees.
A. Drawings and triplicate descriptions, on forms furnished by the
Building Department, for all plumbing drainage, shall be properly filled
in and filed by the owner or architect in the Department of Buildings.
The plans must be drawn to scale in ink on paper or they must be cloth
prints of such scale drawings, and shall consist of such floor plans and
sections as may be necessary to show clearly all plumbing work to be
done, and must show partitions and methods of ventilating water-closet
apartments.
B. The plumbing and drainage shall not be commenced or proceeded with
until said drawings and descriptions shall have been so filed and
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings.
C. No modification of the approved drawings and descriptions will be
permitted unless either amended drawings and triplicate descriptions,
or an amendment to the original drawings and descriptions covering
§ 265-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-114
1:171
the proposed change or changes, are so filed and approved by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
D. The drainage and plumbing of all buildings, both public and private,
shall be executed in accordance with the rules and regulations as
hereinbefore stated.
E. Repairs or alterations of plumbing or drainage may be made without
filing drawings and descriptions in the Department of Buildings, but
such repairs or alterations shall not be construed to include cases
where new vertical lines or horizontal branches of soil, waste, bent or
leader pipes are proposed to be used.
F. Notice of such repairs or alterations shall be given to the Department of
Buildings before the same are commenced in such cases as shall be
prescribed by the rules and regulations as hereinbefore mentioned, and
the work shall be done in accordance with said rules and regulations.
G. Where repairs or alterations, ordered by the Board of Health or for
sanitary reasons, include cases where new vertical and horizontal lines
of soil, waste, vent or leader pipes are proposed to be used or old ones
replaced, drawings and descriptions must be filed with and approved by
the Superintendent of Buildings before the same shall be commenced
or proceeded with.
H. Repairs and alterations may comply in all respects with the weight,
quality, arrangement and venting of the rest of the work in the building.
Except when an existing soil, waste or vent line has been damaged by
fire or other causes to the extent of 50% or more of its entire length, the
same must be replaced by new lines installed in accordance with the
rules and regulations governing the new lines and the New York State
Building Code.
I. No plumbing and drainage or any part thereof shall be commenced
until the plumber who is to do the work shall sign the specifications and
make affidavit that he is duly authorized to proceed with the work. The
affidavit must give the name and address of the owner and plumber, etc.
No registered plumber shall sign the specifications and act as the agent
for a plumber who has not obtained a certificate of competency from
the Examining Board of Plumbers as an employing or master plumber. A
violation of this rule will be deemed a sufficient reason by the
Superintendent of Buildings for the cancellation of a certificate of
registration.
J. One set of specifications will be received for not more than 10 houses,
and then only when on adjoining lots and if the houses are exactly alike.
§ 265-114 MALVERNE CODE § 265-114
1:172
ARTICLE XIV
Electrical Wiring and Electrical Equipment
§ 265-115. General requirements.
A. Rules. The electrical wiring apparatus, fittings, appliances and
equipment hereafter installed within or on a building or structure must
conform in all respects to the rules and regulations of the New York
State Building Code.
B. Scope. These rules shall apply to all electrical wiring, apparatus,
fittings, appliances or equipment for the transmission, distribution or
utilization of electrical energy hereafter installed within or on any
building or structure, except fuse renewals, incandescent lamps and
portable appliances which, together with their cables and attachments,
have been approved for connection to appropriate parts of the
permanent electrical equipment.
C. Special provisions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in the rules and regulations of the New York State Building Code, the
following shall apply to all electrical installations in the Village of
Malverne:
(1) The use of nonmetallic sheathed cable is prohibited in or upon any
building or structure.
(2) The use of S.E. service drop cable is prohibited in or upon any
building or structure.
(3) No service shall be less than what is required as per the state
codes.
(4) Wires are to be installed in one-and-one-fourth-inch rigid conduit or
at least minimum as required by code.
(5) There shall be two bonding bushings on all service change, one on
meter pan and one on point of entrance panel or switch and/or as
required by the state code.
(6) Split buss panels are not permitted.
(7) Only one point of disconnect is permitted or as required by code.
(8) Oil or gas burner switch must be at head of stairs or as required by
code.
(9) Ground wire is to be one-piece copper from point of entrance to
water meter or as required by code.
§ 265-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-116
1:173
§ 265-116. Test and inspection.57
No person shall use or permit to be used any new electrical wiring or
electrical apparatus hereafter installed in any building or structure before
the same has been subjected to a test and inspected by an approved
electrical inspection agency and accepted by the Superintendent of
Buildings.
§ 265-117. Registration of master electricians.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, at the time of the
enactment of this chapter or at any time thereafter, is the holder of a
master electrician's license, duly issued by the Town of Hempstead,
Town of North Hempstead, Town of Oyster Bay and/or a Villageapproved
governing authority, may apply for a master electrician's
license to the License Board, which shall determine the fitness of such
applicant by such examination as it may deem fit.
B. Any person, partnership or corporation, other than those holding a
master electrician's license, who or which is a qualified master
electrician, may apply for a master electrician's license to the License
Board, which shall determine the fitness of such applicant by such
examination as it may deem fit.
C. The fee for the license shall be determined by a resolution issued by the
Board of Trustees.
D. On the first day of each biennial calendar year, every employing or
master electrician carrying on this trade, business or calling in the
Village shall register his name and address at the office of the Building
Department in the Village in which he performs work under such rules
as the Department may prescribe. Such registration may be cancelled
by the Village Board for a violation of the rules and regulations for
electrical work of such Village duly adopted, or in force pursuant to the
provisions of this article, or whenever the person so registered ceases
to hold a certificate from the Examining Board of Electricians or to be
actually engaged in the business of master or employing electrician,
after a hearing before said Superintendent, upon prior notice of not less
than 10 days.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or copartnership in the
Village of Malverne, unless said person, corporation or copartnership
shall have complied with this section, to hold himself or themselves out
to the public as a master electrician by the word "electrician," or words
of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery or in any other
manner whatever.
F. No person, corporation or copartnership shall engage in or carry on the
trade or business of electrician in the Village of Malverne unless the
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-116 MALVERNE CODE § 265-117
1:174
§ 265-118. Permit required.
name and address of such person and the president, secretary or
treasurer of the corporation or of each and every member of the
copartnership shall have been registered as above provided.
G. No person, corporation or copartnership registered as provided in this
section shall, for the benefit of any person who is not so registered,
apply for, receive or make use of any permit granted to him by reason of
being so registered or holding such certificate from the License Board.
H. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Village Board for a
violation of the rules and regulations for electrical work as adopted by
such Village Board.
A. No electrical work shall be started until a permit shall have been
obtained from the Superintendent of Buildings.
B. A permit shall be required for each separate building or structure,
except when a garage and building are constructed at the same time on
the same lot or plot, only one permit shall be required.
§ 265-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-118
1:175

ARTICLE XV
Sewage System Connections
§ 265-119. Adoption of Nassau County regulations.
All regulations adopted by the County of Nassau governing discharge into a
connection to the county sewage facilities are hereby made a part of these
regulations and shall be complied with by the applicant and owner of the
premises involved.
§ 265-120. Application for permit.
An application for a permit under these regulations shall be made only by,
and will be accepted only from, a plumber licensed by the Incorporated
Village of Malverne, on a form to be furnished by the Department of
Buildings of the Village. A separate application must be filed for each sewer
connection to a building. Each application shall be signed by the plumber,
who must be specifically authorized by the fee owner of the premises to
make such application. No Village permit will be issued unless a permit
from the County of Nassau to connect with the county sewer facilities has
been obtained and is presented to the Village with the application for a
Village permit.
§ 265-121. Fee and bond; right of cancellation.
§ 265-122. Work to be performed by licensed plumber.
No work in connection with the installation of a sewer connection to a
building may be commenced or performed except by a plumber licensed by
the Incorporated Village of Malverne and registered by the Superintendent
A. Fee for permit. No work shall be commenced or performed in
connection with the installation of a sewer connection to a building,
prior to the issuance of a permit therefor by the Superintendent of
Buildings of the Village. The fee for each permit shall be determined by
resolution issued by the Board of Trustees.
B. Surety bond. Before any permit is issued under this article, the
applicant for such permit shall, at his own expense, furnish to the
Village a surety bond in form approved by the Board of Trustees and
issued by a company acceptable to such Board and in an amount
determined by the Board of Trustees for each permit applied for under
this article. The bond shall indemnify the Village against all damage or
injury to or loss of Village property occurring during or arising out of
the work performed pursuant to such permit.
C. Upon the failure of any permittee to comply with the requirements of
this article, the Superintendent of Buildings may forthwith cancel the
permit. The right of cancellation herein contained is in addition to any
other remedy provided by the Village local laws or by law for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 265-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-122
1:177
of Buildings of the Village for the year or years in which the work is to be
done.
§ 265-123. Certificates of liability insurance.58
Before any permit is issued, a certificate of public liability, personal injury
and property damage insurance of not less than what is required by the
Nassau County DPW shall be filed with the Superintendent of Buildings of
the Incorporated Village of Malverne, New York to protect the Village, as a
named insured, in the event of any injury to persons or property; said policy
must be kept in effect until the completion of all work covered by all permits
issued hereunder to the plumber furnishing such policy and the issuance of
the certificates of compliance covering such work. In the event such policy
shall expire or be cancelled and no replacement thereof is furnished prior
to such expiration or cancellation, the permits issued will immediately be
revoked.
§ 265-124. Certificate of workers' compensation.59
Before any permit is issued, a certificate of the plumber's current workers'
compensation insurance policy must be filed with the Superintendent of
Buildings of the Incorporated Village of Malverne, New York, as required
by § 57 of the Workers' Compensation Law, as amended. Said policy must
be kept in effect until the completion of all work covered by all permits
issued hereunder to the plumber furnishing such certificate of insurance
and the issuance of the certificates of compliance covering such work. In the
event such policy shall expire or be cancelled and no replacement thereof
is furnished prior to such expiration or cancellation, the permits issued will
immediately be revoked.
§ 265-125. Damage to Village property; protection and completion
of trenches.
The plumber making the sewer connection shall be responsible for any
damage to Village property, including but not limited to sidewalks, aprons,
trees, grass area and curbs. He shall take all precautions necessary to
protect Village property. Any open trench or other obstruction in, on or
abutting the sidewalk, street or other Village property shall be surrounded
by suitable barriers or guards for the protection of persons using the
streets or property in the daytime, and, in addition thereto, by lights or
flares from twilight continuously until daylight. Such barriers and lights
shall conform, in kind and number, to the requirements of the Plumbing
Inspector. Immediately upon completion of the sewer connection to a
building, the plumber shall see that all trench settlement is properly filled
to the grade of the original ground.
§ 265-126. Discontinuance of cesspools.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-122 MALVERNE CODE § 265-126
1:178
§ 265-127. Type and size of pipe.
The sewer connection from the curb to a building shall be of extra-heavy
cast-iron sewer type or DPW-approved equal. All of the aforesaid pipe shall
not be less than five inches in diameter. Where the ground is made or filled
in or where the pipes are less than three feet below ground level, or in any
case where there is danger of settlement by frost or from any other cause,
the sewer connection to a building must be of extra-heavy cast iron with
lead-caulked joints or DPW-approved equal.
§ 265-128. Fittings, connections and cleanouts.
All fittings and couplings shall be in accordance with and conforming to
existing ASTM specifications for cast-iron soil pipe, A74 to A72, or federal
specifications SS-P-351. When there is a change of direction of the sewer
line over a forty-five-degree angle, a cleanout shall be inserted after the
bend and such cleanout shall extend to the surface of the ground and
be properly capped. Using a series of small bends to make a change of
direction shall not do away with the use of the cleanout.
§ 265-129. Pitch.
The minimum fall per foot of pipe laid shall be 1/4 inch, except that a fall
on 1/8 inch per foot may be allowed upon specific approval of the Plumbing
Inspector, where 1/4-inch fall shall be impossible.
§ 265-130. Laying of pipe.
No pipe shall be laid in any trench unless the sewer connection to the
building and the connection to the sewer at the curb are exposed. All
A. After a property owner has been notified that the lateral sewer line
available to his building has been completed and is ready for use,
application may be made to the Village for a permit to connect thereto.
After such notice has been given, a property owner shall discontinue
the use of existing cesspools on his premises and shall connect the
house sewage waste line or lines to the lateral sewer line upon the
happening of any one of the following events, whichever first occurs:
(1) When any existing cesspool requires replacement or repair.
(2) When any existing cesspool has been filled; provided, however, that
such cesspool may be emptied and cleaned not more than once
after such notice is given.
(3) When the continued use of an existing cesspool endangers the life
or health of any person or persons or constitutes a nuisance.
B. When a building is connected to the county sewer system, all cesspools
and overflow pools on the property on which such building is located
shall be forthwith cleaned out and properly and completely backfilled
with clean fill.
§ 265-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-130
1:179
pipe shall be laid with a uniform fall and in as direct and straight a line
as possible from two feet outside the building foundation to the existing
connection to the sewer at the curb.
§ 265-131. Supporting of pipe.
Sewer piping shall be supported throughout its entire length.
§ 265-132. Tunneling.
Tunneling may be done in yards, courts or driveways of any building site.
However, the diameter of the tunnel may not be over twice the diameter of
the pipe and it shall be of such length as will permit inspection of all joints.
All tunnels shall be backfilled by the use of water.
§ 265-133. Backfilling.
Adequate precaution shall be taken to ensure proper compaction of backfill
around pipe without damage to piping. Trenches shall be backfilled in thin
layers to 12 inches above the top of the pipe with clean earth which shall not
contain stones, boulders, cinder fill or other materials which will damage
or break the pipe or cause corrosive action. Mechanical devices may then
be used to finish backfilling to grade. All trenches shall be compacted with
water.
§ 265-134. Joints and connections.
Joints and connections in the sewer connection to a building shall be
rootproof, gastight and watertight so as to withstand the pressure imposed
on the joint in case of stoppage. Cast-iron bell-and-spigot joints may be
either caulked with molten lead or other joint compound approved by the
Plumbing Inspector. Caulked joints for cast-iron bell-and-spigot soil pipe
shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead not
less than one inch deep and not to extend more than 1/8 of an inch below
the rim of hub. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted on the
jointing material until after the joint has been inspected. If other compound,
approved as above mentioned, is used, the joint shall be made in accordance
with manufacturer's specifications.
§ 265-135. Location of sewer connection to building.
The sewer connection to a building shall have a horizontal or lateral
separation from the water service of at least seven feet or a vertical
separation of at least two feet, and shall be located below the water service.
In the event that any of the above minimum separations is not possible,
permission must be obtained from the Plumbing Inspector to vary the above
requirements, and his decision as to location and type of pipe to be used
shall be followed.
§ 265-130 MALVERNE CODE § 265-136
1:180
§ 265-136. Required inspections.
The Plumbing Inspector shall be notified 24 hours in advance of the starting
of work under any permit issued hereunder and shall be further notified
before 10:00 a.m. of the day an inspection is required. The following
inspections are required under this chapter:
A. First inspection. The first inspection shall be made when the pipe is laid
and joints are made, but before any backfill is placed on the pipe.
B. Second inspection. The second inspection shall be made when the
cesspool or cesspools are cleaned, and prior to backfilling of cesspools.
C. Third inspection. The third inspection shall be the final inspection and
shall be made when the sewer connection to a building is complete.
§ 265-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-136
1:181

ARTICLE XVI
Refrigerating Plants
§ 265-137. Mechanical ventilation systems; exits.
§ 265-138. Operating requirements.
A. Refrigerating-machine rooms located in the cellar of any building
hereafter erected shall, in the absence of windows to the outer air, be
provided with a mechanical ventilating system designed to provide at
least minimum per the New York State Mechanical Code. The exhaust
discharge of such ventilating systems shall be extended above the roof
of the building and in such location as to provide at least code minimum
feet clear of any window. All ducts and duct risers which extend into
other parts of the premises shall be encased with at least two-inch
metal lath and cement plaster or four-inch terra-cotta blocks or code
equivalent.
B. Refrigerating-machinery rooms shall be provided with at least two
means of remote exits and equipped with fireproof, self-closing doors or
New York State code minimum.
A. Weight limit. No refrigerating system containing more than 20 pounds
of refrigerant shall be maintained or operated without a permit issued
by the Building Department.
B. Flame lights prohibited. No fire, flame or area light will be permitted in
a refrigerating machinery room in which an inflammable refrigerant is
used.
C. Gas mask required. A gas mask of make approved by the United States
Bureau of Mines as suitable for the refrigerant used shall be kept in
operative condition in an easily accessible case immediately outside the
refrigerating room in all plants using 50 pounds or more of an irritant
refrigerant.
D. Relief-valve requirements.
(1) A refrigerating compressor or generator which operates above
atmospheric pressure shall be protected by a pressure-relief valve
connected into the high-pressure side between the main stop valve
and the compressor or generator, to relieve excessive pressure into
the low-pressure side of the system.
(2) In all refrigerating systems, there shall be a relief valve from the
high-pressure side and a relief valve from the low-pressure side,
piped to the outside atmosphere so as to discharge not less than 12
feet above the roof or surrounding roofs; the pipe area shall be not
less than the combined area of relief-valve outlets and to have the
orifice turned downward. When ammonia is used, the discharge
from relief valves may be piped into a tank of fresh water used for
no other purpose and prevented from freezing without the use of
§ 265-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-138
1:183
chemicals, containing at least one gallon of water for each pound
of ammonia in the system.
E. Storage of refrigerant. Refrigerant not contained in the refrigerating
system shall be stored only in containers conforming to the regulations
described by the Interstate Commerce Commission for the
transportation of such refrigerant.
F. Warranty; display required. The seller of a refrigerating system shall
furnish the purchaser with a sign bearing his name and stating the kind
and quantity of refrigerant required for the satisfactory operation of the
system, and the purchaser shall conspicuously and permanently display
this sign in the machinery room.
§ 265-138 MALVERNE CODE § 265-138
1:184
ARTICLE XVII
Swimming Pools
§ 265-139. Public pools.
No public swimming pool shall be constructed and no existing pool shall be
made available as a public swimming pool without permission of the Board
of Trustees, as a special exception under Chapter 600, Zoning.
§ 265-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-139
1:185

ARTICLE XVIII
Unsafe Buildings and Collapsed Structures
§ 265-140. Removal or repair.
Any building or part of a building, staging or other structure that from any
cause may now be, or shall at any time hereafter become, dangerous or
unsafe shall be taken down and removed or made safe and secure.
§ 265-141. Record and notice of unsafe building.
Immediately upon the receipt of a report by any officer or employee of
the Department of Buildings that a building or part of a building, staging
or structure is unsafe or dangerous, the Superintendent of Buildings shall
cause the same to be entered upon a docket of unsafe buildings to be kept
in his Department; and the owner or some one of the owners, executors,
administrators, agents, lessees or other person who may have a vested or
contingent interest in the same shall be served with a printed or written
notice containing a description of the premises or structure deemed unsafe
or dangerous, and an order requiring the same to be made safe and secure
or removed, as may be deemed necessary by the Superintendent of
Buildings. Such notice shall require the person thus served to immediately
certify to the Superintendent his assent or refusal to secure or remove the
same.
§ 265-142. Voluntary abatement.
If the person served with a notice specified above shall immediately certify
his assent to the securing or removal of said unsafe or dangerous building,
premises or structure, he shall be allowed 48 hours after the service of such
notice in which to commence the securing or removal of the same, and he
shall employ sufficient labor and assistance to secure or remove the same
as expeditiously as can be done.
§ 265-143. Failure to abate.
A. Report to Clerk. In case of neglect or refusal to comply with said notice
within 48 hours, the Superintendent of Buildings shall report the case
to the Village Clerk, who shall bring the matter before the Board of
Trustees so that it may, as soon as possible, consider the matter and
determine what disposition shall be made thereof.
B. Action of Board of Trustees. When the Board of Trustees deems a
building unsafe after inspection and hearing held thereon, of which due
notice shall be given to all parties interested, it shall immediately notify
any and all tenants or occupants of its findings in writing, and direct the
Chief of Police to cause all such tenants or occupants to vacate the
premises forthwith. If said tenants or occupants refuse to or neglect to
vacate the premises pursuant to said notice, such refusal to or neglect
to vacate on the part of said tenants or occupants shall constitute a
violation of this section on the part of said tenant or occupants, and
§ 265-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-143
1:187
§ 265-144. Fallen buildings; buildings imminently dangerous.
each day of such refusal or neglect shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation.
A. Recovery of bodies from wrecked buildings. In case of the falling of any
building or part thereof in the Village, where persons are known or
believed to be buried under the ruins, emergency services personnel or
other governing authority shall cause an examination of the premises to
be made for the recovery of the bodies of the killed and injured.
B. Temporary safeguards for dangerous buildings. In case there shall be,
in the opinion of the Superintendent of Buildings, actual and immediate
danger of the falling of any building or part thereof so as to endanger
life or property, he shall cause the necessary work to be done to render
said building or part thereof temporarily safe until the proper
proceedings for unsafe buildings provided by the article are instituted.
C. Vacating buildings; closing streets and sidewalks. The Superintendent
of Buildings is hereby authorized and empowered in such cases, and
also where any building or part thereof has fallen and life is endangered
by the occupation thereof, to order and require the inmates and
occupants of such building or part thereof to vacate the same forthwith,
and the Superintendent may, when necessary for the public safety,
temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and places
adjacent to such building or part thereof and prohibit the same from
being used. The Chief of Police, when called upon by the
Superintendent of Buildings to cooperate, shall enforce such orders or
requirements.
D. Laborers and materials. For the purpose of this section, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall utilize any laborers and materials as
directed by the Board of Trustees as may be necessary to perform said
work as speedily as possible.60
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-143 MALVERNE CODE § 265-144
1:188
ARTICLE XIX
Multiple Dwellings
§ 265-145. Applicability of state law.
Articles 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 11 of the Municipal Dwelling Law of the State
of New York shall apply to the Village of Malverne.
§ 265-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-145
1:189

ARTICLE XX
Storage Containers
§ 265-146. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STORAGE CONTAINER — Any PODS®, box, bin, or other similar-type
storage vessel or receptacle located outdoors on a residential property
intended for the purpose of storing or keeping household goods and/or
other personal property.
§ 265-147. Permit required.
§ 265-148. Location; content restrictions; size; number permitted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, keep or
maintain any storage container on any property improved with a singlefamily
dwelling for more than 48 hours without securing a permit from
the Village of Malverne. Any persons desiring a permit to place or
maintain a storage container shall file an application with the Building
Department. The form for this application shall be available at the
Department of Buildings and shall be sworn to and filed by the
applicant with the Department of Buildings.
B. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees
shall be paid by the homeowner to the Incorporated Village of Malverne
for permission to place and maintain the storage container upon
residential property for a thirty-day period. There shall be a fee for each
legal extension of the permit.61
C. Any person currently having a storage container on his/her property
shall have seven days from the effective date of this article to comply
with this article.
A. No storage container shall be located on any portion of the front yard of
any residential property other than a paved portion of the property's
property.
B. No storage container shall be placed and located in a manner which
obstructs the vision of pedestrians or traffic or otherwise poses a
danger to pedestrians and/or motorists as determined by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
C. No food products or flammable materials shall be stored in any storage
containers.
D. Storage containers shall be limited to a maximum size of eight feet high
by eight feet wide by 12 feet long.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-148
1:191
§ 265-149. Required setbacks.
§ 265-150. Permit extension.
The Superintendent of Buildings may extend the permit for an additional 30
days, provided the request for such extension is made prior to the expiration
of the thirty-day period. The Superintendent of Buildings may grant up to
two extensions upon demonstration that there is a need for the storage
container.
§ 265-151. Penalties for offenses.
Any storage container placed or maintained upon a residential property or
remaining beyond the time periods specified in this article without a proper
unexpired permit is in violation of this article and shall subject the property
owner to a summons and penalty of up to $250 per day for each day the
storage container is upon the property without a permit. Any such violation
shall result in the issuance of a summons by the Superintendent of Buildings
returnable in Malverne Village Court.
§ 265-152. Variances; when effective.
The provisions of this article may be varied only upon good cause
demonstrated to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby reserves the right to change by
resolution any part of this article, including fees and penalties. This article
shall take effect immediately.
E. No more than one storage container shall be located on any residential
property at any time.
A. The storage container shall be set back from any side yard a minimum
of four feet and from the front yard by a minimum of four feet. In
granting the permit, the Superintendent of Buildings shall consider the
rights of adjacent property owners so that there shall not be any
unreasonable deprivation of light, air or a reasonable use of adjoining
property.
B. The Superintendent of Buildings for the Incorporated Village of
Malverne is hereby authorized, in the exercise of reasonable discretion,
to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article if, after due
investigation and consideration, he deems that the holder thereof has
violated any provisions of this section or if the Superintendent of
Buildings determines the storage container is being maintained in an
unsafe manner or is being maintained as a nuisance. The
Superintendent of Buildings is also authorized to issue summonses for
any violation of this section. Written notice of any revocation of any
permit granted pursuant to this article shall be given, either by
personal service upon the homeowner or by depositing said notice in
the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed
to such a person at the address for which the permit was issued.
§ 265-148 MALVERNE CODE § 265-153
1:192
§ 265-153. Dumpsters on public property.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause, suffer or permit any
dumpster to be parked or positioned on any street without the prior
written approval of the Village Police Department, the Superintendent
of Buildings and the Village Clerk on due application to the Village.
Such approval, in the form of a license or permit, shall be granted on
condition that the applicant provide insurance coverage naming the
Village as an additional insured. In addition, the dumpster must comply
with the safety rules and regulations promulgated from time to time by
the Village. The applicant must pay a license or permit fee, in an
amount established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
B. Any violation of this section will be enforced by the issuance of a
summons by a police officer, returnable in Malverne Village Court, with
penalties of up to $250 per day for each day the dumpster is placed on a
street without a permit.
§ 265-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-153
1:193

ARTICLE XXI
Enforcement
§ 265-154. Notices of requirements or of violations.
§ 265-155. Emergency measures.
A. Issuance. All notices of the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, and all notices required or authorized by this chapter directing
anything to be done, including notices that any building, structure,
premises or any part thereof is deemed to be unsafe or dangerous, shall
be issued by the Superintendent of Buildings and may be returnable in
the Malverne Village Court, or, if necessary, to the Supreme Court of the
State of New York in order to abate the unsafe building or structure.
B. Contents. Each such notice or order, in addition to the statement of
requirements, shall contain a description of the building, premises or
property affected.
C. Personal service. All such notices, and any notice or order issued by any
court in any proceeding instituted pursuant to this chapter, to restrain
or remove any violation or to enforce compliance with any provision or
requirement of this chapter, may be served by delivering to and leaving
a copy of the same with any person violating, or who may be liable
under any provisions of this chapter. They may be served by an officer
or employee of the Department of Buildings or by any person
authorized by the Department.
D. Notice of posting. If the person to whom such order or notice is
addressed cannot be found within the Village of Malverne after diligent
search shall have been made for him, then such notice or order may be
served by posting the same in a conspicuous place upon the premises
where such violation is alleged to have been placed or to exist, or to
which such notice or order may refer or which may be deemed unsafe
or dangerous, and by also depositing a copy thereof in the post office in
the Village of Malverne, enclosed in a sealed, post-paid wrapper
addressed to said notice or order upon all parties for whom such search
shall have been made, whether residents or nonresidents of the State of
New York.
A. Stopping work; vacating and securing building. In case there shall be,
in the opinion of the Superintendent of Buildings, danger to life or
property by reason of any defective or illegal work in violation of or not
in compliance with any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter, the Superintendent, or such person as may be designated by
him, shall have the right and he is hereby authorized and empowered to
order all further work to be stopped in and about said building, and to
require all persons in and about said building forthwith to vacate the
same and to cause such work to be done in and about the building as, in
his judgment, may be necessary to remove any danger therefrom.
§ 265-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-155
1:195
§ 265-156. Judicial remedies.
B. Closing street temporarily. The Superintendent of Buildings may, when
necessary for public safety, temporarily close the sidewalks, street,
buildings, structures or places adjacent to said buildings or parts
thereof; provided, however, that whenever any sidewalks or street is
closed, another means of safe passage shall be provided by the
Superintendent of Buildings, and the Chief of Police, or any of his
subordinates when called upon by the Superintendent of Buildings to
cooperate, shall enforce all orders or requirements made under this
section.
A. Action or proceeding, generally. Whenever the Superintendent of
Buildings is satisfied that any building or structure or any portion
thereof or any drainage or plumbing or electrical wiring, the erection,
construction or alteration, execution or repair of which is regulated,
permitted or forbidden by this chapter, is being erected, constructed,
altered or repaired or has been erected, constructed, altered or
repaired in violation of, or not in compliance with, any of the provisions
or requirements of this chapter, or in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or of any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, or that any provision or
requirement of this chapter or any order or direction made thereunder
has not been complied with, or that plans and specifications for
plumbing and drainage and electrical wiring have not been submitted
or filed as required by this chapter, the Superintendent may, in his
discretion, through the Village Counsel, institute any appropriate action
or proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or remove such
violation or the execution of any work thereon; or to sustain or correct
the erection or alteration of or to require the removal of or to prevent
the occupation or use of the building or structure erected, constructed,
or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, any of the
provisions of this chapter; or with respect to which, the requirements
thereof or of any order or direction made pursuant to any provisions
contained therein, shall not have been complied with. Any person who
shall maintain or continue any building or structure or any portion
thereof, or any drainage or plumbing or electrical wiring in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, after having been duly notified as
in this chapter provided that such building or structure or any portion
thereof or that such drainage or plumbing or electrical wiring is in
violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be subject to any action
or proceeding and any penalty that is provided in this article for the
commission of the violation.
B. Village Counsel to act. The Village Counsel shall institute any and all
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be
appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, upon the order of the Board of Trustees of the Village.
§ 265-155 MALVERNE CODE § 265-156
1:196
C. Courts having jurisdiction. All courts of civil jurisdiction in the Village,
including the Malverne Village Court, shall have cognizance of and
jurisdiction over any and all suits and proceedings authorized by this
chapter to be brought for the recovery of any penalty or the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter, and shall give preference
to such suits and proceedings over all others. No court shall lose
jurisdiction of any action hereunder by reason of a plea that the title to
real estate is involved, provided the object of the action is to recover a
penalty for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All civil
courts in said Village are hereby invested with full legal and equitable
jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all such actions and proceedings,
and to made appropriate orders and render judgment herein according
to law, so as to give force and effect to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Restraining order. In any such action or proceeding, the Village may, in
the discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings and on his affidavit
setting forth the facts, apply to any court of record or to a judge or
justice thereof for any order enjoining and restraining all persons from
doing or causing or permitting to be done any work in or upon such
building or structure, or in or upon such part thereof as may be
designated in said affidavit, or from occupying or using said building or
structure, or such portion thereof as may be designated in said
affidavit, until the hearing and determination of said action and the
entry of final judgment therein. The court or judge or justice thereof to
whom such application is made is hereby authorized forthwith to make
any or all of the orders above specified as may be required in such
application, with or without notice, and to make such other or further
orders or directions as may be necessary to render the same effectual.
No undertaking shall be required as a condition to the granting or
issuing of such injunction order, or by reason thereof.
E. Judgment. All courts in which any action or proceeding is instituted
under this chapter shall, upon the rendition of a verdict, report of a
referee or decision of a judge or justice, render judgment in accordance
therewith.
F. Lien of judgment. Any judgment rendered in an action or proceeding
instituted under this chapter shall be and become a lien upon the
premises named in the complaint in such action, to date from time of
filing a notice of lis pendens in the County Clerk's office of the county
wherein the property affected by such action, suit or proceeding is
located. Every such lien may be enforced against said property in every
respect, notwithstanding the same may be transferred subsequent to
the filing of the notice.
G. Lis pendens. The notice of lis pendens referred to in this section shall
consist of a copy of the notice issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings, requiring the removal of the violation, and a notice of the suit
or proceedings instituted or to be instituted thereon. Such notice of lis
pendens may be filed at any time after the service of the notice issued
by the Superintendent as aforesaid, provided he may deem the same to
§ 265-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-156
1:197
§ 265-157. Judicial orders; agent for service of process; lien.
be necessary, or is satisfied that the owner of the property is about to
transfer the same to avoid responsibility for having violated a provision
of this chapter. Any notice of lis pendens filed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter may be vacated and cancelled of record upon an order
of a justice of a court in which such suit or proceeding was instituted
or is pending, or upon the consent in writing of the Village Trustees.
The clerk of the county where the notice is filed is hereby directed
and required to mark any such notice of lis pendens and any record
or docket thereof as vacated and cancelled of record, upon the
presentation and filing of a certified copy of an order or of consent, as
aforesaid.
H. Costs. In no case shall the Department of Buildings or any officer
thereof of the Village be liable for costs in any action, suit or
proceedings that may have been or may hereafter be instituted or
commenced in pursuance of this chapter.
I. Officer not liable for damages. No officer of the Department of
Buildings, acting in good faith without malice, shall be liable for
damages by reason of anything done in any action or proceeding
instituted under any provision of this chapter, or by reason of any act or
omission in the performance of his official duties.
A. Compliance with building notices. In case any notice or direction
authorized to be issued by this chapter is not complied with within the
time designated therein, the Village, by the Village Counsel, may, at the
request of the Superintendent of Buildings, apply to the Supreme
Court, at a special term thereof, for an order directing the
Superintendent to proceed to make the alterations or remove the
violation, as the same may be specified in said notice or direction.
B. Vacating for violations. Whenever any notice or direction so authorized
shall have been served as directed in this article, and the same shall not
have been complied with within the time designated therein, the Board
of Trustees shall, at the request of the Superintendent of Buildings, in
addition to, or in lieu of, any other remedy provided for by this chapter,
apply to the Supreme Court, at a special term thereof, for an order
directing the Superintendent to vacate such building or premises, or so
much thereof as he may deem necessary, and prohibiting the same to be
used or occupied for any purpose specified in said order until such
notice shall have been complied with.
C. Responsibility of lessees or occupants. In case any of the notices or
orders of the court herein mentioned shall be served upon any lessee or
party in possession of the building or premises therein described, it
shall be the duty of the person upon whom such service is made to give
immediate notice to the owner or agent of the building or premises
named in the notice, if such person shall be within the limits of the
Village and his residence is known to such person, and if not within the
§ 265-156 MALVERNE CODE § 265-157
1:198
§ 265-158. Penalties for offenses.
Village, by depositing said notice in the post office in the Village,
properly enclosed in a post-paid wrapper addressed to such owner or
agent at his then-known place of residence.
D. Designation by an owner of a building. Any owner of real estate or of a
building thereon may execute and acknowledge a written designation of
a resident of said Village as a person upon whom may be served any
notice of violation, notice to make safe or notice of survey, a summons, a
mandate or any paper or process issued under a provision of this
chapter and may file the same with the written consent of the person so
designated, duly acknowledged, in the office of the Superintendent of
Buildings. The designation must specify the location of the property
with respect to which the designation is made and the residences and
places of business of the person making it, and the person designated.
It shall remain in force during the period specified therein, if any, or
until revoked by the death or legal incompetency of either of the parties
or by the filing of a revocation by either of the parties, duly
acknowledged and endorsed with the consent of the Superintendent of
Buildings. The Superintendent of Buildings shall file and index each
designation and shall note, upon the original designation and index, the
filing of a revocation. While the designation remains in force, as
prescribed in this section, a notice of violation, notice to make safe or
notice to survey, a summons, a mandate or any paper or process under
the provisions of this chapter, or either of the same, shall be served
upon the person so designated, in like manner and with like effect, as if
it were served personally upon the person making the designation,
notwithstanding his presence in the Village.
E. Reimbursement. The expenses and disbursements incurred in the
carrying out of any order issued as provided above shall become a lien
upon the building or premises named in the order, from the time of
filing of a copy of the order with a notice of the pendency of the action
or proceeding as provided in this chapter, taken thereunder in the office
of the clerk of the county where the property affected by such action,
suit or proceeding is located; and the Supreme Court to whom
application shall be made is hereby authorized and directed to grant
any of the orders above named and to take such proceedings as shall be
necessary to make the same effectual, and any justice to whom
application shall be made is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
such lien in accordance with the mechanics' lien laws applicable to the
Village.
A. General. Except as specifically provided in a prior section enumerating
a different penalty, the owner of any building, structure or part thereof,
or wall, or any platform, staging or flooring to be used for standing or
seating purposes, or the owner of the land where any violation of this
chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder,
plumber, carpenter, electrician, mason or other person who may be
§ 265-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-158
1:199
employed or assist in the commission of any such violation, and all
persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this Building Code
or fail to comply therewith, or any requirement thereof, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any detailed order or rules made
thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, shall,
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty in the sum of not
more than $350 for each offense.
B. Continuing violation after notice. Any person who, having been served
with a notice as in this Building Code prescribed to remove any
violation, or comply with any requirement of this chapter or with any
order or rule made thereunder, shall fail to comply with said notice
within 10 days after such service, or shall continue to violate any
requirement of this chapter in the respect named in said notice, shall be
liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than $350 for each
offense, for the use of said Village.
C. Jurisdiction of penalty action. For the recovery of any said penalty or
penalties, an action may be brought in the Malverne Village Court or in
the District Court or Supreme Court of Nassau County, New York, or
any court of record in the name of the Village; and whenever any
judgment shall be rendered therefor, the same shall be collected and
enforced as prescribed and directed by the Civil Practice Law and Rules
of the State of New York.
D. Discontinuance of action upon removal of violation. If any violation shall
be removed or be in process of removal within 10 days after the service
of a notice as in this chapter prescribed, the liability for such penalty
shall cease, and the Board of Trustees of the Village, on the request of
the Superintendent of Buildings, shall discontinue any action pending
to recover the same, upon such removal or the completion thereof
within a reasonable time.
E. Remission of penalty. The Superintendent of Buildings, through the
Village Board, is hereby authorized, in his discretion and upon good and
sufficient cause being shown therefor, to remit any penalty which any
person may have incurred or may hereinafter incur under any other
provisions of this chapter, but no such penalty shall be remitted until
the violation shall have been removed. Said Superintendent is further
authorized, in his discretion, to remit any costs allowed or obtained in
any penalty suit or any other action or proceedings instituted under the
provisions of this article.
§ 265-158 MALVERNE CODE § 265-158
1:200
Chapter 280
CONTRACTORS
§ 280-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GENERAL CONTRACTOR — Any organization or individual responsible
for the entire project, from contracting with or administrating contracts
to subcontractors and suppliers, scheduling and reviewing their work;
ensuring code compliance; worker and job site safety; coordination of work
schedules; and compliance with contractual deadlines. The term "general
contractor" shall include any construction manager overseeing the entire
project.
§ 280-2. Registration requirements.
For general contractor registration requirements, see Chapter 265,
Building Construction, § 265-4.
Chapter 301
FEES
§ 301-1. Repeal of fee amounts.
The amount of every fee or charge for an application for a permit, or for
a permit, or for a license, or for any other authorization or inspection
(hereinafter called "an application for a permit") contained in each and
every section of the Code of the Village of Malverne is hereby repealed.
§ 301-2. Certain provisions saved from repeal.
The procedure for filing an application for a permit, or the contents of such
application or any other matter contained in every such section of the Code
of the Village of Malverne dealing with an application for a permit, as that
term is herein defined, other than the amount of such fee or charge, is not
hereby repealed and shall remain unaffected by this chapter.
§ 301-3. Establishment of fees by resolution.
The Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, establish a list of fees and
charges to be imposed and paid for each application for a permit, as that
term is hereby defined, including a minimum fee or charge for any item
omitted from that list of fees and charges, and may, from time to time, by
resolution, amend, modify or change that list of fees and charges, in whole
or in part.
§ 265-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:201
Chapter 313
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 507.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 301-3 MALVERNE CODE § 301-3
1:202
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 313-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne finds that
the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Incorporated Village of Malverne and that
such damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 313-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 313-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-3
1:203
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 313-3 MALVERNE CODE § 313-3
1:204
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 313-4. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of
a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the
top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE,
or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
§ 313-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-4
1:205
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building,"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that
meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk-premium zones applicable to
the community.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A above.
B.
§ 313-4 MALVERNE CODE § 313-4
1:206
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or an employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 313-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-4
1:207
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — Means that at least 51% of the actual
cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 313-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 313-4 MALVERNE CODE § 313-4
1:208
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 313-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-4
1:209

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 313-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Malverne, Nassau County.
§ 313-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 313-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 313-8. Penalties for offenses.62
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Malverne,
Community Number 361633, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Number 36059C0216G, the
effective date of which is September 11, 2009, and any subsequent
revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under the
community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Nassau County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated September 11,
2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Malverne Village Hall, 99 Church Street, Malverne, NY 11565.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or local laws, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-8
1:211
upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Village Code. Each day of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Village of Malverne from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 313-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 313-8 MALVERNE CODE § 313-9
1:212
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 313-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Department Superintendent is hereby appointed local
administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 313-11. Floodplain development permits.
§ 313-12. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate;
additional information may be required on the permit application form:
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 313-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount set from time to time
by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees. In addition, the
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Incorporated Village
of Malverne for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection
and approval of this project. The local administrator may require a
deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.63
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-12
1:213
§ 313-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 313-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 313-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 313-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 313-12, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
§ 313-12 MALVERNE CODE § 313-13
1:214
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards and, in
particular, § 313-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 313-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
§ 313-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-13
1:215
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 313-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 313-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 313-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 313-13 MALVERNE CODE § 313-13
1:216
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedure; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 313-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-13
1:217

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 313-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 313-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Incorporated Village of Malverne agrees to apply to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Incorporated Village of Malverne for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Incorporated Village of Malverne for all costs
related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 313-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 313-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-14
1:219
§ 313-15. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Incorporated Village of Malverne agrees to apply to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is
received and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Incorporated Village
of Malverne for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the Incorporated Village of
Malverne for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
§ 313-14 MALVERNE CODE § 313-15
1:220
§ 313-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 313-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 313-14B,
Encroachments, and § 313-15, Standards for all structures.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
to or above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the
appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of
New York State or the Residential Code of New York State for
location of such items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
§ 313-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-16
1:221
§ 313-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 313-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 313-14B, Encroachments, and § 313-15,
Standards for all structures.
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 313-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2) above.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Subsection
A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
§ 313-16 MALVERNE CODE § 313-17
1:222
§ 313-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 313-14, General
standards, and § 313-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 313-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 313-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-18
1:223

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 313-19. Appeals board.
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the Incorporated Village
of Malverne shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 313-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-19
1:225
§ 313-20. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided items (1) through (12)
in § 313-19D have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 313-19 MALVERNE CODE § 313-20
1:226
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 313-13H.
§ 313-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-20
1:227
Chapter 322
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 443.
Signs — See Ch. 491.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 322-1. Permit required.64
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale in
the Incorporated Village of Malverne without first obtaining a permit and
complying with the regulations set forth herein.
§ 322-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 322-3. Regulations; permit fee.
Garage sales in the Village of Malverne shall be regulated in the following
manner:
A. Merchandise. Garage sales shall offer only used, unwanted items of
personal property owned by the resident of the property where the sale
is held. No new merchandise shall be offered for sale nor may new
merchandise from other sources be brought in and offered for sale.
B. Hours. Garage sales shall not commence before 10:00 a.m. and must
terminate by 6:00 p.m.
C. Number of sales; length. No person shall conduct more than two garage
sales on his premises in any one calendar year. Such sales may not
extend for a period of more than two days.65
D. Signs.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-20 MALVERNE CODE § 322-3
1:228
§ 322-4. Required information.
The information to be filed with the Village Clerk pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows:
(1) Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or other
news media. A sign, not greater in size than three feet by three
feet, may be installed on the property where the sale is being
conducted.
(2) No sign shall be placed on the public right-of-way or on property
other than where the sale is being conducted. No lighted sign shall
be used.
(3) The sign shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be
promptly removed after the sale.
E. Zoning. It is not the intention of this chapter to change or amend
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Malverne.
F. Issuance of permit; fee. Upon application, either in person or by mail,
the Village Clerk is authorized to issue a permit upon payment of a fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.66
A. Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization
conducting said sale.
B. Name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted
and the consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
C. Location at which sale is to be conducted.
D. Number of days of sale.
E. Date and nature of any past sale.
F. Relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any other
person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting the past sale listed in Subsection E and the date or dates of
such sale.67
G. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
or permit by any local, state or federal agency.68
H. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-5
1:229
§ 322-5. Persons and sales exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 322-6. Enforcement; responsibility for good order.69
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by Chapter 600, Zoning, or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted
from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited.
F. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming such exemption.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the code
enforcement officers or those officials designated by the Mayor.
B. The person to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No
such person shall permit loud or boisterous conduct on said premises or
permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets
in the area of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable
orders of any member of the Police Department or Fire Department of
the Village of Malverne in order to maintain the public health, safety
and welfare.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 322-5 MALVERNE CODE § 322-7
1:230
§ 322-7. Penalties for offenses.70
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.
Chapter 330
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460. Vandalism — See Ch. 564.
§ 330-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Village by adopting this chapter, designed to deter the defacing of public
and private property with aerosol spray paint cans, broad-tip markers, pens,
writing and artistic devices.
§ 330-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BROAD-TIP MARKERS — Any felt-tip marker or similar implement
containing a fluid or coloring matter, and which has a flat or angled writing
surface of greater than 1/4 square inch.
DEFACE — To mar the face or surface of, disfigure, injure or spoil the
appearance of.
PENS — Any instrument or similar implement that contains an ink fluid or
similar coloring matter.
WRITING AND ARTISTIC DEVICES — Any crayon, pastel sticks, charcoal
and artistic paints.
§ 330-3. Prohibited conduct, sales and use.
Defacement of property, possession and sale of aerosol spray paint cans
and broad-tipped markers, pens, writing and artistic devices is prohibited
in certain instances.
A. No person shall write, paint, spray or draw any work, inscription,
design, figure or mark of any type on any public or private building or
other structure or any other real or personal property owned, operated
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 322-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-3
1:231
§ 330-4. Penalties for offenses.
§ 330-5. Civil liability.
or maintained by the Incorporated Village of Malverne or any agency or
instrumentality thereof or by any person, firm or corporation unless the
express permission of the owner or operator of the property has been
obtained.
B. No person shall carry an aerosol spray paint can, broad-tipped marker,
pens, writing and artistic devices into any public and/or private building
or other public and/or private facility with the intent to violate the
provisions of Subsection A of this section.
C. No person shall knowingly, or having reason to know that the purchaser
of an aerosol spray paint can, broad-tipped markers, pens, writing and
artistic devices is under 18 years of age and/or who intends to use said
paint, markers, pens and writing and artistic devices for an illegal
purpose, sell or offer to sell such product or products to any such
purchaser.
D. Any person selling or offering for sale aerosol spray paint cans, broadtipped
markers, pens, writing and artistic devices shall post in a
conspicuous place a sign which clearly states:
"It is unlawful to sell aerosol spray paint cans, broad-tipped markers,
pens, writing and artistic devices to any person under the age of 18
years of age."
E. Any person selling or offering for sale aerosol paint cans shall only
display and/or offer for sale aerosol paint cans in a secure enclosed
display or behind a sales counter which is not accessible to the public.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection A, B or C of
§ 330-3 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment of not
more than one year, or both. The court may consider a conditional
discharge upon the condition that, with the consent of the owner, the
defendant restore the property so defaced to its original condition by
means of the defendant's own labor or on the condition of monetary
restitution in an amount not to exceed the cost of said restoration.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of Subsections D and E of
§ 330-3 of this chapter for a first offense shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine of not more than $250, and for a second or
subsequent offense shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not more than $500 or three months' imprisonment, or both.
A. The parent or legal guardian, other than the state or local social
services department or foster parent, of any minor over the age of 10
and under the age of 18 that violates any provision of this chapter shall
§ 330-3 MALVERNE CODE § 330-5
1:232
Chapter 382
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Solid waste — See Ch. 500.
Trees — See Ch. 540.
§ 382-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPER — A person or entity whose business involves
the placing, planting, arranging, trimming, cutting and removing of trees
and maintenance of lawns, trees, bushes, shrubs, gardens and related
appurtenances on land or property for the purpose of improving the same.
TRAILER — Every device in, upon or by which equipment and/or debris may
be transported upon a highway.[Added 11-18-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway.[Amended 11-18-1992 by L.L. No.
3-1992]
§ 382-2. Permit required.71
No person shall operate or conduct business as a commercial landscaper
in the Incorporated Village of Malverne without having first been granted a
permit as set forth in § 382-3.
§ 382-3. Application for permit.
The application for a permit to operate or conduct business as a landscaper
in the Incorporated Village of Malverne shall be made, in writing, to the
Village Clerk and signed by the applicant. The application shall set forth:
be held liable for any damages and/or cleanup costs that result from a
violation of Subsections A, B and C of § 330-3 of this chapter.
B. If anyone sells an aerosol spray paint can(s), broad-tipped marker(s),
pen(s) or writing and artistic devices to a minor or anyone he knew or
should have known would use it for an illegal purpose shall be held
liable for any damages and/or cleanup costs that result from the
violation.
71.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3
1:233
§ 382-4. Operating requirements.
Every landscaper within the Incorporated Village of Malverne shall be
required to comply with the following:
§ 382-5. Penalties for offenses.75
Any person or persons who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed $500 for a first offense; a fine of
not less than $500 and not to exceed $1,000 for a second offense; and a fine
of not less than $1,000 and not to exceed $1,500 for a third offense and/or
the revocation of the permit to further operate within the Village.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the vehicle
plate number and the trailer plate number. [Amended 11-18-1992 by
L.L. No. 3-1992]
B. The character and type of the substance (e.g., grass clippings, brush,
twigs, leaves) that the applicant will be dumping in his operation.
C. The location where the debris is to be taken and the name and
telephone number of the company or organization to receive said
debris.
A. The name of the landscaping company shall be clearly indicated on both
sides of any vehicle used in said operation, shall be no less than three
inches in height and shall include the name, address and telephone
number.
B. An annual fee, as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the
Board of Trustees, shall be paid to the Village by each commercial
landscaper. [Amended 11-18-1992 by L.L. No. 3-199272]
C. Tags identifying that vehicles have been properly registered must be
displayed on each vehicle.
D. Commercial landscapers shall renew their permits on an annual basis.73
E. The hours of operation for commercial landscapers shall be from 8:00
a.m. until 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.74
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3 MALVERNE CODE § 382-5
1:234
Chapter 393
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Signs — See Ch. 491.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 393-1. Legislative findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne finds and
declares:
§ 393-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXTERIOR LIGHT SOURCES — Includes spotlights, floodlights, street
lamps, lights on poles and any other sources of artificial light not enclosed
within a building. Exterior light sources include both portable and
stationary sources.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Malverne and all territory within its
boundaries.
§ 393-3. Light sources to be directed away from adjacent property.
All exterior light sources shall be placed so as not to constitute a nuisance
or to interfere with the enjoyment of the property of other landowners
in the area adjacent to said premises. All such exterior sources shall be
appropriately shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners.
§ 393-4. Light sources to be directed away from public streets.
No exterior light source shall be placed or oriented so as to shed light
directly upon any public street or upon any parcel of real property other
than the one on which it is located, nor shall any exterior light be placed
so as to interfere with motorists' vision or otherwise affect safe driving
conditions on any street.76
A. The installation of excessive exterior lighting sources is detrimental to
the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, peace and repose of
Village residents.
B. The restrictions and prohibitions contained in this chapter are
necessary for the protection of the environment of the Village and for
the well-being of its residents.
§ 382-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 393-5
1:235
§ 393-5. Penalties for offenses.77
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code. The Board of Trustees may commence actions to enjoin
violations of this chapter.
Chapter 399
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 229.
Graffiti — See Ch. 330.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 484.
§ 399-1. School grounds.
No person shall loiter or remain in a school building or in or about school
grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or
responsibility for a pupil or student nor any other specific, legitimate reason
for being there and not having written permission from anyone authorized
to grant the same.
§ 399-2. Enforcement.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or likely
to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 399-1 of this chapter, any
police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 399-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a violation under this
Code, punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.
76.Editor's Note: The original section establishing a time limit for compliance with these
provisions, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 393-5 MALVERNE CODE § 399-3
1:236
Chapter 411
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512.
§ 411-1. Notice required for action.78
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 6-628 of the Village Law, no civil action
shall be brought or maintained against the Village of Malverne for damages
or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, curb or crosswalk being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or in consequence of the existence
or accumulation of snow or ice upon such street, highway, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk, curb or crosswalk, unless written notice of the existence of such
condition, specifying the particular place, was theretofore actually given to
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Malverne, and there was a failure or
neglect on the part of said Village to cause such condition to be corrected
or such snow or ice to be removed, or the place otherwise to be made
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 411-2. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of
limitations, nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Malverne.
Chapter 434
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 200.
Animals — See Ch. 215.
Public assemblies — See Ch. 229.
Loitering — See Ch. 399.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 484.
§ 434-1. Authority to open and close parks.
A. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the parks hereinafter
designated shall be opened and closed at the time and hour designated
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)
§ 399-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-1
1:237
§ 434-2. Prohibited activities.
A person shall not:
by the Board of Trustees, except that the Superintendent of Public
Works and Buildings is authorized to open and close any park in his sole
discretion for emergency, health or safety reasons:
(1) Gaddis Park.
(2) Harris Field.
(3) Reese Park.
(4) Toddler Park.
(5) Whelan Field.
(6) Mini-parks:
(a) All residential parks.
(b) Hempstead Avenue north of railroad station.
(c) Hempstead Avenue south of railroad station.
(d) Broadway, near railroad.
(e) Ocean Avenue and Church Street.
B. A person shall not use the foregoing parks at times other than those
designated in accordance with Subsection A hereof.
C. The opening and closing times at parks shall be posted thereat.
A. Disobey a lawful order of the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Malverne or any authorized law enforcement officer or any
person employed in said parks in a supervisory capacity or the
directions of any park sign.
B. Throw stones or other missiles.
C. Interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any drive, road,
path, walk or area of a park.
D. Climb upon any wall, fence, shelter or other structure not intended as
climbing apparatus.
E. Leave any park area except at established entranceways or exits.
F. Introduce, carry or fire any fireworks.
G. Engage in, instigate, aid or encourage a contention or fight, whether or
not a ring or prizefight.
H. Assault any person.
§ 434-1 MALVERNE CODE § 434-2
1:238
§ 434-3. Penalties for offenses.79
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.
Chapter 443
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 322.
Loitering — See Ch. 399.
Signs — See Ch. 491.
I. Expectorate on any walk, platform or stairway.
J. Make excessive noise which would create a nuisance and prevent park
patrons or residents of the area surrounding the park from
participating in their usual activities.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 434-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-3
1:239

ARTICLE I
Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 6-3-1931 (Ch. 23, Art. I, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 443-1. Definitions.80
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKING OR PEDDLING — Engaging in either:
§ 443-2. Permit required; issuance; fee.81
Hawking and peddling through or in the streets, highways or public places
of or in the Incorporated Village of Malverne without a permit is prohibited.
Such permit shall be for one year from the date thereof and may be issued
by the Mayor, who is hereby empowered to issue such permit to the person
applying therefor, which permit shall not be transferable, and to specify
therefor in the name of the Village the permit fee as set from time to time by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees, which is the fee hereby fixed
therefor. Every such permit shall be countersigned by the Clerk and shall
have endorsed thereon the receipt of said Clerk, showing payment to him of
such fee.
§ 443-3. Hawking from fixed location prohibited.
No person, corporation or association shall keep or maintain at any fixed
point on the streets, highways or public places in the Village of Malverne
any wagon, cart, automobile, vehicle or stand for the purpose of hawking or
peddling therefrom.
§ 443-4. Fraud and theft. [Added 7-10-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby finds
that consumer fraud in door-to-door solicitation, including the theft of mail
from mailboxes of residents, is an activity that must be prevented so as to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village.
The business of selling or attempting to sell or soliciting orders for the
sale of any property or any services by going from house to house, place
of business to place of business or any combination thereof; or
A.
Soliciting contributions for any person, organization, entity or any other
purpose by going from house to house, place of business to place of
business or any combination thereof.
B.
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-5
1:241
§ 443-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-196882]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-5 MALVERNE CODE § 443-5
1:242
ARTICLE II
Solicitation of Orders and Distribution of Handbills
[Adopted 5-15-1940 (Ch. 23, Art. II, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 443-6. Permit required.83
Soliciting orders for goods, wares and merchandise or other commodities
in the streets or public places or by going from house to house in the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, or the distribution or peddling of
handbills containing advertising matter in the streets or public places, or by
going from house to house in the Incorporated Village of Malverne, without
a permit obtained as hereinafter provided, is hereby prohibited.
§ 443-7. Issuance of permit; fee; restrictions; hours of operation.84
Such permit shall be issued in the name of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne upon application therefor and payment of a fee to the Village
Clerk as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board of
Trustees and shall be for a period of one year from the date thereof
and shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk. Such
permit shall not be transferable and shall be carried at all times by the
permittee when performing the acts permitted under said permit and must
be exhibited by the permittee at any time upon request of any person. The
acts permitted thereunder shall only be performed between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 443-8. Investigation; issuance of permit; identification badges and
decals. [Added 2-14-1968]
A. Investigation.
(1) When the aforesaid application is properly filled out and signed by
the applicant, the original and a duplicate thereof shall be filed with
the Village Clerk. The Clerk shall refer the original to the Chief of
Police, who shall make or cause to be made such investigation of
the applicant's business responsibility and moral character as he
deems necessary for protection of the public good.
(2) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his
reason therefor and return said application to the Village Clerk,
who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved
and that no permit shall be issued. Any determination by the Chief
of Police that an application is unsatisfactory shall be based on one
or more of the following findings with respect to the applicant:85
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-8
1:243
(a) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(b) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting law.
(c) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(d) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
(e) Concrete evidence of bad character.
(3) In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police shall find the
application "satisfactory."
(4) If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse on the application his approval and return
the application to the Village Clerk, who shall issue the permit to
the applicant. Such permit shall contain the signature of the issuing
officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the
permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods or services
to be sold thereunder, the date of issue, the length of time the
permit shall be operative and the permit number and other
identifying description of any vehicle used in the peddling,
soliciting or canvassing activity permitted.86
B. The Village Clerk shall issue to each permittee at the time of delivery of
his permit a badge which shall show the nature of the permit in letters
and figures easily discernible from a distance of 10 feet. Such badge
shall, during the time such permittee is engaged in peddling, soliciting
or canvassing, be worn constantly by the permittee on the front of his
outer garment in such a way as to be visible to a person facing him.87
C. All permittees using automobiles or other vehicles in connection with
their business shall have affixed thereon a decal supplied by the Village
Clerk. Said decal shall bear the applicable words "permitted peddler,"
"permitted hawker," "permitted solicitor" or "permitted canvasser,"
together with a number and the expiration date of said permit.88
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or enforced in any way,
manner, shape or form so as to infringe on any protected
noncommercial free speech right of any group or person, including
political and/or religious groups, persons or activities. No permit shall
be required of any political or religious group, member or person
involved in noncommercial speech and/or activities. Any activity which
involves the active solicitation of money or funds shall be deemed a
commercial activity and subject to such regulations as provided in this
chapter. [Added 7-10-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-8 MALVERNE CODE § 443-9
1:244
§ 443-9. Duties of permittee. [Added 2-14-196889]
Every holder of a permit issued by the Village Clerk under the authority of
this article shall be required to carry such permit with him while engaged in
the business or activity permitted within the corporate limits of the Village
of Malverne. He shall produce such permit at the request of any official
of said Village or of any resident of said Village with whom he wishes to
conduct his business or activity. Every such permittee shall restrict his
activity within the Village of Malverne to the hours between 10:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, on Mondays through Saturdays and shall
notify the police officer on duty at least once in every week in which
he plans to conduct said activity and before commencing his selling or
soliciting activity. Such notification shall include a statement of the general
area of the Village of Malverne in which the permittee intends to conduct
said activity and a schedule of dates and times when said activity shall
be conducted. The permittee shall notify the police officer on duty of any
change in area or time of solicitation, should such changes be made during
the week.
§ 443-10. Prohibited practices. [Added 2-14-1968]
No peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall conduct, or attempt to conduct,
his business at any residence or any property on which is posted a sign
expressly prohibiting such activity.
§ 443-11. Enforcement. [Added 2-14-196890]
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Village of Malverne to
enforce the provisions of this article and require any person seen peddling,
soliciting or canvassing, who is not known by such officer to be duly
permitted, to produce his permit.
§ 443-12. Penalties for offenses. [Added 2-14-196891]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-12
1:245
Chapter 455
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512. Trees — See Ch. 540.
§ 455-1. Permit required.
No person shall, except upon written permit issued by the Superintendent
of Buildings, or his/her authorized representative, erect any utility-type pole
for electric, lighting, fiber optic, telephone, cable, satellite, cell, or similar,
or string wire in, over, or upon the streets or public grounds of the Village
or upon, over, or in front of any building or buildings within the Village.
§ 455-2. Installation standards.
Minimum guidelines to be followed for such installation for electric are
contained in reference standard LIPA "Specifications and Requirements for
Electric Installations," latest edition, and other regulations as specified by
the New York State Department of Transportation, Nassau County, and all
Malverne Village codes.
§ 455-3. Penalties for offenses.
Penalties for offenses shall be in accordance with the Code of the Village of
Malverne92 and New York State laws.
Chapter 460
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
Graffiti — See Ch. 330.
Landscaping — See Ch. 382.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 393.
Solid waste — See Ch. 500.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 507.
Trees — See Ch. 540.
§ 460-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Property Maintenance Code
of the Incorporated Village of Malverne."
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 443-12 MALVERNE CODE § 460-2
1:246
§ 460-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for and ensure
the proper maintenance of property and to prevent unsafe, hazardous or
dangerous conditions upon property within the Village of Malverne. It is
the intent of the Village that any and all conditions which pose a threat
to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to the property within
the Village of Malverne be eliminated by the owner of record or tenant in
possession of the offending property. Upon the owner's or occupant's failure
to eliminate such conditions, the Village may cause to have said conditions
eliminated and assess the cost thereof against the owner of record or tenant
in possession of the offending property as set forth in this chapter.
§ 460-3. Maintenance requirements.
A. General requirements.
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be drained to prevent damage
to buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant
waters. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater
sewers and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems
shall be provided, utilized and maintained. In no case shall the
water from any rain leader be allowed to flow over the sidewalk or
adjoining property.
(2) All property shall be well maintained so that lawns, hedges, bushes,
trees and weeds shall be trimmed so as to prevent overgrown and
unsightly conditions. In no event shall any plant growth overhang
or extend beyond the property line so as to obstruct the safe
passage of pedestrians or vehicles. No weeds or lawn growth shall
be permitted to exceed 10 inches in height.
(3) All fences shall be maintained in a safe state and in good repair.
Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to the
replacement and/or repair of fences which may become in
disrepair.
B. Buildings and structures.
(1) All exterior exposed surfaces shall be repaired, coated, treated or
sealed to protect them from deterioration or weathering.
(2) Floors, interior and exterior walls, roofs, ceilings, porches, stairs,
furnishing and fixtures and all appurtenances of buildings shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition and shall be
maintained in a manner so as to prevent collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
(3) Foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and be structurally sound.
§ 460-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-3
1:247
§ 460-4. Responsibility for compliance.
Owners of property within the Village of Malverne, or tenants or occupants
or mortgagees or vendees in possession, assignees of rents, receivers,
(4) Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building
shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the building.
Materials which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or
other deterioration or damage shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a good, workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and
other parts of the building shall be free from loose and unsecured
objects and material. Such objects or materials shall be removed,
repaired or replaced.
(5) Each and every part of the property, including but not limited to
stairs, steps, walks, walkways, driveways, parking areas and
spaces and other paved surfaces, shall be kept in good repair,
maintained in a manner which permits for safe passage and kept in
a clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from any litter, debris,
paper, dirt, garbage or junk. Any holes or other hazards that may
exist shall be filled, or necessary repairs or replacement carried
out. All driveways and parking spaces shall be covered with a
dustless surface, and such driveways and parking spaces shall be
regularly cleaned to avoid accumulation of dirt, paper or any
debris. Any and all sidewalks shall be kept free from snow and ice.
In removing such snow or ice, no person shall put the same in the
gutter or drain of the street or in any manner fill up or obstruct any
such gutter or drain.
(6) Vacant buildings shall be maintained in a condition that does not
present a hazard to adjoining properties, buildings, structures or to
the public.
(7) All property, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
insect infestation, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation.
Insect infestations, rodents or other pests shall be eliminated or
caused to be eliminated, and methods used for such elimination
shall conform with generally accepted practices and comply with
all applicable law.
(8) No building or structure shall be permitted to exist with graffiti.
Graffiti shall be removed and the building or structure restored
within 30 days of occurrence. For purposes of this subsection,
"graffiti" is defined as any writing, drawing, staining, carving,
etching or other marking, made by use of chalk, paint, ink, aerosol
spray can, knife, pencil or any other marking device and/or
material, of any word, name, lettering, inscription, figure, design,
or other representation, made upon a portion of a building or
structure. Signs with proper sign permits or approval are expressly
not included in the definition of graffiti.
§ 460-3 MALVERNE CODE § 460-4
1:248
executors, trustees, lessees, sublessees, agents or any other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly in control of any premises, building or part
of property within the Village shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter.
§ 460-5. Notice to remedy conditions; enforcement.
A. The Building Inspector or any other duly appointed enforcement officer
of the Village of Malverne shall be charged with the duty of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or any other duly
appointed enforcement officer of the Village of Malverne to issue a
notice of violation in writing to order the correction of all conditions
found to exist in or on any premises which violate the provisions of this
chapter. Alternatively, the Building Inspector may, in his sole discretion,
issue an appearance ticket pursuant to Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law.
C. If a notice of violation is issued, it shall be served either personally or by
posting. If a notice of violation is served by posting, it shall be posted in
a conspicuous place upon the premises of the person(s) charged with
the violation and a copy thereof shall be mailed, certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the person(s) charged. If the violation is served by
posting, service is complete upon the date of mailing. If the person so
charged is not the owner, the notice shall also be mailed, certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner.
D. A notice of violation shall state that, unless, within 10 calendar days
from service of the notice of violation, a written request is made for a
review with the Building Inspector, the notice of violation shall, at the
expiration of such ten-day period, be deemed an order to cease and
desist from and to abate, correct or remove the offending conditions;
such notice shall prescribe a reasonable time within which such person
shall be required to cease and desist from and abate such violation.
E. Within five calendar days of receipt of a request for a review, the
Building Inspector, in his sole discretion, shall advise in writing whether
the review will be conducted upon written submissions or will require
personal appearance(s). If personal appearance is required, the
meeting shall be commenced no later than 15 calendar days after the
request for review is made, provided that, for good cause, the Building
Inspector may postpone such meeting for a reasonable time. If, after
the review, the enforcement officer finds that no violation exists, or that
unusual, extraordinary or undue hardship exists, s/he shall withdraw
the notice of violation. If the Building Inspector finds that a violation
exists, s/he shall issue a decision ordering the abatement of the same
within a prescribed reasonable time. The decision of the Building
Inspector shall be issued within seven calendar days of the review and
shall be binding and final.
§ 460-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-6
1:249
§ 460-6. Abatement by Village.
§ 460-7. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to the other penalties set forth in this chapter, any person,
upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, shall be punishable by a
fine of $250 to $1,000, 15 days' imprisonment, or both. Upon conviction
of a second or subsequent violation of this chapter within a twelve-month
period, any person shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 to $2,500, 30
A. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal to abate, correct or remove within
20 calendar days after the cease-and-desist order or decision, as the
case may be, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized and
empowered to initiate the abatement, correction or removal of the
conditions in violation of this chapter.
B. In the event that the Village of Malverne has abated, corrected or
removed the offending conditions or has paid for such abatement,
correction or removal, the actual cost thereof, plus the accrued legal
rate of interest per annum from the date of the invoice for the work,
shall be charged to the owner of the offending property, building or
structure. A copy of the invoice shall be mailed to the persons charged
with the violation by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such
charge shall become due and payable by said owner immediately upon
presentation of such bill. The owner may, within 10 calendar days of
receipt of the invoice, request a review before the Superintendent of
Buildings to challenge the reasonableness of the fees.
C. In the event no review is requested to challenge the reasonableness of
the fees, and the full amount due the Village of Malverne specified in
Subsection B remains unpaid 20 calendar days following the mailing of
the invoice for the cost associated with the abatement, correction or
removal, then the Building Inspector shall cause to be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk a sworn statement showing the cost and expense
incurred for the work, the date the work was completed and the
location of the property by section, lot and block on which said work
was done and the name of the reputed owner thereof. The filing of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property
and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal
and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final
payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be a lien on the
property and shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the
collection of taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty
at the legal rate of interest in the event that the same is not paid in full
on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements filed in accordance with the
provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities
have been complied with and the work has been properly and
successfully done and shall be full notice to every person concerned
that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes in the
statement that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
§ 460-6 MALVERNE CODE § 460-7
1:250
days' imprisonment, or both. In addition, such person shall be subject to
an injunction prohibiting and otherwise preventing any further violations.
Nothing in this chapter precludes the Village of Malverne from seeking any
other available remedies at law.
§ 460-8. State property maintenance code.93
The requirements and standards set forth in the property maintenance code
of the State of New York, and all revisions and amendments thereto, shall
be controlling in the Incorporated Village of Malverne. Where permitted by
the property maintenance code of the State of New York, it is the intent of
the Board of Trustees to implement greater minimum standards within the
Village of Malverne.
§ 460-9. Emergencies.
Whenever the Building Inspector or enforcement official finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate attention to protect the public
health or safety, s/he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such emergency and require that such action be taken as s/
he deems necessary to address the emergency. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall take effect immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately.
Upon petition to the Building Inspector, said person shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as practicable.
§ 460-10. Bamboo. [Added 5-1-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
A. Purpose. The planting or growing of bamboo has been determined to be
a community problem due to the destructive nature of the plant to
uproot asphalt, concrete and fences of adjoining property owners.
Bamboo has a remarkable ability to propagate and spread at an
alarming rate, causing harm to adjoining landowners. For this reason,
the Board of Trustees has determined it to be necessary to prohibit the
planting, growing or maintaining of bamboo on outdoor improved or
vacant unimproved property (excluding the inside of a residence as a
plant).
B. Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent of such owner,
and/or any person, firm or corporation in possession of any improved
real property or vacant unimproved real property, excluding the
possession of a plant inside a residence, within the Village of Malverne,
to permit planting, growing and/or maintaining of bamboo, whether
originating on said property or encroaching thereon from any
neighboring property. The term "bamboo" shall be defined as any
tropical or semi-tropical grass of the genera Bambura, Dendrocalamus,
or of any other related genera.
C. Penalties for offenses.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 460-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-10
1:251
Chapter 466
REAL ESTATE BROKERS, AGENTS AND SALESPERSONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265. Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 466-1. Illegal occupancies prohibited.
No person acting as a real estate broker, agent and/or salesperson, whether
or not licensed by the State of New York, shall knowingly facilitate the use
or occupancy of a detached dwelling or a two-family attached residence
building in a manner which violates the use or occupancy of such dwelling
or building which is permitted by the certificate of occupancy or certificate
of existing use issued by the Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector
and/or Acting Building Inspector, for it or in a manner which violates
the permitted use or occupancy of such dwelling or building under the
Malverne Village Code. A person shall be deemed to facilitate a use or
occupancy by, among other things, advertising or listing a dwelling or
building, showing a dwelling or building to a prospective user or occupant
or otherwise soliciting or encouraging another person to use or occupy
a dwelling or building. Upon the conviction of a licensed broker, agent
or salesperson for a violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
provided for in this chapter, the Clerk of the Malverne Justice Court shall
forward a record of such conviction to the New York Department of State's
licensing bureau.
§ 466-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall commit an offense, the
fine for which shall not exceed $2,000 for each offense. Each separate
advertising or listing of a dwelling or building, and/or showing of a dwelling
(1) The Department of Buildings (i.e., Building Inspector) has the
authority to issue a summons for a violation of the provisions of this
section. If necessary, the Department of Buildings can issue a
summons once per week in the event an owner, owner's agent,
person or corporation fails to remedy an existing condition after
being notified by the Department of Buildings of a bamboo
condition by being issued an initial summons and failing to remedy
the condition within seven days after receipt of the initial
summons.
(2) A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $350 for any such violation or an individual may be subject to
up to 15 days' incarceration.
§ 460-10 MALVERNE CODE § 466-2
1:252
or building to a prospective user or occupant in violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 466-3. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administrated and enforced by the Building Inspector, Deputy Building
Inspector, Interim Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector and any
sworn police officer.
§ 466-4. Interpretation.
Whenever any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other
provision of this chapter or any other statute or local law applicable or
covering the same subject matter, the most restrictive provision or the one
imposing the highest standard shall govern and be supreme.
Chapter 484
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 399.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 484-1. Findings and intent.
§ 484-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby
finds and determines that:
(1) Sex offenders pose an unreasonable threat to the safety and wellbeing
of children.
(2) Information is currently available to the public regarding these
high-risk offenders, which information is available through the
internet and other sources.
(3) It is imperative that the Village take all steps necessary to protect
the most vulnerable residents of the Village.
B. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to restrict all registered sex
offenders from residing within 1,000 feet of any school, licensed daycare
center or playground for the protection of children.
§ 466-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-2
1:253
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any program or facility caring for children for more
than three hours per day per child, as those terms are defined in § 390 of
the New York Social Services Law.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any building, structure, or portion
thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
human beings.
PLAYGROUND — Any public land designated for recreational or athletic
purposes by the Incorporated Village of Malverne, the Town of Hempstead,
the County of Nassau, and/or any school district.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — Any person who has been convicted of an
offense and is registered with the State Division of Criminal Justice Services
pursuant to the provisions of Article 6-C of the New York Correction Law.
SCHOOL — Any institution, building or structure used for teaching children
or imparting an education.
SHELTER — Any residential facility providing temporary housing, for which
such temporary use and occupancy of the housing facilities the owner or
primary tenant of the property receives compensation, either directly from
the temporary occupant or through reimbursement from a third party on
behalf of such temporary occupant, or both.
§ 484-3. Residency restrictions.
§ 484-4. Exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for all registered sex offenders to reside within
1,000 feet of the property line of any public or private nursery,
elementary, middle or high school; or a licensed day-care center; or a
playground.
B. No shelter or housing accommodation shall permit or cause the
placement of any registered sex offender if such shelter or housing
accommodation is within 1,000 feet of the property line of any public or
private nursery, elementary, middle or high school; or a licensed daycare
center; or a playground.
C. The residency restriction established by this section shall remain in
effect for as long as the offender is classified as a registered sex
offender.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any registered sex
offenders who have established a residence prior to June 1, 2006.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if a public or private
nursery, elementary, middle or high school, or a licensed day-care
center, or a playground is newly constructed and is within 1,000 feet of
the residence of a registered sex offender who has previously
established a residence in that location.
§ 484-2 MALVERNE CODE § 484-4
1:254
§ 484-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall commit an offense, the
fine for which shall not exceed $1,000 for each offense. Each daily violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 484-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all actions occurring on or after June 1, 2006.
§ 484-7. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administrated and enforced by the Building Inspector, Deputy Building
Inspector, Interim Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector and any
sworn police officer.
§ 484-8. Reverse preemption; severability.
This chapter shall be null and void on the day that statewide or federal
legislation goes into effect, incorporating either the same or substantially
similar provisions as are contained in this chapter, or in the event that
a pertinent county, state or federal administrative agency issues and
promulgates regulations preempting such action by the Incorporated
Village of Malverne. The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village
of Malverne may determine via mere resolution whether or not identical
or substantially similar statewide legislation has been enacted for the
purposes of triggering the provision of this section. Likewise, if any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be determined to be unconstitutional
or otherwise unenforceable, it shall not affect the constitutionality or
enforceability of the remaining provisions.94
Chapter 491
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Garage sales — See Ch. 322.
Graffiti — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any registered sex
offender who is required by court order to reside at a certain location.
94.Note: Recently the New York State Court of Appeals declared local laws such as this one to
be preempted by state law and that state authorities should impose residency restrictions.
Nevertheless, in the event of legislative override of this decision, the local statute
remains, although local enforcement officials will coordinate prosecution with local
District Attorneys or the New York State Attorney General.
§ 484-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-8
1:255

ARTICLE I
Signs and Banners
[Adopted 12-13-1934 (Ch. 36, Art. I, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 491-1. Permit required; application; fee. [Amended 2-14-196895]
§ 491-2. Height and location.
No consent shall hereafter be given by the Board of Trustees of said Village
to the hanging or erection of any such sign, banner or other emblem
or insignia, nor shall such sign, banner or other emblem or insignia be
hereafter hung or erected, unless such sign, banner or other emblem or
insignia shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk and unless the same
shall extend into the street no greater distance than five feet from the
property line. Any sign, banner or other emblem or insignia intended to run
A. No person shall hereafter erect, hang or place, or cause or permit to be
hereafter erected, hung or placed, over, upon or across any sidewalk in
the Village of Malverne any sign, banner or other emblem or insignia,
without first obtaining from the Board of Trustees of said Village a
permit so to do.
B. Application.
(1) Application for such permit shall be in writing and be accompanied
by a written consent of the owner of the property on which the sign,
banner or other emblem or insignia is proposed to be erected.
(2) Such application shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant that, in consideration of the granting of such permit by
the Board of Trustees, such applicant shall save and keep harmless
the Village of Malverne from any liability for, or by reason of, any
injury to person or property as a result of his negligence or
otherwise in connection with the sign.
(3) The application for such permit shall set forth in detail the nature
and size of said sign, banner or other emblem or insignia, and shall
be accompanied by a sketch showing the design thereof, the
measurements thereof, the words intended to appear thereon and
shall, in addition, show the distance between the lowest part of the
sign, banner or other emblem or insignia and the sidewalk below,
and the number of feet into the street which said sign, banner or
other emblem or insignia shall project.
C. Each and every application shall be filed with the Clerk of the Village of
Malverne and, at the time of filing the application, such applicant shall
pay a fee as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board of
Trustees to the Clerk of said Village to cover the cost of the inspection
thereof.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 491-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-2
1:257
parallel with the building in a horizontal position must be fastened securely
to the building wall and must not project over the sill of the second story
or below the front window cornice. Signs, banners or other emblems or
insignia extending out from the building, other than vertical signs, banners
or other insignia, shall not extend above the floor beams of the second story.
Vertical signs, banners or other emblems or insignia must not extend above
the roof of the building. No sign, banner or other emblem or insignia shall
cover any portion of any window.
§ 491-3. Permit does not authorize violations.
No consent hereafter granted by the Board of Trustees of Malverne, Nassau
County, New York, shall be construed to permit the erection of any sign,
banner or other emblem or insignia in any manner in contravention of the
rules herein specified.
§ 491-4. Temporary signs. [Amended 8-19-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Malverne from permitting the erection of any
banner or transparency which is intended to be temporary and not
permanent, upon proper application made to it in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this article upon such conditions as the Board of
Trustees may prescribe.96
§ 491-5. Use of window space in business districts. [Added
7-17-1974]
It is the purpose of this article to preserve and promote the character
and appearance and conserve the property values of the Village, the
attractiveness of whose residential and business areas is an economic
mainstay of the community, and also to protect the safety of pedestrians and
automobiles. To that end, in a business district, no storekeeper, store owner
or proprietor or anyone conducting a business shall be permitted to use
more than 40% of the available window space either inside or outside of said
store or premises for the purpose of advertising products or merchandise
sold within the premises or for any other purpose or for the placing of
signs of any description. The remaining available window space shall be
free of objects such as cartons, crates, boxes, machinery or similar articles
which are unnecessarily offensive to visual sensibilities as determined by
the Board of Trustees.
96.Editor's Note: Original Sections 36-4(B), Open House Signs, added 9-20-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007, as amended, and 36-4(C), Political Signs, added 8-19-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999,
which followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). See now Ch. 600, Zoning, §§ 600-9.2 and 600-9.5.
§ 491-2 MALVERNE CODE § 491-6
1:258
§ 491-6. Additional regulations.97
For additional sign regulations, see Chapter 600, Zoning, Article IX, Signs
(§§ 600-9.0 through 600-9.8).
§ 491-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-196898]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who shall violate
any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
97.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
.
§ 491-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-7
1:259

ARTICLE II
Advertising Signs or Signboards
[Adopted 6-13-1923 (Ch. 36, Art. II, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 491-8. Posting prohibited; legal notices excepted.
No commercial advertising sign or signboard shall be erected or placed on
any highway, street or roadway in the Village of Malverne, and no person
or persons shall, except upon written permit issued by the Village, placard
with show bills, handbills, posters or any printed or written notice or notices
and advertisements of any kind whatsoever, or attach anything whatsoever
of such character to any tree, pump, hydrant, telegraph, telephone or
electric light pole within the Village of Malverne, except legal notices and
notices and rules made and adopted or enacted by the Board of Trustees of
said Village and posted by order of said Board.
§ 491-9. Additional regulations.99
For additional sign regulations, see Chapter 600, Zoning, Article IX, Signs
(§§ 600-9.0 through 600-9.8).
§ 491-10. Penalties for offenses.100
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
99.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 491-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-10
1:261
Chapter 500
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscaping — See Ch. 382.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512.
Trees — See Ch. 540.
§ 491-10 MALVERNE CODE § 491-10
1:262
ARTICLE I
Garbage, Refuse and Litter
[Adopted 2-14-1968 (Ch. 20 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 500-1. Findings, declaration of policy and purpose. [Amended
12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
§ 500-2. Definitions. [Amended 8-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001101]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature which:
A. The Board of Trustees has found and hereby declares that there exist in
the Village of Malverne structures used for residential and
nonresidential purposes which are or may become in the future a
menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of
the citizens and inhabitants of the Village because of the accumulation
on the open spaces surrounding such structures of litter, garbage,
rubbish, refuse and disabled machinery or vehicles and because of
generally unsanitary conditions creating or tending to create insect,
rodent, vermin or other pest infestations.
B. The improper storage of garbage and refuse and indiscriminate
littering are unsanitary and a detriment to the preservation of public
health, the protection of property and property values and the safety
and welfare of the residents of the Village of Malverne. The control of
the types and storage of garbage containers to prevent depredation by
animals and the prevention of unsanitary littering and certain
restrictions on littering on private property are, therefore, regulated for
the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Village of Malverne.
C. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Malverne hereby declares its
intention to preserve the Harris Field Park as a park for use by the
residents of the Village and to continue the use of the remainder of the
facility as the headquarters of the Department of Public Works with as
little disturbance to neighboring Village residents as possible;
therefore, dumping and storage of garbage as defined in § 500-2 (any
animal or vegetable matter capable of fermentation or decay) or for use
as a transfer station for any nonmetal, trash, litter or debris is
prohibited and to be consistent with federal and state law. [Added
1-18-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-2
1:263
FREON-CONTAINING PRODUCTS — Any and all appliances, containers,
and/or products that contain or contained Freon, including, but not limited
to, refrigerators, air conditioners, freezers and dehumidifiers.
GARBAGE — Any animal or vegetable matter capable of fermentation or
decay.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any and all appliances, containers, and/or
products that contain or contained any toxic, combustible, flammable,
poisonous, corrosive, carcinogenic, radioactive and/or diseasecontaminated
materials, including but not limited to oils, gasoline, paint,
acids and medical waste.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulations, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
"commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, ball field, basketball court, or any
other public area in the Village, owned or used by the Village and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, an association or
corporation.
PREMISES — Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles or parts thereof,
upon or in which the refuse or garbage is stored.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit.
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 500-2 MALVERNE CODE § 500-2
1:264
REFUSE — All solid wastes of a community other than garbage and body
wastes, such as rags, paper, cardboard, shoes, ashes, small metal, rubber
and wooden scrap, leaves and other material of the same general nature.
RUBBISH — Includes waste metal, tin cans, ashes, cinders, glass, pottery
and all discarded substances of a solid and incombustible nature.
§ 500-3. Storage and placement of refuse and garbage; containers.
[Amended 9-20-1972; 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984; 8-1-2001 by
L.L. No. 5-2001]
Refuse and garbage shall be stored for collection as follows:
A. Garbage shall be drained and stored in durable, rust-resistant,
nonabsorbent, watertight containers, which shall have close-fitting
covers and adequate handles to facilitate collection and which shall be
of not more than 32 gallons in capacity or 40 pounds in weight.102
B. Ashes shall be kept dry and stored in fire-resistant containers with
close-fitting covers. Such containers shall be not greater than 20
gallons in capacity and shall have a combined weight (container and
contents) not exceeding 85 pounds.
C. Other refuse, except recyclable materials, shall be stored in durable
containers with close-fitting, detachable covers, and possessing
handles, not exceeding 32 gallons in volume or 40 pounds in weight,
except that bulky refuse may be packed and bundled together and
firmly tied so as to be easily handled, not exceeding four feet in length,
two feet in diameter, or 85 pounds in weight.103
D. All containers for refuse, garbage and/or recycling shall be kept in a
proper state of repair, shall be kept free from nails and sharp edges and
in a sanitary condition, and the contents shall be kept in such condition
that they may easily be removed.
E. No refuse, garbage and/or recycling shall be placed at the curb prior to
7:00 p.m., prevailing time, or 30 minutes past sunset, whichever occurs
earlier, prior to the regular collection day, and all containers shall be
removed from the curb and stored within 12 hours after collection.104
F. No building materials from either new buildings or remodeled buildings
with building permits shall be placed at curbs. The owner or contractor
shall be responsible for the disposal of same. (The Building Inspector
shall stamp this on all building permits.)
G. No containers shall be placed in the paved area of the street or any part
thereof awaiting collection.105
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
104. Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, Newspapers, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:265
§ 500-4. Litter in public places. [Amended 9-7-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the Village except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles.
§ 500-5. Litter on private property. [Added 9-7-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983; amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984; 8-1-2001 by L.L. No.
5-2001]
No person shall throw or deposit litter, refuse, garbage or rubbish on the
private premises of another at any time, nor shall the owner, tenant or
occupant of private property suffer or permit litter, refuse, garbage, rubbish
or disabled machinery or vehicles to accumulate on or to remain on such
private premises.
§ 500-6. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place.
H. Freon-containing products. All Freon-containing products shall be
placed at the curb for collection on such day of the week as designated
by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Board
of Trustees by resolution.
I. Air-tight products. Any and all appliances, products or materials placed
out for collection which are by their nature sealed air tight shall be
disassembled in such a way as to eliminate them from being air tight, by
removing such doors, hinges, hatches, etc. as necessary.
J. Special pickup. All bulk items made of glass and/or metal, except Freoncontaining
products, shall be placed at the curb for pickup on such day
designated for collection of recyclable materials. All bulk items made of
wood, nonrecyclable plastic, carbon composite or other bulk materials,
whether they also contain glass and or metal, shall be placed for pickup
on a day designated for "special pickup" by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Board of Trustees by resolution.
Such special pickup shall be arranged in advance by contacting the
Village during normal business hours.
105. Editor's Note: Original Subsection I, Recyclable materials, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 500-3 MALVERNE CODE § 500-7
1:266
§ 500-7. Owner duty to maintain sidewalk. [Amended 8-1-2001 by
L.L. No. 5-2001106]
No persons shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Village the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 500-8. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free from litter;
sweeping into streets or gutters prohibited.
No persons owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Village the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
driveway or sidewalk. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Village shall keep the sidewalks in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 500-9. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Village.107
§ 500-10. Collection days.108
Collections shall be made on such days as the Board of Trustees may
designate.
§ 500-11. Limit on number of containers placed for collection.
[Added 8-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
No resident or entity shall place, or cause to be placed, or allow to be placed
more than 10 receptacles, as defined in § 500-2, for collection on any single
collection day, per individual dwelling structure or commercial unit.
§ 500-12. Bulk and landscape refuse. [Amended 8-1-2001 by L.L.
No. 5-2001]
A. Lawn cuttings, tree cuttings, hedge trimmings, leaves (except as
provided for in § 500-14), plants and/or other yard waste shall be placed
for collection in cartons, baskets, or other containers not exceeding 32
gallons in capacity or 45 pounds in weight. Bulk tree trimmings or
hedge trimmings shall be placed for collection in tied bundles not
heavier than 50 pounds and not more than four feet in length.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
107. Editor's Note: The original section "Litter in parks," which followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
108. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-12
1:267
§ 500-13. Business establishments.
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises whereon a
business or industry is conducted shall arrange for the removal of refuse
from the business or industry each day, unless sufficient and suitable
facilities are provided and used for storage of such refuse on such premises
until removal of the refuse from the premises.
§ 500-14. Leaves.
During the season specified by Village authorities for collection of leaves
from the streets, leaves may be placed in the street not less than one foot
from the curb or curbline of said street immediately abutting the premises.
§ 500-15. Unregulated dumping prohibited.
No person shall place or deposit or dump, or allow, permit, aid or abet the
placing or depositing or dumping of, any ashes, garbage, paper or rubbish
of any kind upon vacant property or in any of the highways or public streets
of the Incorporated Village of Malverne, except in conformity with the rules
and regulations governing same.
§ 500-16. Contractor's permit required.109 [Added 8-1-2001 by L.L.
No. 5-2001110]
Contractors that provide landscaping, gardening or horticultural services to
any resident or commercial entity within the Village of Malverne must have
a contractor's permit issued by the Village of Malverne, after payment of
the appropriate fee, valid for the date or dates of such service.
§ 500-17. Enforcement. [Added 8-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
B. Any licensed or unlicensed landscaper, gardener, and/or horticulturist
who contracts or agrees to provided landscaping, gardening or
horticultural services to any resident or commercial entity in the Village
shall be responsible to remove any and all lawn cuttings, tree cuttings,
hedge trimmings, leaves, plants and/or other yard waste.
A. The Superintendent of the Building Department, Building Inspector,
Assistant Building Inspector, Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works, Code Enforcement Officer, and other duly appointed law
enforcement officers of the Village shall be charged with the duty of
administering and enforcing this article. Violators are subject to court
action.
B. The Superintendent of the Building Department, Building Inspector,
Assistant Building Inspector, Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works, Code Enforcement Officer, and other duly appointed law
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 382, Landscaping.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-12 MALVERNE CODE § 500-17
1:268
§ 500-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No.
2-1984; 8-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001111]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
§ 500-19. Interpretation. [Added 8-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
Whenever any provision of this article is in conflict with any other provision
of this article or any other statute or local law applicable or covering the
same subject matter, the most restrictive provision or the one imposing the
highest standard shall govern and be supreme.
enforcement officers of the Village shall issue a notice of violation, or
order, ordering the correction of any condition found to be opposite to
or in violation of this article.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-19
1:269

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-27-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989 (Ch. 33 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 500-20. Findings and purpose.
§ 500-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECYCLABLES — Discarded material which may be reclaimed, comprising
solid waste in the form of paper, glass, metals and plastics and which may
be further defined as follows:
A. The conservation of recyclable materials is now a necessity in order to
conserve natural resources, and the cost of solid waste disposal is ever
increasing and available residue disposal landfill facilities are rapidly
decreasing. It is therefore the intention of the Village of Malverne to
establish a program for the mandatory separation of recyclables from
garbage and rubbish within the Village. Such a program will reduce
both the amount of solid waste to be disposed of and the cost of landfill
disposal. In addition, the separation, collection and sale of recyclable
materials will reduce the financial burden of solid waste disposal on the
taxpayers of the Village of Malverne.
B. This article of the Code of the Village of Malverne shall regulate the
separation of recyclables by the residents of the Village in accordance
with the New York State Solid Waste Management Plan.
Paper, clean and unsoiled, including:
Newsprint, all newspapers and newspaper advertisements,
supplements, comics and enclosures.
(1)
(2) Magazines and telephone books.
Corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons, pasteboard and
similar corrugated and kraft paper materials, provided that they
are free of foreign matter and refuse.
(3)
Paper recyclables do not include miscellaneous stationery products
such as discarded letters and envelopes or any paper products
other than those listed.
(4)
A.
Glass:
(1) Clear (flint) and rinsed clean of food or beverage residue.
Amber, brown and green glass food containers rinsed clean of food
or beverage residue.
(2)
B.
§ 500-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-21
1:271
§ 500-22. Curbside program established; collection schedule.
§ 500-23. Preparation of materials for collection.
Glass which is excluded from the recycling program is as follows:
mirrors, china and ceramic material.
(3)
Metals:
(1) Ferrous and bimetal cans with one end removed.
Aluminum cans, including beverage cans and cans used to contain
foodstuff and rinsed clean of food residue.
(2)
Metals which are excluded from recyclables consist of lawn chairs,
screen frames, air conditioners, dryers, refrigerators, hot water
tanks, stoves and other "white" goods which are collected as bulk
on the designated day.
(3)
C.
Plastics:
Plastic containers used to hold food, beverage and other household
commodities.
(1)
Plastics which are excluded are plastic utensils, plates, toys and
other items not used to contain food or beverages.
(2)
D.
A. There is hereby established within the Village a program ("curbside
program") for the separate collection of paper, cardboard, glass and
cans from all non-physically disabled residents of the municipality
located within said area and from all other persons, including
commercial or institutional establishments, within said area whose
solid waste is collected by or on behalf of the Village of Malverne. Said
curbside program shall not apply to any apartment complex or
condominium complex.
B. Collections or recyclable materials pursuant to this article shall be upon
the days established by the Recycling Coordinator and pursuant to a
schedule established by the Superintendent of Public Works, subject to
approval of the Board of Trustees.
C. All residents of the Village of Malverne within the area serviced by the
curbside program established pursuant to this article shall source
separate all designated recyclables and place them at the side of the
road fronting their residence in the manner designated by § 500-23 of
this article and on the date specified for collection of the schedule
published by the Village.
A. It shall be the responsibility of each homeowner or occupant of the
Village to ensure that all recyclable materials are properly separated
from other discarded materials and are cleaned, or otherwise prepared
for collection, in accordance with this article. All recyclable materials
shall be placed in one or more recycling containers provided for that
§ 500-21 MALVERNE CODE § 500-23
1:272
purpose by the Village. In the event that the amount or size of the
recyclable materials exceeds the capacity of the designated containers,
then the excess recyclable materials shall be placed in separate
containers and placed alongside the designated containers when placed
at the curb for collection.
B. Paper recyclables may be placed in paper bags or tied in bundles not to
exceed 35 pounds in weight nor exceeding one foot in thickness, prior
to the collection, removal or disposal of the same. Bundled newspaper
is to be placed within or on top of the recycling container or adjacent to
the recycling container. Papers are not to be secured with wire or
plastic bindings or placed in plastic trash bags.
C. Corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons, pasteboard and
similar paper materials are to be broken down and tied securely in
bundles not to exceed 35 pounds.
D. Glass shall be placed in the recycling container for collection. The glass
bottles and jars must be rinsed clean of food or liquid residue and be
placed in the container without any caps.
E. Metals.
(1) Ferrous and bimetal cans must have one end removed and they
must be rinsed clean of food residue and be placed in the recycling
container.
(2) Aluminum cans, including beverage cans and cans used to contain
foodstuff, must be rinsed clean of food residue and be placed in the
recycling container.
(3) Metal cans must have their labels removed.
F. Plastics. Plastic bottles and containers used to hold beverage and other
household goods must be rinsed clean to remove residues and be
placed in the recycling container.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which consists of recyclables combined with other forms of solid
waste after the date set by the Board of Trustees for mandatory
recycling.
H. From the time recyclables are placed at the curb by any resident,
ownership of such materials set out for collection shall thereupon vest
in the Village of Malverne. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect,
remove or dispose of recyclables which are the property of the Village.
Each such collection in violation hereof from one or more residences
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
I. The Recycling Coordinator is empowered to designate the day of the
week on which recyclables shall be collected, removed and disposed of
from a particular area, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 500-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-23
1:273
§ 500-24. Containers; additional requirements.
§ 500-25. Collection.
The Recycling Coordinator is hereby authorized to establish collection
schedules and routes for the collection of recyclable materials and to cause
reasonable notice of requirements thereof to be given to the residents of the
recycling areas, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 500-26. Motor oil.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, used motor oil shall
only be disposed of by delivery to a service station which is required under
J. No person having custody or control of residential premises within the
Village of Malverne shall permit or cause any garbage, rubbish or other
refuse, including recyclables, within their control, to become a hazard
or potential hazard to public travel, health or safety or to become a
nuisance of any sort.
K. The Village Board of Trustees or its duly authorized representative shall
be permitted to promulgate such other rules and regulations as may be
deemed necessary to effectuate the intent of this article.
A. Containers for the purpose of separating and placing recyclable
materials for collection will be provided by the Village to residents.
Such containers will remain the property of the Village and must be
kept in a good and clean condition by such residents. Recycling
containers are not to be used for any purpose other than as described in
this article. In the event that such containers are lost, damaged or
stolen, additional containers shall be available from the Department of
Public Works, upon payment of an appropriate fee to be established by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Each homeowner or occupant may obtain an additional recycling
container at no charge from the Village upon a showing of need.
Additional requests may be granted at the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works. Advance arrangements must be made
for all additional recycling containers.
C. Homeowners or occupants within the Village shall affix their respective
street addresses to any recycling container provided to them by the
Village. Such address shall be affixed by means of a white permanent
marking.
D. In the event that the Village Board of Trustees or the Recycling
Coordinator finds that additional measures are necessary in order for
such recyclable materials to be marketable, the Board or Recycling
Coordinator shall have the power to require that homeowners or
occupants within the Village undertake such measures, provided that
reasonable advance notice is given to such homeowners or occupants.
§ 500-23 MALVERNE CODE § 500-26
1:274
state law to accept such material, or through other facilities authorized by
law to accept such material.
§ 500-27. Prohibited activities.
§ 500-28. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Department
of Public Works Sanitation Foreman, the Code Enforcement Officers, police
officers and other authorized officials to administer the provisions of this
article.
§ 500-29. Powers of Board of Trustees.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
(1) Any person, other than those persons lawfully authorized, to collect
any designated recyclable or scavenge or remove any articles from
any recyclable container which has been placed at the roadside for
collection or at a drop-off point.
(2) Any person to violate or to cause to assist in the published violation
of any provision of this article or any rules and regulations
promulgated by the Village of Malverne pursuant to this article of
the Village Code concerning recycling.112
(3) Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other
than a designated recyclable in or near a recycling drop-off point.
(4) Any person to hinder, to obstruct, to prevent or to interfere with the
Village of Malverne, or any other authorized persons in the
performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of
this article.
(5) Any recyclables to be placed at the roadside more than 10 hours
prior to the regular collection day, or to have containers remain at
the roadside more than 12 hours after collection.
B. All unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A shall constitute a
violation.
A. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may add to or exclude from, from
time to time, the separation and recycling program of any materials set
forth in this article.
B. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may exclude various types of
establishments from participation in and compliance with this article.
C. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may delay the requirement of
segregating various materials.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-30
1:275
§ 500-30. Penalties for offenses.
A. In the event that an owner or occupant of a dwelling within the Village
fails to separate and prepare recyclable materials for collection in
accordance with the provisions of this article after being given
reasonable notice of these requirements, collection of all solid waste
from such dwelling will be suspended until such time as the owner or
occupant can demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
article. Such compliance can be demonstrated by placing properly
separated and prepared recyclable materials at the curb in one or more
designated recycling containers on the next scheduled collection date
for such recyclable materials.
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, any person
committing an offense against this article or any provision or section
thereof shall be guilty of a violation. Each day that such violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. Such an offense shall be punishable
by a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the following
schedule:113
(1) For a first conviction, by a fine not to exceed $50.
(2) For a second conviction within one year, by a fine not to exceed
$100.
(3) For a third conviction within one year, by a fine not to exceed $200.
(4) For a fourth conviction within one year, by a fine of not less than
$300 nor more than $500.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-30 MALVERNE CODE § 500-30
1:276
Chapter 507
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 507-1. Background and findings.
A. Background.
(1) In 1972, amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
prohibited the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters from a
point source unless authorized by a National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit. Improving water quality
under this program focused on industrial wastewater and
municipal sewage discharges. Once the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) found an improvement in
pollution control of these point source discharges, it shifted its
regulatory focus to nonpoint source pollution, namely urban
stormwater runoff. A series of studies in the 1980s identified many
pollutants in stormwater discharges from a variety of sources,
including streets, parking lots, lawns, construction sites, highway
yards and other urban commercial and industrial uses. As a result,
in 1990 the EPA established Phase I stormwater regulations for
large communities with populations greater than 100,000 which
required National/State Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(N/SPDES) permits for certain municipal and industrial stormwater
discharges. In 1991 Phase II of these regulations was finalized,
requiring smaller communities within urbanized areas to develop
plans for the control of stormwater within their jurisdictions by
March 2003, with implementation by 2008.
(2) The Village of Malverne, as an operator of a municipal separate
stormwater system (MS4), is subject to these permitting
requirements as the State of New York Department of
Environmental Conservation has designated the Village as an
"Automatically Designated Urbanized Area." The initial step toward
providing a stormwater pollution prevention plan under Phase II is
to develop and implement six minimum measures, including public
education, public involvement, detection and elimination of illicit
connections, construction site runoff, post-construction stormwater
controls, pollution prevention and good housekeeping. This chapter
is intended to meet a number of these measures. The various
provisions of this chapter work to meet these objectives by
regulating the impacts of construction activity in the Village on soil
§ 500-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-1
1:277
erosion and stormwater runoff. For most single-family residences,
stormwater runoff is managed with the installation of dry wells,
catch basins, driveway and/or curtain drains, or piping to nearby
existing municipal storm sewer systems. Typical erosion control
measures include the installation of silt fences and hay bales
around the property during construction.
(3) This chapter acknowledges the difference between large
construction projects typically requiring Planning Board site plan
or subdivision approval and more modest additions or
improvements by requiring more detailed information for the large
projects and basic information for the smaller projects.
B. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Malverne finds that
uncontrolled drainage and runoff associated with land development
have a significant impact upon the health, safety and welfare of the
community. Specifically:
(1) Stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into receiving water bodies,
degrading water quality.
(2) The increase in nutrients in stormwater runoff such as phosphorus
and nitrogen accelerates eutrophication of receiving waters.
(3) Improper design and construction of drainage facilities can
increase the velocity of runoff, thereby increasing stream bank
erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Construction involving land clearing and the alteration of natural
topography increases erosion.
(5) Siltation of water bodies resulting from increased erosion
decreases their capacity to hold and transport water, interferes
with navigation in downstream harbors, and harms flora and fauna.
(6) Sediment from soil erosion clogs catch basins, storm sewers and
ditches and pollutes and silts streams, rivers, lakes, reservoirs and
harbors.
(7) Impervious surfaces increase the volume and rate of stormwater
runoff and allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
(8) Improperly managed stormwater runoff can increase the incidence
of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering
property and human life.
(9) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts
on community waters.
(10) Many future problems can be avoided if land is developed with
sound stormwater runoff management practices.
§ 507-1 MALVERNE CODE § 507-2
1:278
§ 507-2. Purpose and objectives.
In order to protect, maintain and enhance both the immediate and longterm
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of
Malverne, this chapter has the following objectives in accordance with
certain measures identified in the SPDES Phase II regulations:
§ 507-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with Articles 4 and 20 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, the Village of Malverne has the authority to enact local laws for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the Village.
The Village may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment
of any municipal officer or employees to effectuate and administer such
local law.
§ 507-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. To prevent increases in the magnitude and frequency of stormwater
runoff so as to prevent an increase in flood flows and in the hazards and
costs associated with flooding.
B. To prevent decreases in groundwater recharge and stream base flow so
as to maintain aquatic life, assimilative capacity, and potential water
supplies.
C. To maintain the integrity of stream geometry so as to sustain the
hydrologic functions of streams.
D. To control erosion and sedimentation so as to prevent its deposition in
streams and other receiving water bodies.
E. To regulate and control the design, construction, use and maintenance
of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land situated in the
Village.
F. To facilitate the removal of pollutants in stormwater runoff so as to
perpetuate the natural biological and recreation functions of streams,
water bodies and wetlands.
G. To secure, to the extent possible, multiple community benefits such as
groundwater replenishment, open space protection and increased
recreational opportunity through integrated land use-stormwater
management planning.
A. Use of words. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the
word "lot" includes the words "parcel" and "plot"; and the word
"building" includes the word "structure."
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
§ 507-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-4
1:279
and to give this chapter the most effective application. The word "shall"
connotes mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is
permissive.
ADDITION — Any work on an existing structure that changes the
external dimensions of such structure.
ADJOINING PROPERTY — Any property facing a work site across any
right-of-way, street or highway shall be deemed "adjoining property," as
well as any property contiguous on any side.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Procedures and methods
pertaining to construction activities which are intended to minimize
water pollution, retain valuable topsoil and prevent erosion and
sedimentation, and include, but are not limited to, those practices
contained in the Nassau County Best Management Practices Manual
Series.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUALS — The most recent
editions of a series of manuals published by the County of Nassau
and the State of New York, consisting of various volumes on best
management practices for certain described activities, and specifically,
the publications titled "Nassau County Best Management Practices
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control, "New York Guidelines for
Urban Erosion and Sediment Control" and "Stormwater Management
Design Manual."
DETENTION — A practice to store stormwater runoff by collection as
a temporary pool of water and providing for its gradual (attenuated)
release over 24 hours or more; a practice which is used to control peak
discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.
DEVELOPMENT — To make a site or area available for use by physical
alteration. Development includes but is not limited to providing access
to a site, clearing of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing
utilities and other services such as parking facilities, stormwater
management and erosion control systems, altering landforms, or
construction of a structure on the land.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice or other meteorological or geological agents.
EXFILTRATION — The downward movement of runoff through the
bottom of an infiltration system into the soil.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material
is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported,
or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
§ 507-4 MALVERNE CODE § 507-4
1:280
FINAL GRADE — The vertical location of the ground or pavement
surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site
development plan.
FIRST FLUSH — The delivery of a disproportionately large load of
pollutants during the early part of storms due to rapid runoff of
accumulated pollutants. The first flush is defined as the runoff
generated from the first half-inch of runoff or runoff resulting from
a one-year, twenty-four-hour storm, whichever is greater, from land
which has been made more impervious from pre-development
conditions through land grading, a change in vegetative cover, or
construction/development activities.
FOREBAY — An extra storage area or treatment area, such as a
sediment pond or created wetland, near an inlet of a stormwater
management facility to trap incoming sediments or take up nutrients
before they reach a retention or extended detention pond.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof, and shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Impermeable surfaces, such as, but not limited
to, pavement, walks, patios, terraces, decks, rooftops, tennis courts and
swimming pools, which prevent the percolation of water into the soil.
INFILTRATION — A practice designed to promote the recharge of
groundwater by containment and concentration of stormwater into
porous soils.
INFILTRATION BASIN — An impoundment made by excavation or
embankment construction to contain and exfiltrate runoff into the soil.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any change to land which may result
in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of soil into water
or onto lands, alteration of a drainage system, or increased runoff of
waters, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating,
transporting and filling of land.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL PERMIT — Any permits or licenses issued by the Village of
Malverne, including, but not limited to, building, grading, demolition,
clearing, topsoil removal, excavation and tree removal permits, and
subdivision, special use permit and site plan approvals.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
OUTFALL — The terminus of a storm drain where the contents are
released.
PEAK FLOW — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point and
time resulting from a storm event.
PEAK FLOW ATTENUATION — The reduction of the peak discharge of
storm runoff by storage and gradual release of that storage.
§ 507-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-4
1:281
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate, or
any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies,
authorities, or other political subdivisions thereof, and one or more
individuals.
RETENTION — A practice designed to store stormwater runoff by
collection as a permanent pool or tank of water without release except
by means of evaporation, infiltration, or attenuated release when runoff
volume exceeds the permanent storage capacity of the permanent pool
or tank.
RIP-RAP — A combination of large stone, cobbles and boulders used to
line channels, stabilize stream banks and reduce runoff velocities.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Measures which protect soil from the erosive
forces of raindrop impact and flowing water and include, but are not
limited to, vegetative establishment, mulching, and the early
application of gravel base on areas to be paved.
SPDES — State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as
clearing, grading and filling; installation of utilities, streets and
walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations;
erection of temporary forms; and the installation of temporary or
accessory buildings such as construction sheds or trailers and garages.
STORMWATER APPURTENANCES — Structures such as dry wells,
catch basins, piping, storm drains and detention/retention basins
designed to control and manage the flow of stormwater.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Collection or arrangement
of varieties of stormwater appurtenances to control and manage the
flow of stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL PLAN — Plans prepared by a professionally qualified person
or persons with expertise in stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control, such as a New York State licensed engineer or
licensed landscape architect or a certified professional in erosion and
sediment control (CPESC). These plans shall indicate the specific
measures and sequencing to be used in controlling erosion and
sediment on a development site during and after construction, showing
the proposed use of the site and showing the methods, techniques
and improvements that will be employed to control erosion and
sedimentation, which shall employ best management practices. The
plan shall contain all surface water calculations, unless set forth in an
accompanying document.
STREAM CORRIDOR — The landscape features on both sides of a
stream, including soils, slope and vegetation, whose alteration can
directly impact the stream's physical characteristics and biological
properties.
§ 507-4 MALVERNE CODE § 507-4
1:282
§ 507-5. Exceptions to permit requirement.
For the purposes of this chapter, a stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control permit shall not be required for the following activities:
§ 507-6. Waivers.
Upon written request from the applicant, the Village Building Inspector may
grant a waiver, in writing, from any requirement of this chapter, specifically
identifying the reasons therefor, using the following criteria:
STRIPPING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
SWALE — A natural depression or a wide, shallow ditch used to
temporarily route or filter runoff.
TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSING — A temporary structural span
installed across a flowing watercourse for use by construction traffic.
Structures may include bridges or pipes.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial, intermittent, seasonal or
permanent and public or private water body or watercourse. A water
body is intermittently, seasonally or permanently inundated with water
and contains a discernible shoreline and includes ponds and lakes. A
watercourse includes rivulets, brooks, creeks, streams, rivers and other
waterways flowing in a definite channel with bed and banks and usually
in a particular direction.
A. Lawn maintenance and landscaping of existing cultivated areas,
including gardens.
B. Alteration to the interior of a building and alteration to the exterior of a
building, provided that such exterior alteration does not increase land
coverage by the building, pavement, walks, patio, tennis court,
swimming pool, etc., and the alteration does not involve the demolition
of a part or all of the exterior of an existing building.
C. Construction of an addition to an existing structure or any landdisturbing
activity that involves less than 500 square feet. However, any
land-disturbing activity of any area shall follow the applicable soil
erosion BMP provided by the Village.
D. Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources, as determined by the
Village Building Inspector.
E. Activities of the Village in regard to the permitting provisions.
A. Special circumstances applicable to the subject property, its intended
use, or the scope of the project.
B. Said waiver will not:
§ 507-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-6
1:283
§ 507-7. Permit required.
No person shall commence or carry out any development or land-disturbing
activity in the Village of Malverne that involves more than 500 square feet
without first obtaining the proper stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control permit from the Village Building Inspector, and all other
necessary local, state and federal permits, and thereafter complying with
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 507-8. Permit for activities involving between 500 square feet and
15,000 square feet.
The following shall apply to applications for permits for land-disturbing
activities involving greater than 500 square feet and up to and including
15,000 square feet:
(1) Result in an increase or decrease in the rate or volume of surface
water runoff;
(2) Result in an adverse impact on a wetland, watercourse or water
body;
(3) Result in degradation of water quality; or114
(4) Otherwise impair the attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
A. It is the responsibility of an applicant to include sufficient information
in the stormwater management and erosion control and sediment plan
for the Village to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
affected areas, the potential and predicted impacts of the proposed
activity on community waters and the effectiveness and acceptability of
those measures proposed by the applicant for reducing or mitigating
adverse impacts.
B. An application for a stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control permit shall be made on forms provided by the Village, and shall
include the name(s) and address(es) of the owner, contract vendee, or
developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name and telephone number of the
applicant's principal contact at such firm. Each application shall include
a certification that any land clearing, construction, or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans
approved and the permit issued. The permit will be valid for the same
period as the associated building or other municipal permit. Where a
building or other municipal permit is not issued, the stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control permit shall expire
within 180 days unless renewed by the Village Building Inspector.
C. Required information.
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 507-6 MALVERNE CODE § 507-8
1:284
§ 507-9. Permit for activities involving greater than 15,000 square
feet.
The following shall apply to applications for permits for land-disturbing
activities involving greater than 15,000 square feet:
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by the following, unless
specifically waived by the Village Building Inspector based on the
scope of the project:
(a) A vicinity map.
(b) A stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
plan for the site showing drainage patterns, on-site stormwater
appurtenances, wetlands, one-hundred-year floodplains, and
proposed use of the site, including areas of excavation, grading
and filling.
(c) Stormwater management improvements, including
calculations, designs and special measures regarding safety
and maintenance operations.
(d) Stormwater conveyance system, including plans, designs and
materials to be used for improvements and erosion control in
channel sections of stormwater conveyance systems and
erosion control measures at culvert inlets and outfalls.
(2) The above plans shall comply with the guidelines and specifications
of the most recent editions of "Reducing the Impacts of Stormwater
Runoff from New Development" (NYSDEC), "Stormwater
Management Design Manual" (NYSDEC), Nassau County "Best
Management Practices Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control,"
and New York "Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment
Control" and include:
(a) Temporary erosion and sediment control measures with
implementation and maintenance schedules.
(b) Permanent erosion and sediment control improvements
showing location of improvements and an implementation and
maintenance schedule.
A. It is the responsibility of an applicant to include sufficient information
in the stormwater management and erosion and sediment control plan
for the Village to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
affected areas, the potential and predicted impacts of the proposed
activity on community waters, and the effectiveness and acceptability of
those measures proposed by the applicant for reducing or mitigating
adverse impacts.
B. An application for a stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control permit shall be made on forms provided by the Village, and shall
§ 507-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:285
include the name(s) and address(es) of the owner, contract vendee,
or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name and telephone number of the
applicant's principal contact at such firm. Each application shall include
a certification that any land clearing, construction, or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans
approved upon issuance of the permit. The permit will be valid for the
same period as the associated building or other municipal permit, or as
may be specified by the Village Building Inspector.
C. Required information.
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by the following, unless
specifically waived by the Village Building Inspector based on the
scope of the project:
(a) A vicinity map in sufficient detail to easily locate the site for
which the permit is sought, including the boundary lines and
approximate acreage for the site, the existing zoning, the date
of the plan (to include the date of any revisions), North point,
scale and legend.
(b) A stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
plan for the site, including:
[1] Existing topography of the site and adjacent land clearly
portraying the drainage patterns of the area, including
ditches, culverts, permanent or intermittent streams,
wetlands or other water bodies, existing roads and sizes of
existing culverts.
[2] The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities,
water bodies, floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative
cover, the size and species of trees with a trunk diameter
of four inches or more at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground
level, paved areas, watershed divides, and other
significant natural or man-made features on the site, and
adjacent land within approximately 50 feet of the
boundary.
[3] An analysis of site limitations and development constraints
by including such factors as slope, soil type and erodibility,
depth to bedrock, depth to seasonal high water, soil
percolation, etc., to facilitate evaluation of site suitability
for proposed stormwater and erosion facilities in relation
to the overall development proposal.
[4] Wetlands boundaries and designated one-hundred-year
floodplain boundaries, including one-hundred-year flood
elevations and floodways where applicable. Such
elevations should be based on the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929. The plan shall also indicate the
§ 507-9 MALVERNE CODE § 507-9
1:286
size of culverts downstream of the project, and existing
easements for storm drains, sewers and other utilities.
[5] Proposed use of the site, including both present and
proposed development; areas of excavation, grading and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades and street
profiles; provisions for stormwater management, including
control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map
and computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and
areas and square feet proposed to be paved, covered,
sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left
undisturbed.
(c) Comparison of pre-development with post-development runoff,
including:
[1] Description of the methodology used to compare and
evaluate pre- with post-development runoff conditions in
terms of volumes, peak rates of runoff, routing and
hydrographs.
[2] Calculation of peak discharge rates and total runoff
volumes from the project area for existing site conditions
and post-development conditions. The relevant variables
used in this determination, such as the curve number and
time of concentration, should be included. Downstream
analysis, including peak discharge rates, total runoff
volumes and evaluation of impacts to receiving water and/
or wetlands, should be evaluated. Storage volume and
surface area requirements should be calculated.
Discharge provisions for the proposed control measures,
including peak discharge rates, outlet design, discharge
capacity for each stage, outlet channel design and a
description of the point of discharge, should be provided.
[a] For sites of two acres or more, stormwater
management practices shall be adequate to provide
for storm intensities of 100, 50, 25, 10 and two years.
[b] For sites of less than two acres, stormwater
management practices shall be adequate to provide
for storm intensities of 25, 10, five and two years.
[3] Description of the methodology used to compare and
evaluate pre- with post-development pollutant loading.
Contaminants to be compared include, when applicable,
total suspended solids, total phosphorus, total nitrogen
and biological oxygen demand. Pollutant loading
coefficients may be used. Water quality treatment
improvements should be designed to meet the above
specified stormwater management practice(s). Compare
§ 507-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:287
pollutant loading between "before" and "after" conditions,
with computations.
[4] Calculation of the necessary storage volumes and the
proposed stormwater management measure(s) described
in detail, providing sufficient detail of the water quality
control measures to ensure that the relevant design
criteria will be met. Such detail may include surface area
dimensions, depths, inlet designs, planting specifications
for use of aquatic vegetation, percent solids removal
expected, discharge rates and outlet design.
[5] Assumptions used in making the calculations.
[6] Assumptions and coefficient values used in the hydrologic
calculations for making the above comparisons. Evaluate
the post-development effect of stormwater runoff on
identified floodplains or designated flood hazard areas in
the community.
(d) Stormwater management improvement plan, including:
[1] Narrative of all proposed stormwater management
improvements. A soil profile to at least five feet below the
stormwater management improvements should be
provided.
[2] Designs of proposed stormwater management
improvements for peak flow attenuation and water quality
management and an indication of which improvements will
be used to attenuate peak flows, which will be used to
enhance stormwater runoff quality and which
improvements will serve a dual role; identification of the
materials to be used in constructing these improvements.
[3] Calculations for sizing stormwater improvements should
be provided.
[4] Designs and calculations for siting and sizing such
specialized measures and devices as filter strips, water
quality inlets (oil/grit separator), forebays, etc., which will
be used to remove sediment, oil-based products and other
contaminants found in urban runoff.
[5] Evaluation of the amount of treatment or level of pollutant
reduction that can be expected from the proposed
stormwater management improvement(s). Contaminants
to be considered in this evaluation, when determined
appropriate by the Village Building Inspector, include total
suspended solids (TSS), total phosphorus (P), total
nitrogen (N), biological oxygen demand (BOD) and
thermal pollution. Evaluation of the effectiveness of
§ 507-9 MALVERNE CODE § 507-9
1:288
stormwater management practices can be based on
reports on the effectiveness of comparable stormwater
improvements on similar sites.
[6] Information on the design provisions that address safety
considerations (e.g., gentle slopes and benches in ponds or
stream banks) and accommodate maintenance needs
(including access to conduct maintenance operations).
(e) Stormwater conveyance system plan, including:
[1] A narrative of the stormwater conveyance (drainage)
system indicating which segments of the drainage system
are open channels and which segments are piped
(culverts) and which provide a rationale and justification
for installing piped segments.
[2] Plan view and cross-sectional designs of stormwater
conveyance systems with hydrologic calculations for siting
and sizing the stormwater conveyance system. The plan
shall also identify materials to be used.
[3] Plans and designs identifying materials to be used for
preventing erosion in channel sections of stormwater
conveyance systems and erosion control measures at
culvert inlets and outfalls.
(2) The above plans shall comply with the guidelines and specifications
of the most recent editions of "Reducing the Impacts of Stormwater
Runoff from New Development" (NYSDEC), "Stormwater
Management Design Manual" (NYSDEC), Nassau County "Best
Management Practices Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control,"
and New York "Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment
Control" and include:
(a) Temporary erosion and sediment control measures to be used
during land clearing, land grading and the construction
phases, including:
[1] Temporary structural and vegetative measures to be used
to control erosion and sedimentation.
[2] Plans showing the location of temporary vegetative and
structural erosion and sediment control measures.
[3] Dimensional details of proposed erosion and sediment
control measures, identifying materials to be used in
developing these measures with calculations used in siting
and sizing sediment basins.
[4] Temporary erosion and sediment control measures to be
converted to permanent stormwater management
measures.
§ 507-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:289
§ 507-10. Plan review, approval and inspections.
[5] An implementation schedule for the staging of temporary
erosion and sediment control measures.
[6] Maintenance schedule for soil erosion and sediment
control measures.
(b) Permanent erosion and sediment control improvements,
including:
[1] Permanent structural and vegetative practices to be used
to provide long-term control of erosion and sedimentation
when construction activities are completed and the project
site is restored.
[2] A plan showing the location of permanent erosion control
improvements, including both structural and vegetative.
[3] An implementation schedule for restoring the project site
with permanent erosion and sediment control
improvements.
(c) An implementation schedule and maintenance, including:
[1] An implementation schedule for staging of all stormwater
management improvements, coordinating the staging of
erosion and sediment control facilities and construction
activities.
[2] A description of the arrangements, including deed
restrictions, if applicable, that will be made for ensuring
long-term maintenance of stormwater management and
erosion control improvements with contingency plans
identifying responsible parties for performing
maintenance and the frequency of maintenance.
A. The Village Building Inspector or his/her designee shall review the plan
for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The applicant
shall, within 30 days of notification, correct any portion of the plan that
does not comply. The Village Building Inspector or his/her designees
may conduct random inspections to ensure effective control of erosion
and sedimentation during all phases of construction.
B. All stormwater management and erosion and sediment control permits
will require adequate provision for inspection of the property. The
applicant shall arrange with the Village Building Inspector or his/her
designee for scheduling the following inspections:
(1) An initial inspection prior to plan approval.
(2) An erosion control inspection to ensure that erosion control
practices are in accord with the approved plan.
§ 507-9 MALVERNE CODE § 507-10
1:290
§ 507-11. Cash deposit or surety.
(3) An inspection prior to backfilling any underground drainage or
stormwater conveyance structures.
(4) A final inspection when all work, including construction of
stormwater management facilities and permanent soil stabilization,
has been completed.
C. The Village Building Inspector and/or his/her designee may also
randomly conduct field inspections to ensure effective control of
erosion and sedimentation during all phases of construction.
D. The applicant shall promptly correct any deficiencies identified as a
result of those inspections and be subject to the provisions of § 507-12,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter.
E. No building permit may be issued until a stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control permit has been issued for those activities
controlled under this chapter.
F. Activities that involve the disturbance of an area of one acre or more
shall comply with any New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (DEC) requirements.
A. In order to ensure full and faithful completion of all construction
activities related to compliance with all conditions of the approved
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control plan, a cash
deposit shall be required from the applicant prior to issuance of a
permit. Said cash deposit shall be sufficient to cover the full cost, as
estimated by the Village Building Inspector, of construction of all
improvements specified in the stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control plan and the permit. Such deposits shall be
promptly refunded upon the completion of the project and the final
inspection and approval by the Village Building Inspector or his/her
designee.
B. Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by a developer/owner or
responsible legal entity, the Village may require a maintenance bond or
other surety prior to the issuance of a permit. Such maintenance bond
or other surety, as approved by the Village Attorney, shall be sufficient
to cover the costs, as estimated by the Village Building Inspector, of
proper maintenance of the facilities for five years after completion of a
final inspection in accordance with § 507-10, Plan review, approval and
inspections, of this chapter. Subsequent to five years, the developer/
owner or responsible legal entity shall file an affidavit with the Village
Building Inspector attesting to maintenance in perpetuity.
§ 507-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-12
1:291
§ 507-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
It shall be the duty of the Village Building Inspector or his/her designee to
enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the following:
§ 507-13. Fees; escrow.
A. Issuance of a notice of violation and order to correct within a specified
time. When the Village Building Inspector or his/her designee
determines that development activity is not being carried out in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, he/she shall issue a
written notice of violation and order to correct to the owner or agent of
the property. The notice of violation and order to correct shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant.
(2) The street address or a description of the building, structure, or
land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the corrective actions necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this chapter and the
permit, and a time schedule necessary for completion of such
corrective action.
B. In the event that correction is not completed within the time specified
by the notice of violation and order to correct, a court appearance ticket
shall be issued specifying the nature of the violation, corrective action
necessary and a time schedule for completion.
C. Any notice of violation, order to correct and court appearance ticket
shall be served upon the person(s) to whom it is directed either
personally or by mailing a copy of the notice of violation by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to such person at his or her last known
address.
D. In an emergency situation, as determined by the Village Building
Inspector, the Village may enter the premises and make necessary
corrections utilizing a portion or all of the cash deposit required in
§ 507-11, Cash deposit or surety, of this chapter. The Village has the
authority to assess the costs of the emergency correction in the same
manner as real estate taxes.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any
penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $250. Such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues.
A. All applications for a stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
§ 507-12 MALVERNE CODE § 507-13
1:292
§ 507-14. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect September 1, 2004.
Chapter 512
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 411.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 455.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Trees — See Ch. 540.
Zoning — See Ch. 600.
Village of Malverne, as established by resolution of the Village Board
and identified in the Annual Village Fees and Charges Schedule.
B. Where deemed appropriate, the Planning Board may require
establishment of an escrow account from which withdrawals shall be
made to reimburse the Village for the costs of retaining qualified
professionals to review plans and conduct inspections to ensure
compliance with the requirements of the approved stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control permit. The applicant
shall be provided with copies of invoices for such professional
inspections when they are available. After all pertinent charges have
been paid, the Village shall refund to the applicant all remaining fund
balances.
§ 507-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-14
1:293

ARTICLE I
Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks and Driveways
[Adopted 5-4-1927 (Ch. 38, Arts. I, II and III, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 512-1. Title; scope.
This article shall constitute and be known as the "Sidewalk Code," and
may be cited as such. It presumptively provides for all matters concerning,
affecting or relating to the construction, repair or maintenance of all curbs,
sidewalks and driveways or any other construction in any street, between
the property lines of such street.
§ 512-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — The party or parties contracting for or doing any work
described herein, or authorized representatives of such party or parties.
ENGINEER — The Village Engineer or his authorized representative.
§ 512-3. Permit required; application; specifications.
§ 512-4. Lines and grades.
All curbs, gutters, sidewalks or driveways shall be laid in accordance with
the lines and grades furnished by the Village Engineer and not otherwise.
The cost of establishing the lines and grades is to be paid for by the property
owner or the contractor.
§ 512-5. Supervision and inspection of work. [Amended
2-14-1968116]
The work of constructing, repairing or re-laying of sidewalks, curbs,
driveways or gutters shall be done under the supervision of the Village
A. No curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway shall be laid in any street in the
Village of Malverne unless application to lay the same shall have been
made in writing to the Village Superintendent of Buildings on blank
forms provided by the Village. The application shall specify the location
and character of the proposed improvements, and no work shall be
done until a written permit, signed by the Village Superintendent of
Buildings, shall be issued on said application. [Amended
2-14-1968115]
B. All work is to be done in conformity with the specifications prepared by
the Village Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees, which
specifications are hereby declared to be a part of this article.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-5
1:295
Superintendent of Buildings, and all materials used and workmanship shall
be subject to his inspection and approval.
§ 512-6. Private streets and new developments.
All sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways or pavements laid on any private
street or on the streets of any new development shall be subject to the same
regulations and must comply in all respects with the regulations governing
streets the title of which is vested in the Village. Failure to comply with
the above will be sufficient cause for the Village to reject any proffered
dedication of such streets.117
§ 512-7. Grades; maintenance.
§ 512-8. Materials. [Amended 2-14-1968118]
Contractors shall perform their work according to the following
specifications:
A. The grade of the gutters shall be maintained at the grade established by
the Village Engineer. No ashes, cinders or other material shall be
placed in the roadway in such a manner as to interfere with the proper
drainage.
B. The grade of the ground adjoining all sidewalks shall on one side be
maintained sufficiently low to prevent the collection of water on the
sidewalk.
A. Cement shall be of American manufacture and shall meet the
requirements of the current Standard Specifications for Air-Entraining
Portland Cement of ASTM: 1) N-Tair; 2) Airalon; 3) Darex AEA. Water
shall be clean and free from alkali, oils, acids, and vegetable matter.
B. Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of sand, stone, screenings
(except limestone screening), or a mixture of these. The aggregate shall
consist of grains or particles of hard, durable rocks, the surfaces of
which are not coated with any injurious materials.
C. Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall be broken stone. Screened or
bank-run gravel will not be permitted. The broken stone shall be clean,
hard, durable, uncoated rock. It shall contain no vegetable or other
deleterious matter and shall be free from soft, thin, elongated or
laminated pieces.
D. Composition requirements.
(1) Average twenty-eight-day compressive strength: 3500 psi.
117. Editor's Note: The original section, "Repair and replacement," as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-5 MALVERNE CODE § 512-8
1:296
§ 512-9. Construction of one-course sidewalks.
One-course sidewalks shall be constructed as follows:
(2) Air content: 4% to 7%.
(3) A three-inch to four-inch slump shall be permitted.
E. Mixing. The ingredients of the concrete shall be thoroughly mixed until
each particle of fine aggregate is coated with cement and each particle
of coarse aggregate is coated with mortar. The consistency of the mixed
concrete shall be such that no separation of the ingredients takes place
and that some tamping is necessary to bring the water to the surface. A
slump of one inch is recommended; a maximum slump of three inches
will be permitted, determined in accordance with ASTM.
A. Forms.
(1) Forms shall be of lumber two inches thick, or of steel of equal
strength, except on curves, where flexible strips may be used.
(2) They shall be held rigidly in place by stakes or braces with top
edges at true line and grade given by the Engineer. Ends of the
adjoining forms shall be flush.
(3) The forms shall be set to give the walk a slope toward the curb of 1/
4 inch per foot of width.
B. Division plates.
(1) Where division plates are used they shall be of one-eighth-inch
steel, as wide as the depth of the slab and as long as the width of
the walk.
(2) Forms and division plates shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled
each time before they are used.
C. Subgrade.
(1) That portion of the ground surface directly beneath the slabs shall
be called the "subgrade."
(2) All soft and spongy material in the subgrade shall be removed and
replaced with suitable material. Fills shall be compacted in layers
not exceeding six inches in thickness. Areas previously compacted
by traffic shall be loosened to a depth of six inches. The whole
subgrade shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted to a firm
surface having as nearly as possible a uniform bearing power.
(3) A template, resting upon the side forms and having its lower edge
at the exact elevation of the subgrade, shall be drawn along the
forms before any concrete is laid. Any high places in the subgrade
shall be removed so that the template will pass over without being
§ 512-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-9
1:297
raised off the side forms or being tipped at an angle to the sidewalk
surface.
(4) The subgrade shall be damp but not muddy when concrete is
placed upon it.
D. Drains. Where, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Buildings, it is
considered necessary to save the walk from damage by frost action,
drains of four-inch tile shall be laid to the lines and grades given by the
Superintendent of Buildings. [Amended 2-14-1968119]
E. One-course sidewalks to a minimum 3000 psi shall be cast between
forms and constructed to a minimum thickness of four inches, except at
commercial area sidewalks, in which case the sidewalk shall be five
inches thick. Any sidewalks under traffic-bearing areas, such as a drop
curb, apron and a driveway or parking lot, shall be 4000 psi, six inches
thick, and reinforced with galvanized 6x6-W1.4 W1.4 WWM. Concrete
aprons at drop curbs shall be 4000 psi, six inches thick, and reinforced
with galvanized 6x6-W1.4 W1.4 WWM. All sidewalks shall be a
minimum of four feet wide. All or as approved by the Superintendent of
Buildings. All handicap drop curb ramps shall be installed as per ANSI
117.1 standards. [Amended 2-14-1968120]
F. Mixing.
(1) The ingredients of the concrete shall be thoroughly mixed until
each particle of fine aggregate is coated with cement and each
particle of coarse aggregate is coated with mortar.
(2) Where a mechanical mix is used it shall be of an approved batch
type. Each batch shall be mixed at least one minute from the time
all the materials, including water, are in the drum, until the
beginning of the discharge.
(3) The consistency of the mixed concrete shall be such that no
separation of the ingredients takes place and some tamping is
necessary to bring the mortar to the surface.
G. Placing and finishing.121
(1) The concrete shall be compacted by hand, spading sufficiently to
avoid honeycombing along the forms and to eliminate voids. All
compacting shall be performed while the concrete is in a plastic
state and to such extent as will ensure a dense mass with even and
uniform surfaces and free from segregation, aggregate pockets or
honeycomb.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-9 MALVERNE CODE § 512-9
1:298
(2) Driveway aprons and sidewalks shall be given a wood float or
broom finish and edges and joints tooled. Curbs shall be rubbed to
a hard, smooth surface on top, and the face to at least seven inches
below the top. The placing of concrete shall not be suspended for
45 minutes or longer except at the end of a slab.
H. Jointing.122
(1) The sidewalk shall be scored into separate rectangular slabs. The
depth of the scoring shall be a minimum of 3/8 inch. The distance
between scorings shall not be greater than four feet on any one
side.
(2) Care shall be taken to make the scorings at right angles to the
alignment of the sidewalk. The surface edges of each sidewalk slab
and the inside edge of curbs shall be rounded to a radius of about 1/
4 inch. The outside edge of all curbs shall be rounded to a radius of
1 1/2 inches.
I. Expansion joints.123
(1) Expansion joints for sidewalks, curbs and driveway aprons shall be
1/2 inch in thickness extended from the surface to the subgrade,
and truly at right angles to the surface. They shall be placed at or
near all places where the sidewalk, driveway apron, or curb meets
another curb, driveway, or sidewalk or other structure and at
regular intervals not exceeding 20 feet.
(2) The expansion joint in the curb shall be on the same line as the
transverse expansion joints in the adjoining sidewalks. Expansion
joints for curbs shall be 1/2 inch in width and shall be placed at
regular intervals not exceeding 20 feet.
(3) All existing utility structures such as poles, hydrants, etc., which
occur in the sidewalk area shall be wrapped with at least one layer
of felt and expansion joint material for protection. Whenever roots
are encountered which interfere with the proper construction of a
sidewalk, curb or apron, the contractor shall cut away roots so as to
be clear of such obstruction, unless such roots are heavy enough so
that if cut, the safety of the tree may be impaired.
J. Curing.
(1) As soon as the concrete has set sufficiently, it shall be sprinkled and
kept moist for 48 hours.
(2) The contractor shall protect the concrete from damage by rain,
pedestrians and animals, with suitable covers and barricades and
by red lights at night.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-10
1:299
§ 512-10. Construction of curbs, gutters and combined curbs and
gutters. [Amended 2-14-1968124]
The foregoing specifications concerning terms, materials, forms, subgrades,
drainage, subbase, mixing, placing, jointing and curbing shall govern the
construction of curbs and gutters and combined curbs and gutters, except
as noted below.
§ 512-11. Construction of driveways.
The foregoing provisions under §§ 512-1 through 512-7, as well as the
subsections concerning forms, subgrade, drainage, subbase, mixing,
placing, finishing, jointing and curing under § 512-9, shall govern the
construction of driveways, except as noted below:
§ 512-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Amended
2-14-1968126]
This article shall be enforced by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Malverne under the rules and regulations adopted by it. For every violation
of the provisions of this article, the owner of property adjacent to which
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general
agent or contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises
A. One-course curbs shall be cast between forms at 3000 psi strength and
shall have the following dimensions: six inches across the top, eight
inches across the bottom, and not less than 18 inches in depth. The top
of the curb shall be pitched toward the street and six inches above the
gutter/street grade or water line grade. The back of curb shall be
vertical and the face of curb shall have a batter of two inches in 18
inches toward the street. At driveways, the top of curb shall be dropped
to within 3/4 inch to 1 1/4 inches of the gutter/street grade or water line
grade. New drop curbs/curb cuts shall be a minimum of two feet away
from property lines and a maximum of 20 feet wide. All or as approved
by the Superintendent of Buildings.
B. Expansion joints. The curbs, gutters and combined curbs and gutters
shall be cut into sections not longer than 20 feet and shall be provided
with one-half-inch expansion joints every 50 feet at the ends of all
curves.
A. Thickness and proportions. All driveways within the street line shall be
at least six inches thick and shall be of a design approved by the
Superintendent of Buildings. [Amended 2-14-1968125]
B. Proportions. The proportion shall be one part portland cement to two
parts of fine aggregate and three parts coarse aggregate.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-10 MALVERNE CODE § 512-12
1:300
adjacent to which such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the
general agent, builder, contractor or any person who commits, takes part
or assists in such violation, or who maintains any property adjacent to any
such violation, shall, for each and every violation and for each and every
day that such violation continues, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
§ 512-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-12
1:301

ARTICLE II
Cleaning and Repair
[Adopted 12-13-1934 (Ch. 38, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 512-13. Removal of snow, rubbish, dirt required; deposit on street
prohibited; penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-18-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
§ 512-14. Duty to maintain curbs and sidewalks. [Amended
2-14-1968]
A. Every owner or occupant of any house or other building, and every
owner or person entitled to possession of any vacant lot and every
person having charge of any church or other public building in the
Village of Malverne shall, during the winter season and during the time
the snow shall continue on the ground, keep the sidewalks in front of
such house, building or lot free from obstruction by snow or ice, and
shall also, at all times, keep such sidewalks in good and safe repair and
clean, and keep the same free from dirt, filth, hedges and weeds or
other obstruction or encumbrance.
B. No person or entity shall remove or cause to be removed any snow or
ice and deposit such snow or ice upon any street, roadway and/or
highway within the Incorporated Village of Malverne.
C. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$200 per event.
A. All property owners are hereby required and directed to keep the curbs
and sidewalks, together with any portion of their property paved and
used as a sidewalk or public walk, immediately in the front, side,
abutting or upon their property, in good order and repair, at proper
grade to provide adequate drainage, to keep at all times level with the
sidewalk or public walk, gas, sewer or drain, stop or vent boxes,
driveways and driveway ramps, and to keep the sidewalks or public
walks at all times free and clear of all obstruction to safe and
convenient passage. Such owner or occupant and each of them shall be
liable for any injury or damage by reason of omission, failure or neglect
to make, maintain, or repair such sidewalk. [Amended 12-7-2016 by
L.L. No. 5-2016]
B. Notices. In the event that the owner of any property fails to or neglects
the duty required of him in Subsection A, a written notice may be
served upon said owner directing and requiring him to do what is
necessary and stating that in the event the owner fails to perform the
work required, then the Village of Malverne, in its sole and absolute
discretion, may perform the work required or hire an outside agency to
perform the work. Such notice may be served upon property owner by
leaving the same at his place of residence or his place of business or by
§ 512-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-14
1:303
leaving the same with the tenant or occupant of the premises or by
mailing the same to the owner at his last-known address.
C. Noncompliance of owner; penalty. If the owner of any property fails or
neglects to perform the duty required of him in the preceding
subsections, the Village shall make or cause to be made the necessary
repair or remove any obstruction. The expense of the necessary
materials and labor for doing the work, together with a penalty of 10%,
shall be charged against and paid by the property owner, and in default
thereof the same shall be collected by action in the name of the Village
as a debt or by filing a municipal lien against the property of such
owner.
§ 512-14 MALVERNE CODE § 512-14
1:304
ARTICLE III
Awnings
[Adopted 12-13-1934 (Ch. 38, Art. V, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 512-15. Location restrictions; clearance.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall erect or hang,
cause or permit or allow to be erected or hung upon any building owned or
occupied by him, it or them, any awning, any part of which shall project in,
over or upon any of the streets or public places of the Village of Malverne,
unless such awning shall be at least 7 1/2 feet above the sidewalk upon such
street or public place.
§ 512-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-1968127]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-16
1:305

ARTICLE IV
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 2-19-1930 by Ord. No. 20 (Ch. 39 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 512-17. Definitions. [Amended 12-19-1962]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
§ 512-18. Permit required; emergencies.
Unless acting under a contract with the Village, it shall be unlawful for
any person, other than a duly authorized Village official or employee in
the course of his employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any
excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street,
alley, sidewalk, curb or other public place within the limits of the Village
of Malverne, without first having obtained and having in force a permit
so to do as hereinafter provided. In case of an emergency arising outside
of office hours, at nights, Sundays or legal holidays, when an immediate
excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property,
the same shall be reported to the Police Department, which shall grant
permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition
that an application be made in the manner herein provided on or before
12:00 noon of the next following business day.
§ 512-19. Application for permit.
A. Any person desiring to procure a permit as herein provided shall file
with such official as the Board of Trustees may designate, at least 24
hours before the time proposed to begin such work, a written
application upon a blank form prepared and provided by the Village.
Such application shall state:
(1) The name and business or residence address of the applicant.
(2) The name of the street, alley, sidewalk, curb or public place in or
under which it is desired to make the excavation or opening.
(3) The kind of pavement, curb or sidewalk thereon.
(4) The purpose, size and location of the proposed excavation or
opening.
(5) The name and business or residence address of the person for
whose benefit the work is to be done and the time during which it is
desired such opening is to be permitted.
§ 512-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-19
1:307
§ 512-20. Deposits required. [Amended 12-19-1962]
§ 512-21. Granting permit. [Amended 12-19-1962; 2-14-1968129]
B. When required, the application shall be accompanied by a plat or pencil
tracing or sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of the
proposed excavation or openings for the installation of new work or the
location and character of the alterations involving the location of pipes,
conduits, wires or other conductors.
A. Before a permit shall be issued, the Village shall require of the
applicant a cash deposit as set from time to time by resolution adopted
by the Board of Trustees or, in extraordinary cases, a deposit of such
sum of money as shall be deemed by the Village sufficient to cover and
pay all the expenses for furnishing such material, doing such work,
making such inspections and taking such means as shall be required
properly to restore and secure against sinkage, the street, sidewalk,
pavement, curb and flagging necessary to be replaced in consequence
of making such excavation, opening or disturbance.128
B. The sum or sums of money so collected and deposited shall be paid into
the Village treasury and deposited to the credit of a special and
separate fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying for the
repairing and replacing of any such pavement or surface broken into or
disturbed for any of the purposes mentioned herein.
C. The applicant for a permit may, in his discretion, instead of making the
cash deposit as herein described, furnish to the Village at his expense a
surety bond in such amount or in such form as the Board of Trustees
may prescribe, guaranteeing the satisfactory completion of the work.
A. The Superintendent of Buildings, upon the filing of the application and
the payment of a fee which shall be as set from time to time by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees, plus an amount computed
at the rate as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board
of Trustees per each linear foot of the opening measured along the
longest side of the opening (If tunneling is permitted, the entire
tunneled area shall be deemed the opening.), and the cash deposit or
surety bond required by § 512-20 hereof, may issue a permit, which
shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location, nature,
purpose and extent of the excavation or opening, the kind or kinds of
pavement to be disturbed, the amount of deposit paid by the applicant
and the dates of granting and expiration of the permit.
B. All permits shall be consecutively numbered, and shall be made in
triplicate, one copy to be given to the applicant, one copy to be retained
by the Superintendent of Buildings and one copy for the files of the
Malverne Police Department.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-19 MALVERNE CODE § 512-21
1:308
§ 512-22. Record of permits.
The official of the Village shall prepare and keep a record of permits
issued, numbered in the order in which they were issued, with the name
and address of the person to whom issued; the location, nature, purpose
and extent of excavation or opening; the time in which the street is to be
restored; the fee and amount of deposit paid; and such other and further
items as will enable anyone to obtain a complete history of each permit from
its issuance to its termination. The copies of the permits kept by the Village
official, if properly bound, may be used as a basis for such record.
§ 512-23. Guarding excavations and openings.130
Any person making or causing to be made an excavation or opening in any
street, alley, sidewalk, curb or other public place, or within five feet of the
line of any street, shall, between sunset and sunrise of every night that the
same remains open or danger exists therefrom, keep such excavation or
opening fenced and barricaded with substantial barriers to secure public
safety, and lighting placed so as to properly warn all persons of such
excavation or opening and all obstructions. No unauthorized person shall
remove or interfere in any way with any such lighting or other danger signal
or any such barriers.
§ 512-24. Requirements for work.
All work under a permit shall be under the supervision of the designated
officials of the Village and in conformity with the following requirements:
C. Such permit shall at all times be in the possession of a competent
person actually on the work and shall be shown upon demand to a
police officer or properly authorized officer and employee of the Village.
A. All work shall be started within 24 hours after the receipt of the permit
and shall be pursued diligently and continuously until the same is
completed. When, in consequence of the weather or any process of law
or any other unexpected obstacle, the work shall be stopped for so long
a time that public travel shall be obstructed, the excavation or opening
shall be refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in a permit
were actually completed.
B. In no case shall a person open or remove a greater area or surface and
at no other location than that specified in the original or supplementary
application; provided, however, that if, at the time of actually doing the
work, it shall be necessary to open or remove a greater area or surface
than originally applied for, the applicant shall first notify and procure
the consent of the Village to do so, upon the express condition that he
shall and will, before 12:00 noon of the following business day, file a
supplemental application for the making of an additional excavation.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-24
1:309
C. At the intersection of cross streets, not more than 1/2 of the width of the
street shall be opened at one time; the other 1/2 shall remain untouched
for the accommodation of traffic until the first 1/2 is restored for safe
use. All work shall be prosecuted so as not to interfere with easy access
to firehouses, fire hydrants and United States mail boxes.
D. The permittee must remove within 24 hours all snow and ice that may
fall or form upon the street within five feet upon either side of the
opening and keep such space free from snow and ice until the opening
is properly refilled.
E. The person to whom a permit is granted shall give notice in writing
thereof to any person or corporation whose pipes, mains or conduits are
laid in the street about to be disturbed by such excavation at least 24
hours before commencing the same; and shall at his expense sustain,
secure and protect such pipes, mains or conduits from injury and
replace and pack the earth wherever the same shall have been
removed, loosened or disturbed, under or around them, so that they
shall be well and substantially supported. If any person shall fail to
sustain, secure or protect such pipes, mains or conduits from injury or
to replace or to repack the earth under or around them as the
provisions of this section require, then the same may be done by the
person or corporation to whom the same may belong, and the cost
thereof and all damages sustained by such person or corporation
thereby shall be paid by such person, and in default thereof, such
person or corporation may maintain an action against him therefor.
F. All materials for paving or macadamizing must be removed with the
least possible injury or loss of the same and, together with the
excavated material, must be placed where they will cause the least
possible inconvenience to the public. Paving materials and earth
removed must be kept separate. The width of the excavation or opening
shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work. Sheeting and
bracing shall be used when the excavation or opening is four feet or
more in depth. Sheeting and bracing shall be cut off one foot below the
surface pavement and left in place when the opening is refilled. The
street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public place must be opened in a
manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and
admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter. Excavations
shall be made in open cut. No tunneling shall be done except by special
permission of the Village, and then only under such conditions as may
be imposed. No excavation shall be undercut or have a greater width at
the bottom than at the top. In case of slips or slides of the sides of the
excavation, the same shall be trimmed to solid earth and the top surface
cut back to the limit of the same before any backfilling is commenced.
G. All openings shall be refilled and temporarily resurfaced within the time
fixed in the permit and written notice shall be given to the Senior
Building Inspector. All work must be satisfactory in every detail to the
Inspector. The temporary resurfacing shall consist of blacktop asphalt
and shall be maintained by the person to whom the permit has been
§ 512-24 MALVERNE CODE § 512-24
1:310
§ 512-25. Failure to comply with regulations.
In case any person to whom a permit has been granted shall fail to comply
with the terms thereof, such permit shall become null and void, and any and
all expense which may be incurred by the Village in refilling an excavation
or restoring the street to its proper condition shall be borne by the
permittee. In case a person to whom a permit is granted shall fail to leave
the street in as good a condition as it was previous to any work being
done under the permit, all expense which may be incurred by the Village in
restoring the street to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee.
§ 512-26. Return of deposit. [Amended 12-19-1962]
All sums of money or surety bonds deposited by the permittee shall be held
by the Village of Malverne until the Village has been furnished, at the sole
expense of the permittee, with a certificate of the Senior Building Inspector
or other designated Village official that the excavation or opening and the
refilling or resurfacing thereof has been fully completed and satisfactorily
done in every detail, and then if no expense has been incurred by the
Village, the whole of said sum deposited or the surety bond shall be
returned to the permittee. In case the Village has incurred expense in
restoring the pavement, such expense shall be deducted from the amount
of the deposit or automatically become a claim for that amount against the
surety, and the balance thereof shall be returned to the permittee.
§ 512-27. Duties of police.
All policemen shall be vigilant in the enforcement of this article and shall
report through proper channels any violation thereof to the Village. Said
police, on observing or being informed of the opening of or excavation in
any street, shall require the person making such opening or excavation to
exhibit the permit therefor; and, if none has been given or if the exhibition
thereof is refused, the officer shall, without delay, make complaint to the
Village.
issued until the opening has been permanently resurfaced. The
permanent resurfacing shall be finished in a manner acceptable to the
Inspector and shall in every respect be equal in quality, character and
materials to the street surface as it existed prior to the making of the
excavation or opening. [Amended 12-19-1962]
H. In the replacement or restoration of the permanent pavement, the
Village shall have the right and authority to remove the old concrete for
an area extending at least two feet in all directions beyond the edge of
the original cut, and to be replaced with new, reinforced concrete, not
less than six inches thick, but equal in thickness to the adjacent
pavement, made in accordance with the latest Village specifications for
a permanent foundation. In case a construction joint is within four feet
of an opening, pavement must be replaced to such joint.
§ 512-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-28
1:311
§ 512-28. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-1968131]
Any person or corporation who himself or itself, or by his or its agent or
employee, shall make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or
opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, curb,
sidewalk or public place without a permit as required by this article, or who
shall violate any of the provisions or rules or regulations made in pursuance
thereof, or who, having his permit declared null and void, shall continue
such work, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 512-28 MALVERNE CODE § 512-28
1:312
Chapter 523
TAXATION
§ 512-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-28
1:313

ARTICLE I
Utility Service Tax
[Adopted 6-23-1954 by L.L. No. 1-1954 (Ch. 41, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-1. Tax imposed; applicability.132
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of June 1954 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in
the Village of Malverne which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months
ending the last day of February in each year, commencing with the 12
months ending February 28, 1955, in excess of $500, except motor carriers
or brokers subject to such supervision under § 240 of the Transportation
Law, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of June 1954 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing
business in the Village of Malverne which has a gross operating income for
the 12 months ending the last day of February in each year, commencing
with the 12 months ending February 28, 1955, in excess of $500, which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village
of Malverne, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees
imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits
of the Village of Malverne, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 523-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale
made, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with
respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in
gross income), or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Malverne, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of material used, labor or services or
other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever;
also, profits from the sale of securities; also, profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also, profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also, receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of
Malverne, other than such as are received from a corporation, a majority of
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-2
1:315
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction (except sales for
resale and rental) within the Village of Malverne, whatsoever; provided,
however, that the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility
engaged in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local
exchange service wholly consummated within the Village of Malverne, and
in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service,
only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Malverne.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Malverne, including cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business
of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating
railroads other than street surface, rapid-transit, subway and elevated
railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such person
is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water,
refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or
wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or
telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether
such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental
thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 523-3. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 523-2 MALVERNE CODE § 523-4
1:316
§ 523-4. Annual return required.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
25th day of March, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding such
return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby is
effective. Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating
income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the
Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and
shall contain such other data, information or matter as he may require
to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to insure payment
of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental
return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by him, and he
may require any utility doing business in the Village of Malverne to file an
annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him, regardless of
whether the utility is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall
have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same,
or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the
corporation, if such business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect
that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 523-5. Tax due at time of filing return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 523-6. Insufficient or unsatisfactory return; assessment.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against
whom it is assessed shall, within one year after the giving of notice of
such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing, or
unless the Village Treasurer of his own motion shall reduce the same.
After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his
decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York, if application therefor is made within 90 days
after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first
deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him,
§ 523-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-6
1:317
§ 523-7. Notices.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 523-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village Treasurer,
for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return, and if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty
fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 523-9. Refunds.134
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously
or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be
so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no refund shall
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding is dismissed
or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or, at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the
tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the
applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties
as a condition precedent to such granting of such order.133
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return, with intent to
evade the tax, no bent of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-6 MALVERNE CODE § 523-9
1:318
be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Village
Treasurer as hereinbefore provided, unless the Village Treasurer, after a
hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced
the tax or penalty, or it shall have been established in a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York that
such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out
of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination,
the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 523-10. Liability for tax.135
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and may be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility
to customers or others.
§ 523-11. Action to enforce payment; lien.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 523-12. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 523-13. Confidential information; penalties for offenses.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Malverne to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-13
1:319
§ 523-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not
be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained
in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of
the Village of Malverne in an action or proceeding under the provisions
of this article, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action
or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence,
so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent
to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification
of particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of
delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay
their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article,
together with any relevant information which, in the opinion of the
Village Treasurer, may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes;
or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal representatives
of the Village of Malverne of the return of any person who shall bring
action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom
any action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender is an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Malverne, he shall be dismissed from
office, and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
Village of Malverne for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other village
in the State of New York information contained in returns filed under
this article, provided that such city or other village grants similar
privileges to the Village of Malverne, and provided that such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with
any information contained in such returns.
§ 523-13 MALVERNE CODE § 523-14
1:320
ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 2-5-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986 (Ch. 41, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-15. No exemption to be granted.
The percentum of tax exemption allowed by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b
is, pursuant to the authority granted by Subdivision 7 of that section,
reduced to zero, so that no such exemption shall be permitted or allowed in
the Village.
§ 523-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-15
1:321

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 2-12-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990 (Ch. 41, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-16. Exemption granted. [Amended 10-14-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992; 9-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 11-18-2004 by L.L. No.
2-2004; 8-21-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014136]
Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended, real property
owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over,
or real property owned by a husband and wife or by siblings, one of whom
is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from Village taxes to the extent
indicated as follows for senior citizens with incomes of more than $20,500
and less than $28,899:
Less than $20,500 50%
At least $20,500 but less than
$21,500
45%
At least $21,500 but less than
$22,500
40%
At least $22,500 but less than
$23,500
35%
At least $23,500 but less than
$24,400
30%
At least $24,400 but less than
$25,300
25%
At least $25,300 but less than
$26,200
20%
At least $26,200 but less than
$27,100
15%
At least $27,100 but less than
$28,000
10%
At least $28,000 but less than
$28,899
5%
§ 523-17. Commencement of exemption. [Amended 10-14-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992; 9-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 11-18-2004 by L.L.
No. 2-2004; 8-21-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
The exemption shall hereby commence with the assessment roll to be
finalized on April 1, 2015.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-18
1:323
§ 523-18. Eligibility.137
A person must be 65 years of age on or before May 1 to apply for an
exemption and must meet any and all other requirements specified in § 467
of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York to qualify for an
exemption under the sliding scale formula.
§ 523-19. Rules and regulations.
The Village Board of Trustees may by resolution establish rules, regulations
and procedures to verify an applicant's income level and any other statutory
criteria necessary to obtain an exemption.
§ 523-20. Amendment of income levels.138
The Village Board of Trustees may by resolution amend the income levels
necessary to qualify for sliding scale exemptions, provided that said
resolution is not in conflict with § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York then in effect.
§ 523-21. Ratification of exemptions from previous years.
The Village Board of Trustees expressly ratifies the full and partial
exemptions granted in the years granted subsequent to the passage of Local
Law No. 3 of the Village of Malverne for the year 1983 and up to the
effective date of this article.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-18 MALVERNE CODE § 523-21
1:324
ARTICLE IV
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-3-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994 (Ch. 41, Art. IV, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-22. Continuation of collection.
Pursuant to § 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by a
chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A, the Village of Malverne hereby acts by local law, not subject to
referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue
to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law,
as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 523-23. Filing.139
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 523-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of
1994 takes effect as proposed in legislative bill number S. 8560-A, except
that if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this article, this
article shall take effect immediately.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-24
1:325

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Improvements to Accommodate Disabled Resident
[Adopted 10-26-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994 (Ch. 41, Art. V, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-25. Exemption granted; applicability.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if the
improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the
use and accessibility of said real property by a resident owner of the real
property who is physically disabled or a member of the resident owner's
household, excluding boarders, who is physically disabled, if such member
resides in the real property. Such exemption shall apply to improvements
constructed prior to and subsequent to the effective date of this article.
§ 523-26. Certificate required.140
To qualify as physically disabled for the purpose of this article, an individual
shall submit to the Assessor of the Incorporated Village of Malverne a
certified statement from a physician licensed to practice in the state, on
a form prescribed and made available by the Assessor of the Incorporated
Village of Malverne, which states that the individual has a permanent
physical impairment which substantially limits one or more of the
individual's major life activities, except that an individual who has obtained
a certificate from the State Commission for the Blind, stating that the
individual is legally blind, may submit such certificate in lieu of the
physician's certified statement.
§ 523-27. Application for exemption.
This exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner or all
of the owners of the real property, on a form prescribed and made available
by the Assessor of the Incorporated Village of Malverne. The applicant shall
furnish such information as the Board shall require. The application shall be
filed, together with the appropriate certified statement of physical disability
or certificate of blindness, with the Assessor of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne on or before the taxable status date.
§ 523-28. Approval; term.
If the Assessor of the Incorporated Village of Malverne is satisfied that
the improvement is necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and
accessibility by a resident who is physically disabled and that the applicant
is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this article, the Assessor of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne shall approve the application and enter
the taxable assessed value of the parcel for which an exemption has been
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 523-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-28
1:327
granted pursuant to this article on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption as determined pursuant to
§ 523-26 of this article in a separate column. Once granted, the exemption
shall continue on the real property until the improvement ceases to be
necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility of the
property by the resident who is physically disabled.
§ 523-29. Effective date; information regarding availability;
refunds.
This article shall take effect and upon passage; provided, however, that any
benefit derived by this article shall be effective January 1, 1995, and only for
fiscal years subsequent to the passage of this article. The Village Clerk shall
disseminate information to the residents of the Village prior to the taxable
status date of the Village. No refunds of taxes previously paid or owing, shall
be permitted nor authorized for any tax period preceding the effective date
of this article.
§ 523-28 MALVERNE CODE § 523-29
1:328
ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Ambulance Corps and Fire Department Volunteers
[Adopted 2-5-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003 (Ch. 41, Art. V, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-30. Findings and intent.
Volunteers are the backbone of the Incorporated Village of Malverne and
provide the residents of the Village with protection for their health, safety
and welfare. The members of the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps
and the Malverne Volunteer Fire Department provide this service without
remuneration and at a detriment to themselves and their families. These
volunteers risk their lives each and every day to provide this protection for
the residents of the Village. Chapter 440 of the Laws of 2002 of the State of
New York permits the Village of Malverne to provide a partial property tax
exemption for members of volunteer fire companies, fire departments and
volunteer ambulance services; and because of the invaluable service that
the members of the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps and the Malverne
Volunteer Fire Department provide to the residents of this Village, the
Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby provides
this tax exemption.
§ 523-31. Amount of exemption. [Amended 10-19-2006 by L.L. No.
5-2006]
Real property owned by an enrolled member of the Malverne Volunteer
Ambulance Corps and/or Malverne Volunteer Fire Department, or the
enrolled member and the enrolled member's spouse, shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of 10% of its assessed value for taxes for the
Incorporated Village of Malverne; provided, however, that such exemption
shall in no event exceed $3,000.
§ 523-32. Qualifications.
Such exemption shall not be granted to a member of the Malverne Volunteer
Ambulance Corps and/or the Malverne Volunteer Fire Department unless:
A. The applicant resides in the Incorporated Village of Malverne.
B. The property is the primary residence of the applicant and is wholly or
partially occupied by the applicant.
C. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence, such portion not used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to taxation at full
value and the remaining portion shall be entitled to exemption provided
by this article.
D. The applicant has been certified by the Board of Directors for the
Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps or the Fire Council for the
§ 523-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-32
1:329
§ 523-33. Limit on exemption.
Any person who is, was or shall become a member in good standing of both
the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps and the Malverne Volunteer Fire
Department shall only be entitled to one exemption. Only one exemption
shall be allowed for any parcel of real property.
§ 523-34. Service required to be under contract to Village.
This exemption shall not apply to any resident of the Incorporated Village of
Malverne who is a member of any volunteer fire company, fire department
and/or volunteer ambulance service which is not contracted with by the
Incorporated Village of Malverne to provide fire, rescue or ambulance
services to residents of this Village.
§ 523-35. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Assessor or Village
Clerk on or before taxable status date, on a form as prescribed by the
Village Clerk.
§ 523-36. Lifetime exemption.
An enrolled member of the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps and/or
the Malverne Volunteer Fire Department who accrues more than 20 years
of active service in such corps or department, and is so certified by the
Board of Directors for the Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps or the Fire
Council for the Malverne Volunteer Fire Department, shall, subject to the
other limitations of this article, be granted the ten-percent exemption for
the remainder of his or her life.
§ 523-37. Eligibility of surviving spouse. [Added 10-19-2006 by L.L.
No. 5-2006]
Should a qualified member (as outlined in § 523-32 of this article) of the
Malverne Volunteer Ambulance Corps and/or the Malverne Volunteer Fire
Department die in the line of duty for such department, and such member
is survived by a spouse, each surviving spouse shall be eligible for a tenpercent
exemption for the remainder of the surviving spouse's life, or until
such time as the surviving spouse remarries. The determination of a "line
of duty" death shall be made by resolution of the Board of Trustees, by a
majority vote.
Malverne Volunteer Fire Department as an enrolled member of such
organization, and has served in good standing for a minimum of five
years. Membership in any other fire company, fire department of
volunteer ambulance service shall not be included in calculation of such
time.
§ 523-32 MALVERNE CODE § 523-37
1:330
ARTICLE VII
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 7-16-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015 (Ch. 41, Art. VII, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 523-38. Exemption granted.
The Incorporated Village of Malverne hereby recognizes alternative
veterans exemptions for veterans who served in the armed forces during
periods of war as designated in Real Property Tax Law § 458-a.
§ 523-39. Amount of exemption.
Pursuant to § 458-a of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, in exercise of the option granted by
Subdivision 2(d)(ii) of § 458-a, hereby selects the following as the maximum
exemptions allowable pursuant to Paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of
Subdivision 2 of § 458-a:
A. Alternative non-combat veterans exemption: 15% of assessed value,
with a maximum of $27,000, or the product of $27,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate, whichever is less.
B. Alternative combat veterans exemption: 25% of assessed value, with a
maximum of $45,000, or the product of $45,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate, whichever is less.
C. Alternative non-combat or combat veterans with a disability rating:
50% of the veteran's disability rating multiplied by the assessed value,
with a maximum of $90,000, or the product of $90,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate, whichever is less.
§ 523-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-39
1:331
Chapter 528
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 44.
§ 523-39 MALVERNE CODE § 523-39
1:332
ARTICLE I
Operators' Licenses
§ 528-1. License required.
No person owning or controlling a taxicab shall operate such taxicab or
permit the same to be operated or driven as a vehicle for hire upon the
streets of the Village of Malverne without having first obtained and having
then in force an operator's license therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 528-2. Issuance and expiration.
Every operator's license issued under this chapter shall be issued as of the
first of January, first of April, first of July or first of October, whichever shall
be nearest to the date of the granting thereof, and shall expire on the 31st of
December next succeeding, unless sooner revoked by the Board of Trustees.
§ 528-3. Application information.
Every person desiring that a taxicab owned or controlled by him shall be
operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the Village of Malverne
shall file with the Mayor a written application, verified under oath, stating:
A. The name and address of the applicant and specifying, in the case of
any unincorporated association, the names and addresses of each
member thereof, and in the case of any corporation, the names and
addresses of each officer, director and stockholder thereof.
B. A complete financial statement of the applicant, specifying the amounts
of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transactions or acts giving rise to said judgments and the name and
location of the court in which and the date on which each was entered.
C. All crimes and violations of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation of
which the applicant, and any member thereof if an unincorporated
association, and any officer, director and stockholder thereof if a
corporation, has been convicted, stating the name and location of the
court in which and the date on which such conviction was had and the
penalty imposed therefor.
D. The experience of the applicant, and each member thereof if an
unincorporated association, and each officer, director and stockholder
thereof if a corporation, in the transportation of passengers.
E. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the public
convenience and necessity require the granting of a license.
F. The number of vehicles to be operated by the applicant and a
description of each such vehicle, including the make, model, passengerseating
capacity, year of manufacture, New York State registration
number and motor number thereof, and, if it has ever been in any
§ 528-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-3
1:333
§ 528-4. Public hearing.
Upon filing of an application under this chapter, the Mayor shall fix a time
and place for a public hearing thereon which shall be not less than 15 days
nor more than 30 days after such filing, and the Clerk of the Village shall
give notice thereof as follows:
§ 528-5. Findings by Mayor; issuance of license.
If the Mayor shall find that further taxicab service in the Village of Malverne
is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant
is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform
to the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted
under this chapter, then the Mayor, upon the payment by the applicant
of the fees and the furnishing by the applicant of proof of insurance, as
hereinafter provided, shall issue a license stating the name and address of
the applicant, the number of vehicles the applicant is authorized to operate
and the date of the issuance thereof; otherwise, such application shall be
denied.
§ 528-6. Basis for findings.
In making the findings required by § 528-5 hereof, the Mayor shall take into
consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation in the Village,
whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the
probable effect of additional taxicabs on local traffic conditions and the
character, experience and responsibility of the applicant and the adequacy
of the service which the applicant proposes to give.
accident, the date and nature of the accident and a description of the
damage done to such vehicle.
G. The age and citizenship of the applicant, and each member thereof if an
unincorporated association, and each officer, director and stockholder
thereof if a corporation.
H. The location of any and all depots and terminals proposed to be used by
the applicant.
A. By mailing a copy thereof to the applicant and to each person to whom a
license to operate taxicabs upon the streets of the Village has
theretofore been issued, which is then in force, not less than 10 days
prior to the date of such hearing.
B. By publishing such notice at least once a week for each of two
successive weeks in the official newspaper of the Village.
§ 528-3 MALVERNE CODE § 528-7
1:334
§ 528-7. Insurance required.141
Each applicant shall, before the issuance to him of a license under this
chapter, file with the Village Clerk evidence that he is insured against public
liability in the limits as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the
Board of Trustees for personal injuries to each person and for personal
injuries for each accident and for property damage.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 528-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-7
1:335

ARTICLE II
Drivers' Licenses
§ 528-8. License required.
No person shall drive any taxicab as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of
the Village of Malverne without having first obtained and having in force a
driver's license as hereinafter provided.
§ 528-9. Issuance and expiration.
Every driver's license issued under this chapter shall be issued as of the
date of the granting thereof and shall expire on the 31st of December next
succeeding, unless sooner revoked by the Board of Trustees.
§ 528-10. Application information. [Amended 6-4-1952]
A. Every person desiring to drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
Village of Malverne shall file with the Mayor an application for a license
so to drive, which application shall be in writing upon a form supplied
by the Village Clerk and verified under oath and shall state:
(1) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(2) A full description of the applicant, including his color, height,
weight, color of eyes and hair and the nature of any physical
infirmity from which he may suffer.
(3) Whether or not he is a citizen of the United States.
(4) The names and addresses of four residents of Nassau County who
have known the applicant for a period of 10 years or more and who
will vouch for the applicant's sobriety, honesty and general good
character.
(5) The names and addresses of the applicant's employers during at
least 10 years prior to his application.
(6) All crimes and violations of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation
for which the applicant has ever been arrested or convicted, stating
the date and place of each such arrest and the name and location of
the court in which and the date on which each such conviction was
had and the penalty imposed therefor.
(7) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
B. Each such application shall be accompanied by two recent unmounted
photographs of the applicant, three inches by three inches, a complete
set of fingerprints, and a certificate from a reputable physician of
Nassau County certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not
inflicted with any physical or mental disease or infirmity which might
§ 528-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-10
1:337
§ 528-11. Examination and investigation of applicant.
Upon the receipt of any application, the Mayor shall refer the same to the
Chief of Police of the Village or some other suitable person who shall cause
the applicant to be examined as to his ability, fitness and skill in driving
and to have such other investigation made of the applicant as he shall deem
necessary or desirable, and shall report the results of such examination and
investigation to the Mayor.
§ 528-12. Findings by Mayor; issuance of license.
Upon receipt of the report provided for in § 528-11 hereof, the Mayor, upon
payment by the applicant of the fees hereinafter provided, shall issue a
taxicab driver's license to the applicant if he shall find that the applicant
holds a New York State chauffeur's license and is a fit and proper person
to drive a taxicab, considering his age, experience, police and accident
records, character and driving ability; otherwise, such application shall be
denied.
§ 528-13. Unlicensed drivers prohibited. [Added 10-7-1953]
No person owning or controlling a taxicab shall permit any person to drive
the same who is not licensed under this chapter, or who is otherwise in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver, and a photostatic copy of
the applicant's current New York chauffeur's license.
§ 528-10 MALVERNE CODE § 528-13
1:338
ARTICLE III
Appeals; Issuance and Suspension of Licenses
§ 528-14. Licenses from Board of Trustees.
Any applicant who shall have been refused a license hereunder either to
operate or to drive taxicabs may apply to the Board of Trustees therefor at
a meeting thereof as hereinafter provided:
§ 528-15. License fees. [Amended 2-14-1968142]
The fees for the issuance of a taxicab operator's license, per taxicab
licensed for each annual period for which such license is issued, or for
a taxicab driver's license, for each calendar year or portion thereof for
which such license is issued, shall be as set from time to time by resolution
adopted by the Board of Trustees.
A. Such application to the Board of Trustees shall be in writing and signed
and acknowledged by the applicant and shall state the ground or
grounds on which the applicant claims that the determination of the
Mayor was erroneous.
B. Such application shall be filed with the Village Clerk within 20 days
after notice of denial of the application by the Mayor has been mailed to
him or delivered to him in person, and not less than 15 days prior to the
meeting of the Board of Trustees at which he wished his application to
said Board to be considered.
C. Upon the filing of such application, the Village Clerk shall mail notice of
the hearing thereon to each person who shall have appeared at the
hearing of the application before the Mayor.
D. At such meeting, the Board of Trustees shall consider the applicant's
application upon the facts submitted to the Mayor in connection with
his consideration thereof and shall receive no new or additional
evidence either in support thereof or in opposition thereto, and may
hear argument thereon from any person or an attorney representing
any person who shall have appeared at the hearing before the Mayor on
the application to him.
E. Such application may be granted or refused by the Board of Trustees
upon the findings and considerations set forth in §§ 528-5 and 528-6
hereof or in § 528-11 hereof, as the case may be.
F. Upon the granting of such application by the Board of Trustees, a
license shall be issued to the applicant by the Mayor on payment by the
applicant of the fees therefor provided herein, and, in the case of an
application under Article I hereof, on compliance by the applicant with
§ 528-7 hereof.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 528-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-16
1:339
§ 528-16. Record of licenses; when effective.
Every license issued hereunder shall be countersigned by the Village Clerk,
who shall keep a record thereof and of the amount of the fee to be paid
therefor and, upon presentation of such license to the Village Treasurer,
signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Village Clerk, and the
payment to the Village Treasurer of such fee, the Village Treasurer shall
endorse thereon his receipt of the license fee, and no license issued
hereunder shall take effect until the receipt of the Village Treasurer shall
have been endorsed thereon.
§ 528-17. Conditions of issuance.
No license shall be issued hereunder which shall permit the operation of any
taxicab unless and until it has been inspected pursuant to § 528-21 hereof
and certified to the Mayor that it conforms to the provisions of § 528-20
hereof.
§ 528-18. Conditions for suspension or revocation.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended for a period of not more
than three months or revoked by the Board of Trustees if the holder thereof
shall violate any provision of this chapter or shall be convicted of any
violation of any local law of the Village of Malverne or of any traffic law,
ordinance or regulation of the State of New York or any municipality of
the State of New York, or of any crime; and any license issued hereunder
may be suspended by the Board of Trustees if the holder thereof shall be
indicted or charged, upon information duly filed with the public authorities,
with or for the commission of any crime, until such holder shall be convicted
or acquitted of the violation of such crime, but no license shall be either
suspended or revoked hereunder without a public hearing thereon, held
not less than 20 days after written notice thereof shall have been given to
the holder thereof, either in person or by registered mail, at which such
holder may be represented by counsel and shall be given due opportunity to
present evidence in his own behalf.
§ 528-19. Temporary suspension.
The Mayor, upon receiving information giving him reasonable cause to
believe that the holder of any license issued hereunder has violated any
provision of this chapter or been convicted of any violation referred to in
§ 528-18 hereof or indicted or charged with or for any crime, may forthwith
suspend such license until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees.
§ 528-16 MALVERNE CODE § 528-19
1:340
ARTICLE IV
Rules and Regulations
§ 528-20. Condition of taxicabs.
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the Village of Malverne as
a taxicab shall be kept in a safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, clean, sanitary, fit and of good appearance.
§ 528-21. Inspection of taxicabs.
The Village Trustee in charge of the Police Department is hereby authorized
and directed to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection
of taxicabs operated upon the streets of the Village of Malverne and to
inspect or cause each such taxicab to be inspected not less than once every
six months; and if he shall find upon such inspection that any such taxicab
does not conform to the provisions of § 528-21 hereof, he shall immediately
report the same to the Mayor.
§ 528-22. Operating requirements.
The following regulations shall be observed in the operation and driving of
every taxicab upon the streets of the Village of Malverne:
A. Each taxicab operated hereunder shall bear on the outside of each front
door the word "taxicab" and the name and address of the owner in
letters not less than two inches and not more than four inches in height,
either painted thereon or otherwise securely affixed thereto.
B. No person shall drive any taxicab upon the streets of the Village of
Malverne unless there is displayed in such taxicab, in a manner in
which it can be readily observed by all passengers therein, an
identification card containing a recent photograph of such driver and
his full name and driver's permit number, all in letters not less than 1/2
inch high.
C. The driver of every taxicab shall at all times remain in the driver's
compartment or immediately adjacent to his taxicab when such vehicle
is in any public place, except that, when necessary, a driver may be
absent from his cab for not more than 20 consecutive minutes, and
alight to assist passengers into or out of his taxicab.
D. No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers except when sitting in the
driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately
adjacent thereto, nor in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign, or in
any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person
or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage.
E. No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers.
F. No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers at a railroad station on the
property of the railroad, without the written consent of the railroad.
§ 528-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-22
1:341
G. No taxicab driver shall permit more persons to be carried in his taxicab
than the number for which he has seating facilities.
H. No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person,
upon request, unless previously engaged to full capacity or unless the
transportation of such person shall substantially delay or inconvenience
passengers who have already engaged his taxicab.
I. If a taxicab is carrying two or more persons to different destinations,
the driver shall be the sole judge of the order in which such persons
shall be delivered to their destinations and the route which shall be
followed in so delivering them.
J. No taxicab shall park or stand on any public street or place other than
at a public taxicab stand designated or established and so marked
pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Trustees.
K. No passenger in a taxicab shall be kept waiting longer than three
minutes before proceeding to his announced destination.
L. All accidents in which any taxicab shall be involved shall be reported to
the Police Department within 24 hours after the happening thereof.
M. Every taxicab driver, as soon as practicable after his taxicab is emptied
of passengers, shall carefully search his taxicab for any property lost or
left therein by any passenger, and if he shall find any such property,
shall immediately deliver it to the Police Department.
N. Every taxicab driver shall obey all traffic laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations while driving a taxicab, and upon the receipt of a summons
for any alleged violation of any such law, ordinance, rule or regulation,
shall immediately report the same to the Village Clerk, advising him of
the nature of the offense charged, the name and location of the court
and the date on which such summons is returnable.
O. No person other than the driver or a passenger shall enter any taxicab
while it is in operation as such.
P. Every taxicab driver licensed as such pursuant to this chapter shall,
within 48 hours, notify the Village Clerk of any change of his address or
loss of either his taxicab driver's or his chauffeur's license.
Q. No taxicab operator or driver shall demand or suggest that any
passenger or prospective passenger pay a fare larger than that
prescribed herein.
R. Every person licensed as a taxicab operator under this chapter shall
maintain continuous service seven days each week between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and the following 1:30 a.m., and shall keep at least one cab
and driver subject to call between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 528-22 MALVERNE CODE § 528-22
1:342
ARTICLE V
Definitions; Fares; Penalties
§ 528-23. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, any unincorporated
association, a corporation and any other legal entity.
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than eight persons and
not operated on a fixed route.
§ 528-24. Maximum fare. [Amended 2-5-1964; 11-13-1970;
2-21-1973143]
No fare greater than as set from time to time by resolution adopted by the
Board of Trustees shall be charged for the transportation of any person
from one place to another within the Village of Malverne, and no person so
transported shall refuse to pay such fare.
§ 528-25. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-4-1952; 2-14-1968144]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code and shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of any
license hereunder held by him as hereinabove provided.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 528-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 528-25
1:343
Chapter 540
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Landscaping — See Ch. 382.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512.
§ 528-25 MALVERNE CODE § 528-25
1:344
ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 12-13-1934 by Ord. No. 29; amended in its entirety
2-14-1968 (Ch. 35 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 540-1. Trimming required; enforcement.
It shall be the duty of every owner of real property in the Village of
Malverne to keep the shade trees in front of his premises trimmed so that
overhanging limbs will not interfere with passersby on the sidewalk or
roadway. All overhanging limbs shall be at least eight feet above the center
of the sidewalk and 13 feet above the roadway. It shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of Public Works to see that the provisions of this section
are maintained and enforced and to serve notice in writing on any owner of
real property who fails to comply with the provisions of this section; or if
such owner of real property cannot be found, service may be made on the
occupant of the premises. The notice shall contain a direction that the trees
shall be trimmed to meet the requirements of this section within five days
after the service of such notice.
§ 540-2. Penalties for offenses; work done by Village.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Village Code.145
B. In addition to the penalty herein provided, if the owner of said property
fails to comply with the notice set forth in § 540-1, the Village may trim
or cause to be trimmed the trees mentioned in the notice and the owner
shall be required to pay the cost of the same plus a penalty of 10%, and
in default of payment, the same shall be secured by action in the name
of the Village as debts of like amount are collected or by filing a
municipal lien against the property of said owner.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 540-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-2
1:345

ARTICLE II
Trees in Public Areas
[Adopted 12-2-1987 by L.L. No. 9-1987]
§ 540-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the Village, or
to which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between private property lines on either side of all streets,
avenues or ways within the Village.
§ 540-4. Tree and Beautification Committee.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created and established a Village Tree
and Beautification Committee of the Village of Malverne, State of New
York, which shall consist of seven members, citizens and residents of
this Village, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the Village Board of Trustees. [Amended 4-23-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
B. Term of office. The term of the seven persons to be appointed by the
Mayor shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term, by the Mayor with the approval of
the Village Board of Trustees. [Amended 4-23-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
C. Compensation. Members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation.
D. Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
Committee to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update
annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, and removal for disposition of trees and
shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will
be presented annually to the Village Board of Trustees and upon its
acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive
Village Tree Plan for the Village of Malverne, State of New York. The
Committee, when requested by the Village Board of Trustees, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
E. Operation. The Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of
the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Upon
§ 540-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-4
1:347
§ 540-5. Species to be planted.
A list of suggested species for planting may be promulgated as part of
this program. The Village Board of Trustees shall be empowered to modify
by resolution, from time to time, the suggested list, which list shall not
be exclusive. Other species not appearing on the suggested list may be
utilized, provided that the maintenance requirements, root and growth
patterns, insect and disease resistance are similar to the other species on
the suggested list.
§ 540-6. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The placement of trees in relation to curbs, curblines, sidewalks, utility
poles, structures and other obstructions shall consider the species to be
planted, size, etc., and shall be determined by the Committee in relation to
the particular situation, within its discretion, in the absence of other policy
which may be established by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 540-7. Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner,
measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug.
§ 540-8. Utilities.
No street trees, other than those species listed as "small trees" in the
suggested list of this article, may be planted under or within 10 lateral
feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
§ 540-9. Care of trees by Village.
approval of the minutes, a copy of same shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.
A. The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.
B. The Village Tree and Beautification Committee may remove, or cause or
order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, disease, insect
or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees
by adjacent property owners, provided that the selection and location of
said trees is in accordance with §§ 540-5 through 540-8 of this article.
§ 540-4 MALVERNE CODE § 540-10
1:348
§ 540-10. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or Village
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this article at the determination of the Village Tree and
Beautification Committee.
§ 540-11. Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property.
The Village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the Village when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute
a potential threat to other trees within the Village. The Village Tree and
Beautification Committee will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees.
The Village shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with or impinges on public safety or with the
proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with
visibility of any traffic-control device or sign.
§ 540-12. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 540-13. Interference with Tree and Beautification Committee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Village Tree and Beautification Committee, or any of its agents, while
engaging in and about the plantings, cultivating, mulching, pruning,
spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private
grounds, as authorized in this article.
§ 540-14. Arborists' license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the
Village without first applying for and procuring a license in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 382, Landscaping, pertaining to licensing
of landscapers, the provisions of which shall be incorporated herein by
reference. No license shall be required of any public service company,
town, county or Village employee doing such work in the pursuit of their
public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant
shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts which may be prescribed by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees for bodily injury and property damage, indemnifying the Village or
§ 540-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-14
1:349
any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors
as herein described.
§ 540-15. Review of actions by Board of Trustees.
Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Village Tree and
Beautification Committee to the Village Board of Trustees, which may hear
the matter and make final decision.
§ 540-16. Conflict with other laws.
Notwithstanding contrary provisions contained in any other local law and
especially Article III of this chapter, Tree Preservation, which requires
a permit prior to removal of a street tree and replacement thereof, the
provisions of this article shall prevail, and the replacement of removed
trees shall conform hereto, even to the extent of excusing replacement of a
removed tree, if such replacement would be in violation of this article.
§ 540-17. Existing trees.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to require the
replacement, removal or relocation of any tree presently existing which may
not conform to the standards to be established by this article.
§ 540-18. Penalties for offenses.146
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 540-14 MALVERNE CODE § 540-18
1:350
ARTICLE III
Tree Preservation
[Adopted 1-23-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003 (Ch. 42A of the 1972 Code)]
§ 540-19. Legislative intent.
§ 540-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED ARBORIST — An arborist or firm certified by the International
Society of Arboriculture, one of its chapters, or another nationally
recognized arboricultural organization.
HISTORIC OR UNIQUE VALUE — A quality of protected trees or shrubs
that may cause them to have a special role in the historic character of
the Village, and an incomparable or irreplaceable aesthetic benefit to the
community or environment, or may be listed as a rare or endangered plant
species on federal, state or other accredited plant registries.
PROTECTED SHRUB — Any established shrub with a height and/or spread
of six feet or more that has been found by the Board of Trustees, upon
recommendation by the Tree and Beautification Committee and after public
hearing, to have historic or unique value to the Village as defined herein.
A. The Village of Malverne finds that the existence of trees within the
Village makes a fundamental contribution to the health, safety and
general welfare of Malverne citizens. Trees, in addition to their
aesthetic benefits and temperature moderation, are essential to habitat,
wildlife, energy conservation, and the healthy ecology of the area, and
these benefits to the community and environment increase as trees
mature. Maturation of trees protects surface water quality, provides
shade, offers windbreaks, reduces soil erosion and flooding, offers a
natural barrier to noise and, together with shrubs, enhances the natural
beauty and appearance of the Village, and preserves its historic,
nonurban character.
B. Indiscriminate damage to and destruction of trees, especially mature
and/or specimen shrubs and trees, causes barren and unsightly
conditions, increases surface drainage problems, increases municipal
expense to control drainage, impairs the stability and value of
developed and undeveloped property, and adversely affects the health,
safety, environment, ecosystem, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the Village of Malverne. The unregulated destruction of trees
contributes to the degradation of the natural beauty, environmental
quality and historic character of the Village.
C. This article seeks to promote the benefits described above by
promoting a healthy and mature tree and shrub population throughout
the Village for the benefit of its citizens and the environment.
§ 540-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-20
1:351
PROTECTED TREE — Any deciduous or evergreen perennial plant, usually
having one main stem or trunk and more or less definitely formed, whose
trunk has a diameter of nine inches or more (28 inches in circumference)
at a height of four feet measured from the uphill side. Protected trees shall
also include any tree, regardless of size, that has been found by the Board of
Trustees, upon recommendation by the Tree and Beautification Committee
and after public hearing, to have historic or unique value to the Village as
defined herein.
TREE AND BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE — As defined and created by
Article II, Trees in Public Areas, of this chapter (see § 540-4).
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — A permit duly issued by the Village Clerk or
designee pursuant to the terms of this article.
§ 540-21. Cutting, killing or destroying protected trees and shrubs
prohibited; exceptions.
A. No person, firm, corporation or individual shall purposely, carelessly or
negligently cut down, kill or otherwise destroy any protected tree or
shrub or take any action that will result in the cutting down, killing or
otherwise destroying of any protected tree or shrub without first
obtaining a tree removal permit.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not apply, however, if
destruction of any protected tree or shrub is necessary in response to
an emergency caused by an act of God or to protect the health and
safety of persons or property as determined by one or more members of
the Tree and Beautification Committee. If the destruction of a protected
tree or shrub is necessary to protect against an immediate threat to the
health and safety of persons or property, and a determination of such
threat cannot be made in a timely fashion by one or more members of
the Tree and Beautification Committee, then such protected tree or
shrub may be destroyed or removed; provided that within five days of
taking such action the Village Clerk is notified in writing that such
action has taken place. Such notice shall contain, at a minimum, a
completed tree removal permit application form as prescribed by the
Village Clerk, and a complete explanation of the circumstances and
conditions that gave rise to the emergency removal. Any removal of a
protected tree or shrub based on an unreasonable reliance on the
emergency provisions contained herein, as determined by the Village
Clerk, may subject the person removing or destroying such protected
tree or shrub or the person causing such removal or destruction to the
restoration requirement of § 540-24 and/or the penalties provided in
§ 540-26.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, where protected
tree or shrub removal is proposed in connection with any site plan or
subdivision application submitted to the Planning Board, Board of
Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board for approval,
protected trees or shrubs may be removed from the affected property
§ 540-20 MALVERNE CODE § 540-21
1:352
§ 540-22. Granting of permits.
only in conjunction with and subsequent to the approval by the Planning
Board, Board of Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board of
a final subdivision plat or final site plan. The Planning Board, Board
of Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board applicant shall
not be required to obtain a tree removal permit. Rather, the Planning
Board, Board of Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board, in
connection with any site plan or subdivision application, may approve
or disapprove the removal of protected trees or shrubs on such terms
and conditions as it may prescribe, including but not limited to
requiring the planting of trees or shrubs to replace protected trees or
shrubs removed from the affected property as a condition of a final
site plan or subdivision application, moving or relocating proposed
structures to preserve trees or shrubs that the Planning Board, Board
of Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board deems to have
particular value. The Planning Board, Board of Zoning Appeals and/or
Architectural Review Board may refer such subdivision or site plans to
the Tree and Beautification Committee for its recommendations with
regard to the proposed removal of protected trees or shrubs or their
protection and preservation. If such referral is made, the Tree and
Beautification Committee shall respond to the Planning Board, Board of
Zoning Appeals and/or Architectural Review Board within 21 days.
D. If the Building Inspector, Superintendent of Public Works or any other
Village employee, in the course of their duties, becomes aware of a plan
that may result in a violation of this article, notice of such plan shall
promptly be made to the Tree and Beautification Committee.
A. Permits for the removal of protected trees or shrubs may be granted
under the following circumstances:
(1) That the protected trees or shrubs are dead or diseased to the
extent that they cannot, or should not, consistent with good and
accepted arboricultural practices, be saved, or that the removal of
the protected trees or shrubs is otherwise necessary due to their
health or physical condition, according to good and accepted
arboricultural practices. To this effect, a written statement of a
certified arborist, obtained and paid for by the applicant, may be
required by Tree and Beautification Committee of any applicant
who proposes to destroy any protected tree or shrub.
(2) That the presence of protected trees or shrubs causes undue
hardship or danger for the person or property of the owner, or
danger to the public, to public property or to the person or property
of an adjoining property owner. Such danger shall include damage
caused to any public sidewalk and/or roadway which may cause a
tripping hazard.
§ 540-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-22
1:353
§ 540-23. Procedural requirements for permit; revocation.
(3) That protected trees or shrubs are within 10 feet of the perimeter
of existing or planned buildings or structures for which a valid
building permit or certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(4) That protected trees or shrubs substantially interfere with a
permitted and intended use of the property.
(5) That the property owner has an approved permit to fill or
relandscape, and that such filling or relandscaping, in the opinion
of the Tree and Beautification Committee, shall lead to the demise
of protected trees or shrubs.
B. The Village may, as a condition to granting the application for a permit,
require the applicant to replace any protected tree or shrub which is
the subject of the application with a replacement tree or shrub under
conditions specified in the issued permit. Such replacement shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions of § 540-24, Subsections
B, C, and D.
A. All applications for tree removal permits hereunder must be made in
writing upon forms prescribed by the Village Clerk by the owner or duly
authorized representative of the owner of the property on which such
protected tree or shrub is located. There shall be no fee associated with
such a permit application.
B. All applications for tree removal permits shall be referred by the Village
Clerk to the Tree and Beautification Committee for review. Permits will
be granted in accordance with § 540-22 and Article II, Trees in Public
Areas, of this chapter.
C. The application shall include the types and sizes of trees or shrubs to be
removed and destroyed, the reasons for removing or destroying said
trees or shrubs, and a plan clearly indicating the location of the
property and the trees or shrubs to be destroyed.
D. Where five or more tree cuttings are planned for relandscaping, a
landscape design plan indicating the species and location of
replacement plantings must also be attached to the application. If 10 or
more protected tree or shrub cuttings are planned, the applicant may
be required to pay for an inspector, to be assigned by the Village, to
supervise the orderly development of the land and ensure the
protection of the trees.
E. The applicant may be required to furnish additional relevant
information if necessary to a determination of the permit application.
F. The application for a permit shall provide for the permission of the
property owner for members of the Tree and Beautification Committee
to enter onto the applicant's property and inspect protected trees or
shrubs to be destroyed, and such member(s) may be accompanied by a
§ 540-22 MALVERNE CODE § 540-23
1:354
§ 540-24. Restoration requirements.
certified arborist. In the event of such an inspection, protected trees or
shrubs to be destroyed shall be clearly identified with a bright-colored
ribbon, spray paint or other identifying mark. Such on-site inspection
shall be conducted at a reasonable time, and no more than three such
on-site inspections shall occur without the subsequent approval of the
property owner.
G. Within 40 days from the date a complete application is submitted, the
Tree and Beautification Committee shall make its decision on the
application and the Village shall thereupon issue or deny the permit
request. The failure to act upon the application for a tree removal
permit within 40 days shall be deemed a granting of the tree removal
permit.
H. The Village may revoke any duly issued tree removal permit if the work
proposed in the application is not proceeding in an orderly and diligent
manner, in accordance with good and acceptable arboricultural
practice, or if destruction of protected trees or shrubs not proposed in
the tree removal permit is undertaken.
A. All persons who remove or cause to be removed protected trees or
shrubs without first obtaining the required permit under this article
may be required by the Village to plant one or more replacement trees
or shrubs on the property which are of like kind, quality and size. When
like-sized replacement is not practical, replacement with a specific
quantity of smaller-size trees or shrubs may be required. When
restoration is determined by the Village to be impractical or
undesirable, an additional fine may be imposed in accordance with the
provisions of § 540-26.
B. All restorative work shall be done in accordance with good and
acceptable planting and tree surgery practice.
C. All trees that fail to survive as a result of the restoration work required
under this section for a period of two calendar years following planting
shall be replaced by the owner of the land. Said replacement shall be
within 60 days following written demand from the Village for such
replacement, or within an extended period of time as may be specified.
Should the property owner fail to replace the trees pursuant to demand
within the required period of time, the Village has the right to impose
penalties as set forth in § 540-26 of this chapter.
D. All tree planting, tree dressing and associated restoration work must be
substantially completed within six months from the date of issuance of
the decision of the Tree and Beautification Committee; except that the
time may be extended by the Building Inspector, whose decision shall
be subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 540-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-25
1:355
§ 540-25. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector until
all tree planting, tree dressing and associated restoration work shall be
completed to the reasonable satisfaction of the Building Inspector or
designee. In the event seasonal planting requirements prevent the timely
completion of all planting and restoration work, the Building Inspector may
issue a certificate of occupancy together with prescribed conditions.
§ 540-26. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
violating any of the provisions of this article shall commit an offense,
the fine for which shall not exceed $250 for each offense. The removal,
destroying or killing of each protected tree or shrub shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this article may be required to replace such protected tree or
shrub with one of similar size and quality as provided in this chapter. When
restoration is determined by the Village to be impractical or undesirable, an
additional fine may be imposed in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
§ 540-27. Work done on Village property.
No Village department, agency, commission or authority in the Village of
Malverne, or any employee of the Village, or any firm or individual retained
by the Village shall propose to or shall cut down, kill or otherwise destroy
more than 10 protected trees or shrubs in any Village park or on other
Village property, with the exception of Village highways, within the Village
of Malverne, without first providing written notice to the Village Board of
Trustees. The Board of Trustees may consult the Tree and Beautification
Committee and ask for its recommendation on the destruction of said
protected trees or shrubs, and the determination of the Village Board of
Trustees concerning their destruction shall be final.
§ 540-28. Appeals.
Any property owner who is the subject of any decision under this article
by the Tree and Beautification Committee, the Village Clerk or the Building
Inspector may, within 30 days of receiving such decision, appeal such
decision to the Village Board of Zoning Appeals. The decision of the Village
Board of Zoning Appeals on any such appeal shall be deemed to be the final
decision of the Village of Malverne.
§ 540-29. Utility easements.
Nothing in this article should be construed to interfere with the right of any
public utility to enforce or act with any preexisting utility easements created
by law or agreement.
§ 540-25 MALVERNE CODE § 540-30
1:356
§ 540-30. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be
administered and enforced by the Superintendent of Public Works, Building
Inspector, Deputy Building Inspector, Interim Building Inspector, and/or
Assistant Building Inspector. Violators are subject to court action.
§ 540-31. Interpretation.
A. Whenever any provision of this article on tree removal is in conflict with
any other provision of this chapter or any other statute or local law
applicable or covering the same subject matter, the most restrictive
provision or the one imposing the highest standard shall govern and be
supreme.
B. All former statutes or local laws governing tree removal on non-public
property in the Village of Malverne, exclusive of those contained in this
article and Article IV, are hereby declared null and void.
§ 540-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-31
1:357

ARTICLE IV
Infested and Infected Trees and Shrubs
[Adopted 1-23-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003 (Ch. 42B of the 1972 Code)]
§ 540-32. Infestations prohibited.
No person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
owning, leasing or possessing any land in the Incorporated Village of
Malverne shall allow, permit or maintain on any such land, any trees,
shrubs, bushes or other vegetation which are infected or infested with
organisms which cause or may cause disease, damage or destruction of
such trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation by devouring the bark or
foliage thereof and which spread, or may be spread, to other such trees,
shrubs, bushes or other vegetation.
§ 540-33. Destruction and removal required.
Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
owning, leasing or possessing any land in the Incorporated Village of
Malverne who or which allows, permits or maintains any such tree, shrub,
bush or other vegetation which is so infected or infested shall immediately
destroy and remove any such infected or infested tree, shrub, bush and
other vegetation, in such a manner to prevent the spread of such infection
and/or infestation to other trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation. Such
destruction and removal shall include all portions of the affected tree,
shrub, bush or other vegetation, including any roots and/or stumps.
§ 540-34. Notice to comply; performance of work by Village.147
A. In the event that any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or
other legal entity shall fail to destroy and remove any such infected and/
or infested tree, shrub, bush or other vegetation, the Village shall serve
or cause to be served a written notice of such failure upon the owner,
lessee or occupant of such land, requiring such owner, lessee or
occupant to destroy and remove such infected and/or infested tree,
shrub, bush or other vegetation. If such owner, lessee or occupant does
not reside within the Village, then such written notice shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
such person or legal entity.
B. If such owner, lessee or occupant served with such notice shall fail to
destroy and remove such infected and/or infested tree, shrub, bush or
other vegetation within 10 days after such notice, then the Village may
destroy and remove such infected and/or infested tree, shrub, bush or
other vegetation, and the actual cost of said destruction and removal
shall become a lien upon the property on which said infected and/or
infested tree, shrub, bush or other vegetation was located, and shall be
added to and become and form part of the taxes from the date of
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 540-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 540-34
1:359
§ 540-35. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be
administered and enforced by the Superintendent of Public Works, Building
Inspector, Deputy Building Inspector, Interim Building Inspector, and/or
Assistant Building Inspector. Violators are subject to court action.
§ 540-36. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal entity
violating any of the provisions of this article shall commit an offense,
the fine for which shall not exceed $250 for each offense. The failure to
destroy and remove each infected and/or infested tree, shrub, bush or other
vegetation shall constitute a separate and additional offense of this article.
§ 540-37. Interpretation.
certification of such actual costs next to be assessed and levied upon
such land and shall bear interest at the same rate and be collected and
enforced as taxes. Such cost shall be in addition to any fine or other
penalty that may be imposed.
A. Whenever any provision of this article on tree removal is in conflict with
any other provision of this chapter or any other statute or local law
applicable or covering the same subject matter, the most restrictive
provision or the one imposing the highest standard shall govern and be
supreme.
B. All former statutes or local laws governing tree removal on non-public
property in the Village of Malverne, exclusive of those contained in this
article and Article III, Tree Preservation, of this chapter, are hereby
declared null and void.
§ 540-34 MALVERNE CODE § 540-37
1:360
Chapter 564
VANDALISM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 229.
Graffiti — See Ch. 330.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 434.
§ 564-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the Village of Malverne is
reimbursed for the negligent, reckless or intentional actions of individuals
who damage Village property and to prevent individuals from damaging any
such Village property without accountability.
§ 564-2. Damage to Village property prohibited; enforcement.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any individual or
corporation to intentionally, negligently or recklessly damage property of
the Village in any manner. In addition to any other legal remedies, any
individual or corporation who or which violates this chapter shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Village Court and may receive a summons issued
by either the Police Department or the Building Department for any such
violation.
§ 564-3. Penalties for offenses.
When an individual or corporation has been found to have violated this
chapter, that the following penalties may be ordered by the court:
A. A fine of not more than $350 for any such violation; further, in the event
an individual is responsible for intentionally damaging property, that
individual may be subject to up to 15 days' incarceration.
B. In the event that the party receiving the summons has not repaired or
remedied the damage within 15 days after receipt of the summons to
the satisfaction of the Malverne Building Department, it is understood
that the court may order restitution for the reasonable costs and value
of services by the Malverne Building Department for the repair of the
personal or property damage as part of a sentencing proceeding, upon
a finding of a violation of this chapter. Additionally, in the event that a
party fails to pay a restitution order issued by the court, it is understood
that the amount of the repairs may be levied as a municipal lien on the
property of the individual or corporation if said individual is a resident
of Malverne.148
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 540-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 564-4
1:361
§ 564-4. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on March 1, 2013.
Chapter 586
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscaping — See Ch. 382. Zoning — See Ch. 600.
§ 564-4 MALVERNE CODE § 564-4
1:362
ARTICLE I
Wells
[Adopted 6-13-1923 by Ord. No. 8 (Ch. 47 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 586-1. Required depth.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall install or drive within the
Village of Malverne a well for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking
purposes, unless such well shall be driven to a depth of at least 25 feet.
§ 586-2. Inspection required.
No water will be drawn for home consumption from any such well until the
same shall have been inspected and the depth of said well has been verified
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Malverne or by an official duly
designated by it to make such inspection.
§ 586-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-14-1968149]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Village Code.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 586-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-3
1:363

ARTICLE II
Conservation
[Adopted 12-2-1987 by L.L. No. 8-1987]
§ 586-4. Legislative findings.
It is the determination of the Board of Trustees, based upon a study
conducted on behalf of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Nassau,
that circumstances exist with respect to the sufficiency of water supply
within Nassau County which pose a potential threat to the safety and
well-being of its citizens. Accordingly, the Board of Trustees does adopt
applicable provisions of the Nassau County Comprehensive Management/
Conservation Program which is designed to regulate or limit the use of
water throughout the county, including the towns, cities, villages and
special districts, and provide for enforcement of such program since it is
the policy of the Village to conserve, protect and manage the waters within
its jurisdiction. This determination has been made in connection with the
action of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
in imposing restrictions in 1986 and in view of the fact that the water
supply in Nassau County is dependent upon a sole-source aquifer system
which serves domestic, industrial, commercial and/or recreational needs
of individuals in the county, and the Board further finds that, due to the
sensitivity of the aquifer system, certain limitations are necessary to curb
water withdrawals in order to ensure a long-term water supply.
§ 586-5. Lawn sprinkling.
§ 586-6. Car washes and fleet maintenance.
A. During the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., no person shall water, hose,
sprinkle or otherwise irrigate any outdoor lawn, field, garden hedge or
shrub, except in accordance with the following:
(1) Persons occupying residences or other establishments with evennumbered
addresses may water, hose sprinkle or otherwise irrigate
other than during the above hours on even-numbered days of the
month.
(2) Persons occupying residences or other establishments with oddnumbered
addresses may water, hose sprinkle or otherwise irrigate
other than during the above hours on odd-numbered days of the
month.
(3) Persons occupying residences or other establishments without
numbered addresses may water, hose sprinkle or otherwise irrigate
other than during the above hours on even-numbered days of the
month.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit, restrict or prohibit
irrigation of any sort which is done by means of water obtained from
sources other than the Nassau County sole-source aquifer system.150
§ 586-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-6
1:365
§ 586-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. All existing commercial car washes and all fleet vehicle washes shall
install water-recycling systems.151
B. All commercial car washes and all fleet vehicle washes for which
building permits have not been issued shall be equipped with waterrecycling
systems.
C. The Village of Malverne shall be responsible for enforcement of this
section.
A. Enforcement of this chapter shall be effected by the Malverne Police
Department or any other law enforcement officer or agency having
jurisdiction within the Village limits.
B. Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an
offense against the provisions of § 586-5 of this article shall be guilty of
a violation punishable by a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the
second offense, $200 for the third offense and $500 for each and every
offense thereafter.
C. Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an
offense against §§ 586-6 and 586-7 of this article shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for each offense. Each
day shall constitute a separate violation.
150. Editor's Note: The original section regulating air-conditioning systems, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 586-6 MALVERNE CODE § 586-7
1:366
Chapter 600
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 265.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 393.
Signs — See Ch. 491.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 507.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 512.
§ 586-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-7
1:367

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 600-1.0. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Code of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, New York."
§ 600-1.1. Purpose.
A. There is hereby established a Comprehensive Zoning Plan for the
Incorporated Village of Malverne, which plan is set forth in the text,
maps and schedules that constitute this chapter. This plan is adopted
for the purposes set forth in §§ 7-700, 7-702 and 7-704 of the Village
Law of the State of New York and more particularly for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the Village in the following respects:
(1) Protecting the character of the Village as found in the desirability
of the living environment provided by its residential neighborhoods
and the quality and economic soundness of its business districts,
and assuring that further development in the Village will be in
harmony with these characteristics.
(2) Providing a guiding pattern of land use and population density that:
(a) Represents the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Village.
(b) Is a normal and beneficial evolution of the comprehensive
planning that has guided the development of the Village from
its inception.
(c) Recognizes sound trends in building development and land
area design.
(d) Takes account of trends of development in the larger
community of Nassau County of which the Village is a part.
(3) Providing an atmosphere of community safety and suburban quality
of life in all neighborhoods of the Village.
(4) Fostering the most beneficial relation between the uses of land and
buildings and the movement of traffic through, and the circulation
of traffic within, the Village, having particular regard to the
avoidance of congestion in the streets of the Village and the
provision for safe and convenient traffic access appropriate for the
various uses of land and buildings throughout the Village.
(5) Providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient
provision of public facilities and services and for private enterprise
in building development, investment and other activity relating to
the uses of land and buildings throughout the Village.
§ 600-1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.1
1:369
§ 600-1.2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases shall be
interpreted or defined as set forth in this section.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among
the purposes of this chapter shall be the protection of the public
interest by ensuring that development results in minimum disturbance
of natural terrain and reduction in the potential for such adverse
occurrences as soil erosion, siltation, slide damage, flooding problems,
severe land and/or tree cutting or scarring and loss of vegetation,
natural land cover and animal habitat. These regulations are designed
to foster development of a character which respects the natural
environment, the natural character, and conserves the aesthetic and
historic qualities of the land as well as the Village's man-made
resources as an important part of Malverne's heritage. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance or
any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which
shall be adopted or issued pursuant to any law unless such rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the height of
buildings, or requires larger yards or greater open spaces than are
imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinances or
by such rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
A. Word usage. Words in this chapter are defined for the purpose thereof,
as follows: Words in the present tense include the future; the singular
includes the plural and vice versa; the word "lot" includes "plot"; the
word "building" includes the word "structure"; "buildings" shall be
construed as though followed by the words "or part thereof"; the word
"shall" is always mandatory. Words not specifically defined in this
chapter shall be given their plain and ordinary meanings. The titles to
articles, sections or subsections are intended for the purpose of
convenience and are not intended to influence the interpretation of any
text.
B. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject
matter requires otherwise, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
subordinate and incidental to the main building or structure on the
same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the
main building or structure. For purposes of this chapter, an accessory
building or structure shall not occupy more than 40% of the rear yard.
No part of an accessory building or structure shall be less than four feet
§ 600-1.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.2
1:370
from the rear or side lot lines, except that a detached garage and sheds
less than 100 square feet shall be no less than two feet from the rear or
side lot lines.152
ACCESSORY USE — A use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use.
ALTER; ALTERATION — To:
AVERAGE NATURAL GRADE LEVEL — The mean elevation of the land
along and adjacent to the front of a building or structure prior to
the placement of any fill thereon, or as depicted on plans previously
approved in accordance with this chapter, whichever is more recent.153
APPROVED — As applied to any material, device, or mode of
construction, the written approval by the Superintendent of Buildings,
which approval shall be given only after full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and satisfactory evidence of impartial
tests submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height
measurement of a building.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed with exterior
walls, or party walls, and a roof affording shelter to persons, animals,
or property for any use or occupancy.
BUILDING AREA — The square footage of buildings, and accessory
structures, measured at the exterior of the foundation walls or
foundation structure of a building, excluding the square footage of:
Change or rearrange:
The walls, roof, ceiling, floors, supporting beams, columns, or
other structural parts of a building or structure;
(a)
(b) The interior plan or layout of a building or structure;
(c) The exterior architectural features of a building or structure;
(d) The exit facilities of a building or structure; or
(1)
(2) Move a building or structure from one location to another.
(1) Open and uncovered porches;
(2) Balconies and terraces;
(3) Decks and patios less than 10 inches in height;
(4) Cornices, eaves or chimneys projecting not more than 24 inches;
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
153. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.2
1:371
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average natural grade level, as defined in this chapter, to the highest
level of a flat or mansard roof, or to the peak of a pitched, gable, hip
or gambrel roof. The highest point shall not include heating, ventilation
and air-conditioning equipment; stairway and elevator bulkheads;
antennas; and other minor appurtenances.154
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person appointed by the Board of
Trustees to assist the Superintendent of Buildings with the inspection,
approval and issuance of permits for the construction, alteration, or
demolition of buildings or other structures in the Village.
CELLAR — The part of a building which is partly or wholly underground
but having less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average
level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story
for purposes of height measurement of a building. The cellar shall not
be calculated in floor area.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Superintendent of Buildings
for the Village of Malverne or such other person designated by the
Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or razing of all or part of a building
or structure, including all operations incidental thereto.
DWELLING — A building or structure or part thereof designed
exclusively as living quarters and containing cooking facilities. The
term "dwelling" or any combination of the term "dwelling" with any
other word or words shall not be deemed to include an hotel, rooming
house, motel, tourist home, mobile home, hospital, dormitory, tent,
fraternity or other accommodations or other similar uses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling authorized for use as and
containing three or more dwelling units separated by uninterrupted
party walls, partitions or floors. A multiple-family dwelling shall include
dwellings:
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling authorized for use as
and consisting of a building containing one dwelling unit only.
(5) Porticos not exceeding 48 square feet;
Hanging bay windows not extending through more than one story,
in no event projecting more than five feet from the facade; and
(6)
(7) Temporary structures.
With sleeping accommodations for more than five persons, used or
occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses; and
(1)
Used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home, but
not including private or public hospitals or public institutions.
(2)
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-1.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.2
1:372
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached dwelling authorized for use
as and containing two dwelling units only, separated by uninterrupted
party walls, partitions or floors.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living,
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities for use by one family.
EXIT — Means or way of departure from the interior of a building
or structure to the exterior at street or grade, including doorways,
passageways, hallways, corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and
all other elements necessary for egress or escape.
FAMILY —
One or more individuals, whether or not related to each other
by blood, marriage or adoption, all living together as a single,
stable, permanent and bona fide housekeeping unit, so long as such
individuals together occupy and own, lease or rent the whole of
a building or dwelling unit in a family-like living arrangement as
the functional and factual equivalent of a natural family and use all
rooms and housekeeping facilities in common;
(1)
One or more individuals, whether or not related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption, shall not be deemed to constitute a
family if:
Any one or more of such persons may not have lawful access to
all parts of the building or dwelling unit; or
(a)
If any one or more of such individuals lease or rent any
separate portion of such building or dwelling unit from any
other individual; or
(b)
If residency is temporary or transitional, either as part of an
educational, medical, rehabilitation or treatment process or
otherwise;
(c)
(2)
It shall be presumed that a building or dwelling is occupied by more
than one family if: (1) any two or more of the following features
are found to exist at a building or dwelling: (a) more than one
mailbox, mail slot or post office address, or doorbell or doorway
on the same side of the building or dwelling or electric meter or
gas meter; or connecting line for cable or satellite TV; (2) two
or more kitchens, each of which contains a range or oven, and a
refrigerator or sink; (3) separate entrances for segregated portions
of the building or dwelling; (4) partitions or locked doors barring
access between segregated portions of the building or dwelling
including bedrooms; or (5) separate written or oral leases or rental
agreements or the payment of rent for portions of the building or
dwelling among its owner or residents. The presumption provided
for in this subsection shall be rebuttable. Such presumption shall
not preclude a determination that the building or dwelling unit is
(3)
§ 600-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.2
1:373
FLOOR AREA — The area, measured in square feet, of a floor of a
building, measured at the exterior of the walls thereof.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The total floor area in square feet of
a building, buildings or accessory structures divided by the area in
square feet of the lot on which the building, buildings or accessory
structures are situated. For purposes of FAR, total floor area shall
exclude:
GARAGE, MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall consist of a basement garage
or accessory garage building, or a combination of the two with outdoor
parking facilities providing for one parking space consisting of not less
than 200 square feet for the parking of each noncommercial automobile
for each dwelling unit.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or part of a main
building used only for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles
of the occupants of the main building or building group to which the
not occupied by one family based on other criteria not listed in this
subsection.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall make the primary
determination as to the application of this definition of "family" for
the purposes of compliance with any provisions of this chapter and
the New York State Building Code, based upon an inspection of the
premises, any information received from the residents thereof or
any other persons or upon any other documentary or other written
evidence as to the condition of the premises or the relationship
and living arrangements of the residents, in consultation with the
Village Attorney, and such determination shall be presumed to be
correct and final, subject to review of or appeal by the Zoning
Board of Appeals and judicial review as provided by law.
(4)
(1) Open or uncovered porches;
(2) Balconies and terraces;
(3) On-grade patios;
(4) Cornices, eaves or chimneys projecting not more than 24 inches;
(5) Porticos not exceeding 48 square feet;
Hanging bay windows not extending through more than one story,
in no event projecting more than five feet from the facade;
(6)
(7) Temporary structures;
(8) Sheds;
(9) Detached garages and garages without structures above; and
(10)Swimming pools.
§ 600-1.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.2
1:374
garage is accessory or of which it is a part and in which no service,
occupation or business is conducted.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private garage, available
to the public and operated as a commercial business regardless of profit
or loss and used for the storage or repair of automobiles only as an
incidental use.
HABITABLE SPACE — The space occupied by one or more persons for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking.
HOME, MOBILE — A structure or vehicle containing one or more
dwelling units that is so designed as to be transportable, either by
being drawn or propelled or under its own power. This definition shall
apply irrespective of whether or not the wheels or other devices for
transportability are actually in place or operable. Trailers, house-cars
or other structures with similar designations shall be deemed to be
mobile homes.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within
a dwelling solely by the inhabitants thereof which is clearly incidental
to the residential use and in connection with which there are:
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or studio of a physician,
dentist, architect, accountant, artist, musician, chiropractor, osteopath,
podiatrist, professional engineer, real estate or insurance broker or
lawyer, provided that: (1) such use is clearly incidental to the resident's
use of the premises and is conducted entirely within a dwelling in
which the practitioner resides; (2) not more than three assistants or
employees are employed; (3) such use does not occupy more than 25%
of the habitable floor area of any single floor of the dwelling; (4) there is
no display of goods or advertising other than a professional nameplate
no larger than six inches by 12 inches bearing only the name and
occupation (words only) of the practitioner; (5) there is no alteration
or change to the building exterior which will change or modify the
residential character or appearance thereof; and (6) such use does
not have any feature which is annoying, offensive or harmful to public
health, safety or general welfare by reason of noise, glare, vibration,
odor, radiation, dust, fumes or undue traffic. The Board of Trustees
shall have the power to grant a special use permit for a professional
office in the home for a profession not specifically enumerated herein,
(1) No sounds audible outside the building;
(2) No display of goods visible from outside the building;
(3) No signs or other advertising;
(4) No selling of a commodity on the premises; and
Which use does not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor
area of any single floor of the dwelling and does not in any way
change, alter or modify the residential character or appearance of
the building.
(5)
§ 600-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.2
1:375
provided the use is of the same or similar general character of those
enumerated in this definition.
HOSPITAL — An institution licensed for the care of at least four sick,
injured, infirm or aged persons, but excluding a penal, correctional or
mental institution or institutions for alcoholics or drug addicts.
HOTEL — A building or portion thereof or a group of buildings
containing sleeping accommodations for transient guests, without
individual kitchen facilities, whether such establishment is designated
as an hotel, inn, motel, motor hotel, motor lodge, rooming house,
or other similar establishment. "Hotel" shall also include bed-andbreakfast
establishments.
LOT — A vacant parcel of land or a parcel occupied by one building
and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it, including
such open spaces as are required by this chapter, and such open spaces
as are arranged and designed to be used in connection with such
building.
LOT AREA — The total area of a lot located within the border thereof.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two
or more intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — The square footage of a lot covered by the building
area of primary and accessory structures.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean distance from the street line of the lot to
its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the
lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — That dimension of a lot measured along the front
lot or street line thereof, or if said front lot or street line is curved,
along the chord of the arc. On a corner lot, the lot shall be deemed
to front on the street with the narrower frontage, and where the two
street frontages are of the same length the owner may elect either
street frontage as the front lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the mean points along the side
lines of a lot.
NONCONFORMING LOT, BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A lot,
building, structure or use, or any part thereof, that does not conform to
the regulations prescribed for the district in which it is situated.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An open off-street area, as an accessory
use, containing parking spaces for automobiles owned by occupants of
the main building or their employees or customers.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, or corporation or
other business or legal entity.
PORCH — A platform at an entrance of a building. The term "porch"
shall include any veranda, gallery, terrace, pergola, piazza, portico
§ 600-1.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.2
1:376
or similar projection from a main wall of a building, which is either
covered or not by a roof not enclosed and which is not heated.
PORCH, ENCLOSED — A porch which is covered by a roof and fully
enclosed with outside walls having window sashes and window frames.
All other porches shall be considered open porches.
PREEXISTING BUILDING — A building or part thereof which was
lawfully in existence at the time that such regulation became applicable
thereto, whether by the adoption of the first Zoning Ordinance or local
law replacing the same, including this local law, or of any amendments
to any of the foregoing, and which has not since that time been altered
in any manner or moved.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place available to or used by the general public,
whether or not an admission fee is charged, including, but not limited
to, restaurants, discotheques, cabarets, bars, social clubs, amusement
parks, penny arcades, game rooms and other similar establishments.
SCHOOL — An institution or place for learning, limited to prekindergarten
through grade 12, other than a public school, which
furnishes a comprehensive curriculum of academic instruction either
similar to that of a public school or otherwise meeting educational
requirements of the laws of the State of New York. This shall not
include a college, nursery school, day camp, professional school or a
school giving special or limited instruction in areas of learning such as
business, art, music, dance or riding.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — A regularly organized school licensed by the
State of New York operated to provide daytime instruction, guidance or
education for children two to five years of age inclusive.
SCHOOL, PROFESSIONAL — A school giving regular instruction in
professional subjects, such as, without limitation, the dramatic or
graphic arts, business, dancing, languages, music, sciences or
stenography and secretarial study.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — An institution or place for learning, limited to prekindergarten
through grade 12, operated by a public school district
under the laws of the State of New York. This shall not include a college,
nursery school, day camp, professional school or a school giving special
or limited instruction in areas of learning such as business, art, music,
dance or riding.
STORY — That part of any building comprised between the surface of
one floor, except a cellar floor, and the surface of the next higher floor
or, if there is no higher floor, then that part of the building compromised
between the surface of the highest floor and the ceiling above.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming any construction
or part thereof, including a building, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground, including, but not limited to, curbs, fences and walls; gasoline
§ 600-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.2
1:377
pumps; gates and gateposts; mobile dwellings, whether mobile or
stationary at the time; platforms or stands; pools and pool equipment;
porches; sheds or bins; shelters; signs; standpipes; tanks of any kind;
air conditioning compressors; fire pits; towers of any kind, including
radio and television towers and antennas; parabolic or hemispheric
discs or dishes or other similar convex or concave antennas, the
purpose of which is to receive television and radio and/or microwave or
other similar signals from satellites or ground stations which transmit
satellite signals, but excluding conventional television and radio
aerials; tents; patios, trellises and solar energy equipment. The word
"structure" shall be construed to include the words "or part thereof."
A "temporary structure" shall be defined as any structure without a
footing or foundation.
SUPERINTENDENT OF BUILDINGS — The person charged with the
inspection, approval and issuance of permits for the construction,
alteration or demolition of buildings or other structures in the Village.
The Board of Trustees may appoint Building Inspectors, who shall serve
as assistants to the Superintendent of Buildings.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or a structure, or
a portion thereof, is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or any variant or any other form
of said term having the same meaning shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is customarily associated with and
incidental and subordinate to the principal uses of a lot or a building
which is located upon the same lot therewith.
USE, SPECIAL — A use prohibited unless a permit therefor shall have
been received from the Board of Trustees.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — Any trailer, boat, tractor, van, truck or
other motor vehicle licensed or used for transportation for
compensation or for hire of persons or property or used in conjunction
with a trade or occupation. For the purposes of this definition, a
limousine is presumed to be a commercial vehicle. Lack of commercial
license plate or commercial registration shall not be conclusive proof
that a vehicle is not a commercial vehicle as defined in this section.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building,
open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard across the full width of the lot extending from
the front wall of the building to the front line of the lot. Corner lots shall
have two front yards. The primary front yard shall be the yard with the
shortest street frontage. The other front yard shall be considered the
second front yard.
YARD, REAR — A yard lying from the rear line of the lot and the nearest
point of the building extending between the side lines of the lot. For
§ 600-1.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.2
1:378
§ 600-1.3. Permitted uses.
No building or structure in any district shall hereafter be erected and no
existing building or structure in any district shall be altered or enlarged, nor
shall any land, building or structure in any district be used, for any purpose
other than those permitted in this chapter.
§ 600-1.4. Schedule of Regulations; applicability.
corner lots, the rear yard shall be the yard opposite the primary front
yard.
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the
nearest point at the building extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
A. A Schedule of Regulations shall be adopted and is hereby declared to be
part of this chapter and may be amended in the same manner as any
other part of this chapter. The regulations listed in the Schedule of
Regulations shall be deemed to be the minimum prescribed
requirements for each district in every instance of their application.155
B. Application of regulations.
(1) Height. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected,
reconstructed or altered to exceed the height limit designated in
this chapter and the Schedule of Regulations for the district in
which such building is located.
(2) Area and open space. No building or structure shall hereafter be
erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be altered, nor
shall any open space contiguous to any building be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with this
chapter and the yard, lot width and area regulations designated in
the Schedule of Regulations relative to the district in which such
building or space is located, provided that the minimum lot width
and lot area regulations shall not apply to any lot having less than
the required width or area at the time of the adoption of this
chapter or of any amendment thereof increasing the width or area
required for such lot and held at that time and continuously
thereafter in separate ownership from that of adjoining land, but
such lot shall not be reduced in width or area, and all other
regulations prescribed in this chapter for the district in which such
lot is situated shall apply thereto.
(3) Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking space and offstreet
loading space shall be provided as specified in this chapter
and the Schedule of Regulations, and such spaces shall be provided
with necessary passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto
and giving access thereto, and all such space, together with such
155. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-1.4
1:379
§ 600-1.5. Schedule of fees.
All fees and charges shall be paid in accordance with the Schedule of Fees
adopted by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may amend, from
time to time, the Schedule of Fees by resolution.
§ 600-1.6. Merger.
A lot created before the effective date of this chapter having common
ownership with an adjoining lot shall be deemed to have merged into one
lot. Lots which have merged shall be considered one lot and shall conform
to the minimum prescribed requirements in this chapter.
passageways and driveways, shall be deemed to be required space
on the lot on which the same is situated and shall not thereafter
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
(4) Reduction of lot area. No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so
that the minimum land area per dwelling unit, yards or other open
spaces thereon shall be smaller than as prescribed by this chapter
and the Schedule of Regulations.
(5) Yard limitations. No yard or other open space provided on one lot
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered as providing a yard or open space required on
any other lot.
(6) Prior construction. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require
any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a
preexisting building or structure, a substantial portion of the
construction of which was lawfully completed on the date this
chapter or any amendment thereto affecting the same takes effect,
provided that construction is completed within one year after such
effective date.
§ 600-1.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-1.6
1:380
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 600-2.0. Designated titles.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Malverne is hereby divided
into six districts, which shall be designated as follows:
§ 600-2.1. Boundaries; Zoning Map.

A. Residence A District.
B. Residence B District.
C. Residence C District.
D. Residence D District.
E. Business District.
F. Commercial District.
A. The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon the map on file
in the Village Office, which shall be designated as the "Building Zone
Map of the Village of Malverne, Nassau County, New York." Said map
and all notations, references and other things shown thereon shall be as
much a part of this chapter as if the matters and things shown by said
map were all fully described herein.
B. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way or such lines
extended or lines parallel thereto. Where figures are shown on the
Zoning Map between a street and district boundary line, they indicate
that the district boundary line runs parallel to the street line at a
distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated. When
the location of a district boundary is not otherwise determined, it shall
be determined by the scale of the map measured from a given line.
Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the Building Zone Map, the designation shown on
the mapped street shall apply in such a way as to carry out the intent
and the purposes of this chapter for the particular area in question.
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single ownership at
the time of the passage of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals, as
hereinafter provided, may permit the less restricted use to extend to
the whole or any part of such lot.
156. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-2.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.2
1:381

§ 600-2.2. Residence A District.
In the Residence A District, the following regulations, and those regulations
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,156 shall apply:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or
premises may be used, for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, except that, with any family, one
roomer may be permitted for every 500 cubic feet of room space
provided and kept available for sleeping quarters additional to that
provided for each family and servants.
(2) Educational, religious or philanthropic use, including a dormitory
of an educational institution but excluding correctional institutions.
(3) Telephone exchange, when authorized by a special use permit of
the Zoning Board of Appeals, as hereinafter provided.
(4) Farm, nursery or greenhouse; golf course, provided that there is no
display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the premises;
municipal administration or recreational use.
(5) Railway passenger station, not including a freight yard.
(6) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses, including a private garage. This
shall be understood to include a home professional office or home
occupation, provided that the home professional office or home
occupation room is located in a dwelling in which the practitioner
resides.
(7) Accessory buildings as defined and pursuant to the limitations set
forth in § 600-1.2B.

§ 600-2.3. Residence B District.
In the Residence B District, the following regulations, and those regulations
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,157 shall apply:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or
premises may be used, for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, except that, with any family, one
roomer may be permitted for every 500 cubic feet of room space
provided and kept available for sleeping quarters additional to that
provided for each family and servants.
(2) Educational, religious or philanthropic use, including a dormitory
of an educational institution but excluding correctional institutions.
(3) Telephone exchange, when authorized by a special use permit from
the Zoning Board of Appeals, as hereinafter provided.
157. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-2.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-2.3
1:382
§ 600-2.4. Residence C District.
In the Residence C District, the following regulations, and those regulations
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,158 shall apply:
(4) Farm, nursery or greenhouse; golf course, provided that there is no
display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the premises;
municipal administration or recreational use.
(5) Railway passenger station, not including a freight yard.
(6) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses, including a private garage. This
shall be understood to include a home professional office or home
occupation, provided that the home professional office or home
occupation room is located in a dwelling in which the practitioner
resides.
(7) Accessory buildings as defined and pursuant to the limitations set
forth in § 600-1.2B.
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or
premises may be used, for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, except that, with any family, one
roomer may be permitted for every 500 cubic feet of room space
provided and kept available for sleeping quarters additional to that
provided for each family and servants.
(2) Educational, religious or philanthropic use, including a dormitory
of an educational institution but excluding correctional institutions.
(3) Telephone exchange, when authorized by a special use permit from
the Zoning Board of Appeals, as hereinafter provided.
(4) Farm, nursery or greenhouse; golf course, provided that there is no
display for commercial purposes or advertisement on the premises;
municipal administration or recreational use.
(5) Railway passenger station, not including a freight yard.
(6) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses, including a private garage. This
shall be understood to include a home professional office or home
occupation, provided that the home professional office or home
occupation room is located in a dwelling in which the practitioner
resides.
(7) Accessory buildings as defined and pursuant to the limitations set
forth in § 600-1.2B.
158. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.5
1:383
§ 600-2.5. Residence D District.
In the Residence D District, the following regulations, and those regulations
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,159 shall apply:
§ 600-2.6. Business District.
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or
premises may be used, for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, except that, with any family, one
roomer may be permitted for every 500 cubic feet of room space
provided and kept available for sleeping quarters additional to that
provided for each family and servants.
(2) Two-family detached dwelling.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling, when permitted by a special use permit
from the Board of Trustees, as hereinafter provided.
(4) Hotels, lodging and boardinghouses, when permitted by a special
use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, as hereinafter
provided.
(5) Educational, religious or philanthropic use, including a dormitory
of an educational institution but excluding correctional institutions.
(6) Hospital, sanatorium or telephone exchange, when authorized by a
special use permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, as hereinafter
provided.
(7) Farm, greenhouse, municipal administration or recreational use,
railway passenger station, telephone exchange or golf course.
(8) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses, including a private garage. This
shall be understood to include a home professional office or home
occupation, provided that the home professional office or home
occupation room is located in a dwelling in which the practitioner
resides.
(9) Accessory buildings as defined and pursuant to the limitations set
forth in § 600-1.2B.
A. Permitted uses. In the Business District, a building may be erected,
altered or used, and a lot or premises may be used, for any of the
following purposes and for no other:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family detached dwelling.
159. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-2.5 MALVERNE CODE § 600-2.6
1:384
(3) Hotels, lodging and boardinghouses.
(4) Educational, religious or philanthropic use, including dormitory of
an educational institution but excluding correctional institution.
(5) Farm, greenhouse, municipal administration or recreational use,
railway passenger station.
(6) Office, bank, financial institution, telephone, telegraph, gas or
electric business.
(7) Store, excluding, however, any store subject to the provisions of
Subsection A(17) of this section.
(8) Personal-service shops.
(9) Bakery, pastry, candy, confectionery or ice cream shop, excluding,
however, any shop subject to the provisions of Subsection A(17) of
this section.
(10) Post office.
(11) Firehouse.
(12) Police station.
(13) Printing office.
(14) Private garages, provided that no part of the storage space or
workshop shall be nearer than 20 feet to any public street, unless
all openings are glazed with obscure wire glass, and with only one
driveway not exceeding 12 feet in width for each 50 feet front or
fraction thereof. All entrance driveways shall have an unobstructed
width of at least 10 feet, except that such driveway may be reduced
to eight feet in width where not more than five automobiles are
stored. Not more than five rated horsepower shall be used on the
premises for power purposes, except for hoists and elevators.
There shall be no opening in the side or rear walls or roof of such a
garage within 15 feet of any side or rear lot line, except for a fixed
wire-glassed sash in a noncombustible frame. No automobile
commercial repair work, except emergency work, shall be carried
on out-of-doors.
(15) Tailoring, dressmaking and shoemaking and repairing.
(16) Jewelry, watches, clocks or optical goods and musical, professional
or scientific instruments repair or manufacture.
(17) When authorized by a special use permit of the Board of Trustees in
accordance with § 600-5.2:
(a) Multiple-family dwelling.
(b) Gas-filling station or public garage.
§ 600-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.6
1:385
(c) Undertaking or embalming.
(d) Dry-cleaning or dyeing establishment, including any such
establishment which makes available for use by the public any
coin-operated or other automatic dry-cleaning machine or
device, laundromat, launderette or other similar establishment
which makes available for use by the public any coin-operated
or other automatic clothes-washing or drying machine;
provided, however, that any such establishment shall provide
an adult attendant of not less than 21 years of age who is fully
familiar with the use and operation of such machines and
devices, and such individual shall be in attendance at all times
when such machines are made available for hire.
(e) Public parking space.
(f) Trailer camps or parking spaces.
(g) Store or shop for the sale of food or drink, which permits or
provides or makes available any facility (which shall include
but is not limited to parking or standing space on the premises
for customers' motor vehicles) for the consumption of such
food or drink on the premises outside the building or structure
occupied by such store or shop.
(h) Used car sales lot; provided, however, that no used car sales lot
shall be located on any lot, any part of which is situated within
a distance of 300 feet, as measured along the shortest line,
from any lot occupied by a school or place of religious worship;
and provided further that no used-car sales lot shall be so
lighted or illuminated as to cause discomfort or annoyance to
the owners or occupants of neighboring premises or to
constitute a hazard to safety and traffic.
(i) Any use of the same general character as any of the uses
permitted in this subsection.
(j) Theater, department store, supermarket, general market,
public market, place of amusement, restaurant, lunch counter,
lunch wagon, dance hall, bowling alley or billiard room.
(18) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses.
(19) The professional office of a New York State Department of
Education licensed lawyer, magistrate, engineer, physician,
architect and/or teacher.
B. Prohibited uses. In the Business District, no building may be erected,
altered or used, and no lot or premises may be used, for any trade,
industry or business that is noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, gas, vibration or noise. No internal-combustion engine or other
§ 600-2.6 MALVERNE CODE § 600-2.6
1:386
§ 600-2.7. Commercial District.
In a Commercial District, the following regulations, and those regulations
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations,160 shall apply:
machinery shall be used unless objectionable noise and vibration are
eliminated and it is equipped and supplied with an effective muffler or
silencer.
A. Prohibited uses. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or
premises may be used for any lawful purpose except the following:
(1) Abattoirs.
(2) Acetylene manufacture.
(3) Acid manufacture.
(4) Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(5) Arsenal.
(6) Asphalt manufacture, refining, mixing or treating.
(7) Assaying.
(8) Blacksmithing or horseshoeing.
(9) Boiler making or machine shops.
(10) Brewing or distilling of liquors or sale thereof.
(11) Candle manufacture.
(12) Celluloid manufacture.
(13) Coal yard.
(14) Coke ovens.
(15) Commercial stable for horses or livestock.
(16) Crematory.
(17) Creosote treatment or manufacture.
(18) Distillation of coal, wood or bone.
(19) Disinfectants manufacture.
(20) Dyestuff manufacture.
(21) Exterminator and insect poison manufacture.
(22) Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture.
160. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.7
1:387
(23) Fat rendering.
(24) Fertilizer manufacture.
(25) Fireworks or explosives manufacture, storage or sale.
(26) Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacture or storage.
(27) Glue, size and gelatin manufacture.
(28) Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, dead animals or refuse.
(29) Junk, scrap paper or rag storage or baling.
(30)Kennels or a place for breeding or boarding any kind of animals for
commercial purposes.
(31) Lampblack manufacture.
(32) Lime, cement or plaster-of-paris manufacture.
(33) Match manufacture.
(34) Manufacture of chloracetophenone.
(35) Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
(36) Oiled or rubber goods manufacture.
(37) Ore reduction.
(38) Paint, oil, varnish, or shellac or turpentine manufacture.
(39) Petroleum refining or storage.
(40) Printing ink manufacture.
(41) Plating works.
(42) Potash works.
(43) Pyroxylin manufacture.
(44) Rubber, caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
(45) Saw or planing mill or woodworking establishment.
(46) Shoddy manufacture or wool scouring or pulling.
(47) Slaughtering of animals or fowl.
(48) Salt works.
(49) Sauerkraut manufacture.
(50) Shoe blacking manufacture.
(51) Smelting.
§ 600-2.7 MALVERNE CODE § 600-2.7
1:388
(52) Soap manufacture.
(53) Soda and compound manufacture.
(54) Stove polish manufacture.
(55) Starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture.
(56) Stockyards.
(57) Stone monumental works or brickyard.
(58) Storage of gasoline, kerosene or fuel oil.
(59) Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(60) Sugar refining.
(61) Tanning, curing or storage of leather, raw hides or skins.
(62) Tallow, grease or lard manufacturing or refining.
(63) Tar distillation or manufacture.
(64) Tar roofing or tar waterproofing manufacture.
(65) Yeast plant.
(66) Any use which may be noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas, vibration or noise.
(67) Adult uses as defined in Subsection B.
B. Adult uses.
(1) Intent. The Board of Trustees recognizes that there are some uses
which, due to their very nature, have serious objectionable
characteristics. These objectionable characteristics are heightened
by their concentration in any one area, thereby having deleterious
effects on adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is
necessary to prevent their adverse effects. The Board of Trustees
further finds that the location of these uses in regard to areas
where our youth may regularly assemble and the general
atmosphere of their operation are of great concern to the Village of
Malverne. Special regulations are itemized in this subsection to
accomplish the primary purposes of preventing the deleterious
effects of adult uses.
(2) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a use 30%
or more of its retail floor space and/or 30% or more of its retail
sales and/or rentals, stock-in-trade books, magazines, films, slides,
§ 600-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.7
1:389
videotapes, and/or video discs for which use any minor is excluded
from use, rental, purchasing or viewing by reason of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — Any public or private
establishment which presents topless or nude dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators, exotic dancers or other similar
entertainment and which establishment is not open to the public
generally or is restricted to private membership or excludes any
minor by reason of age.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel, hotel or inn which is not open to
the public generally but excludes any minor by reason of age
and/or which makes available to its patrons in their rooms, films,
slides, videotapes and/or video discs which, if shown in a public
movie theater, would not be open to the public generally but would
exclude any minor by reason of age, and where such films, slides,
videotapes and/or video discs constitute 30% or more of the stock
of such items, and/or 30% or more of its retail sales and/or rentals,
for such motel, hotel or inn.
ADULT THEATER — An establishment or theater that presents
for viewing on 30% or more of its retail floor space, and/or 30%
or more of its retail sales and/or rentals, motion pictures, films,
videotapes, slides and/or video discs, that is not open to the public
in general and excludes any minor by reason of age.
ADULT USE — The use of any lot, property, or premises or portion
thereof as an adult bookstore, adult theater, massage
establishment, adult motel, or for peep shows or other adult
entertainment cabaret as defined in this section.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administrated for a fee or
pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths, and
steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a
hospital; nursing home; medical clinic; the office of a physician,
surgeon or chiropractor; osteopath or duly licensed massage or
physical therapist; or barber shop and beauty salon for massages
which are administered only to the scalp, face, neck, shoulders,
hands and/or feet. This definition shall also exclude health clubs,
which have facilities for physical exercise such as tennis courts,
racquetball courts or exercise rooms and which do not receive
more than 10% of their revenue from the administration of
massages.
PEEP SHOWS — An establishment or theater which presents
material in the form of live shows, films, slides, videotapes and/or
video discs viewed from an individual enclosure which is not open
to the public generally and excludes any minor by reason of age.
SMOKING BAR/LOUNGE — An establishment, facility, shop, office,
parlor, business or other nonresidential premises, the primary or
ancillary use of which includes or is intended to include the
§ 600-2.7 MALVERNE CODE § 600-2.7
1:390
smoking of tobacco, vegetable, herbal or other organic substances
on the premises. Such prohibition shall include smoking of
substances through one or more pipes (also commonly referred to
as a "hookah," "water pipe," "shisha," "narghile" or "bong") or any
other similar equipment or device.[Added 1-21-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
(3) Restrictions. Adult uses shall be prohibited unless a special use
permit has been granted by the Board of Trustees after a public
hearing and subject to the requirements of this subsection. Adult
uses as defined in this section shall be restricted as to location in
the following manner, in addition to any other requirements in this
chapter: no adult uses shall be located within: (a) a one-hundredfifty-
foot radius of any area zoned residential; or (b) a onethousand-
foot radius of any other adult use; or (c) a five-hundredfoot
radius of any school, park, playground, playing field, church,
synagogue or other place of religious worship. No more than one
adult use per lot shall be permitted.
§ 600-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-2.7
1:391

ARTICLE III
Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
§ 600-3.0. Continuation of nonconformity.
Any legal nonconforming use, or preexisting building or use may be
continued unless otherwise prohibited or limited in duration by the
provisions of this article.
§ 600-3.1. Change in use.
A legal nonconforming use may not be changed to a different
nonconforming use.
§ 600-3.2. Abandonment and destruction.
Whenever a legal nonconforming use shall have been abandoned for a term
of six months, or whenever the structure in which a legal nonconforming
use is located is substantially destroyed, the land, building or structure in
which said legal nonconforming use shall have existed shall not thereafter
be used for any nonconforming use. There shall be no abandonment if,
within the six-month term, the nonconforming use shall be reestablished
for a period of at least 30 days. A legal nonconforming use shall be
"substantially destroyed" if the cost to repair and replace the structure
subject to such nonconforming use exceeds 50% of the current structural
replacement value thereof. Where more than one legal nonconforming use
is maintained upon a lot, all such uses must be abandoned as aforesaid
in order for the legal nonconforming uses to be extinguished. Any legal
nonconforming use which shall have been extinguished as a result of
abandonment or destruction as set forth herein may be reinstated within
two years of extinguishment by special use permit by the Board of Trustees
upon good use shown.
§ 600-3.3. Enlargement or extension.
A legal nonconforming use or structure may not be enlarged or extended.
§ 600-3.4. Alterations and repairs.
Any legal nonconforming use may be altered or repaired, provided that
the cost of such alteration or repair is no greater than 50% of the current
structural replacement value of the building or structure.
§ 600-3.5. Maintenance and good repair.
Nonconforming buildings or structures, or a building or structure in which a
nonconforming use is conducted, shall be kept in good repair. Any building
that is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by
reason of physical condition shall be restored, repaired or rebuilt in full
conformity with the regulations prescribed by this chapter for the district in
which such building is located.
§ 600-3.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-3.6
1:393
§ 600-3.6. Authority to determine legal nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may, after public hearing on the written
verified application of the owner of property claiming a legal nonconforming
use thereon, confirm such use by determining that such use is, in fact, a
legal nonconforming use.
A. Evidence to accompany application to determine legal nonconforming
use. Every application under this section shall state or be accompanied
by an affidavit or affidavits stating the evidentiary facts claimed to
establish such use as a legal nonconforming use and shall be filed in
duplicate with the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may, in its discretion, require the production of additional
evidence and may make whatever independent investigation it may
deem necessary.
B. Confirmation or denial of legal nonconforming use. The Zoning Board of
Appeals, upon the evidence submitted to and obtained by it, shall make
and file with the Village Clerk a written determination confirming or
denying the legal nonconforming use and stating the facts which it finds
to be established by such evidence, the basis of such findings and the
conclusions it has drawn from such findings.
C. Issuance or denial of certificate of occupancy.
(1) Upon confirmation by the Zoning Board of Appeals of any legal
nonconforming use pursuant to this section, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall issue to the applicant a certificate of occupancy with
an endorsement thereon specifying the legal nonconforming use so
confirmed, and such certificate shall constitute presumptive
evidence that such use is a legal nonconforming use in any action
or proceeding brought to enforce this chapter.
(2) Every nonconforming use for which a certificate of occupancy has
not been issued, as provided in this section, shall be an illegal
nonconforming use for the purpose of any application to or
proceeding before any officer or board of the Village.
D. Effect of section.
(1) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to make legal or to permit
the confirmation of any nonconforming use which is not a legal
nonconforming use or to invalidate the use of or require the
confirmation of the use of any land, building or structure for which
a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued prior to and is in
effect on the effective date of this chapter.
(2) All the foregoing provisions relating to nonconforming uses and
buildings shall apply to all nonconforming uses and buildings
existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter and to all
uses and buildings that become nonconforming by reason of any
amendment thereof.
§ 600-3.6 MALVERNE CODE § 600-3.6
1:394
(3) The existence of a nonconforming use or building or the application
thereto of the limitations set forth in this section shall not be
deemed to result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
warranting any variance in the strict application of any of the
provisions of this chapter to such nonconforming use or building or
to the land on which it is located. It is the intention of this chapter
that such vested rights as pertain to any nonconforming use or
building shall remain unimpaired but that the same shall not be
extended or increased in any manner whatsoever.
§ 600-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-3.6
1:395

ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking and Unloading
§ 600-4.0. Off-street parking and loading regulations.
Compliance required. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall comply
with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
§ 600-4.1. Supplemental parking regulations in residential districts.
The following supplemental regulations shall apply in any residential
district:
A. The Superintendent of Buildings shall determine the amount of offstreet
parking and loading spaces and the size and location thereof.
Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall determine the design of off-street parking and loading
spaces and the means of ingress and egress for the same. The Board of
Trustees may require such screening of off-street parking and loading
spaces as it may find to be necessary in order to prevent detriment to
neighboring property or annoyance to the occupants thereof.
B. No use shall be maintained in the Village unless off-street parking
spaces as specified in the Schedule of Minimum Spaces Required in this
article are provided and a parking plan has been approved by the Board
of Trustees. For any premises where there are multiple uses, the
number of required parking spaces shall be the sum of the
requirements for all uses thereat.
C. No building, or part thereof, shall be expanded or altered so as to
increase the gross floor area, or change the use thereof, unless offstreet
parking, as specified in the Schedule of Minimum Spaces
Required shall be provided, and a parking plan has been approved by
the Board of Trustees.
D. No parking of vehicles shall be permitted on lawns or sidewalk areas
nor, as to multifamily developments, in fire lanes, buffer areas or within
five feet of any property line.
A. All driveways and parking areas serving one-family and two-family
dwellings shall have one curb cut, unless otherwise approved by the
Board of Trustees, and shall be paved or graveled to handle adequately
the vehicles for which provision is made. All driveways and parking
areas serving multifamily developments shall be paved in accordance
with the specifications of the Village Building Department.
B. The off-street parking facilities required for one-family and two-family
multifamily developments shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as
the building they are intended to serve.
C. All parking areas serving multifamily developments shall be designed to
permit each vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided
§ 600-4.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-4.1
1:397
for it without the moving of any other vehicle, except in the case of a
space in front of an enclosed garage. Aisles providing access to parking
spaces shall have the following minimum dimensions:
Angle of Parking Space
One-Way Aisle
(feet)
Two-Way Aisle
(feet)
90° 25 25
60° 18 20
45° 15 20
30° 13 18
Parallel 13 18
D. Where the angle of the parking is different on both sides of the aisle, the
larger aisle width shall prevail.
E. All parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a
minimum depth of 18 feet, except that all handicapped spaces shall
have a minimum width of 16 feet.161
F. No part of the parking area shall be used for the storage or
abandonment of any article or material.
G. No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored outdoors overnight in
any residential zone, and only one such vehicle per lot may be housed in
such district(s), provided that it is completely housed within a garage
and not visible at all times.
H. Where required by the Superintendent of Buildings, access driveways
shall be marked with arrows indicating proper flow of traffic and
individual parking spaces shall be shown.
I. Parking areas serving multifamily developments shall be illuminated.
Such illumination, lighting and screening shall be subject to the prior
written approval of detailed plans submitted to the Superintendent of
Buildings and shall be so constructed, arranged and shielded that no
direct light rays from any light or fixture used in such illumination shall
constitute a nuisance to the occupants of any neighboring residences or
buildings. Any lighting or illumination constituting such a nuisance is
hereby strictly prohibited.
J. The total area of driveway, parking space, pavement, gravel or any
combination thereof in the front yard of a dwelling that is intended and
used for the parking of vehicles shall not exceed the amount of square
footage derived by multiplying the shortest distance in feet between the
front line of the plot and the nearest point of the building by 20.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-4.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-4.2
1:398
§ 600-4.2. Supplemental parking regulations in nonresidential
districts.
The following supplemental regulations shall apply in any nonresidential
district:
A. Landscaping. To the maximum extent possible, each off-street parking
area shall have a minimum landscaped area equivalent to one parking
space per every 10 parking spaces, with 1/2 said area having shrubs no
higher than three feet and the other half having trees with branches no
lower than seven feet. Such landscaped areas shall be distributed
throughout the parking area in order to break the view of long rows of
parked cars in a manner not impairing visibility, and shall be provided
separate and apart from the requirements for buffers as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Surfacing and curbing. All driveways and parking areas serving
nonresidential uses shall be paved and curbed in accordance with the
specifications of the Village Department of Buildings.162
C. Access driveways shall be marked with arrows indicating proper flow of
traffic, and individual parking spaces shall be striped.
D. Parking areas shall be illuminated. Such illumination, lighting and
screening shall be subject to the prior written approval of detailed plans
submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings and shall be so
constructed, arranged and shielded that no direct light rays from any
light or fixture used in such illumination shall constitute a nuisance to
the occupants of any neighboring residences or buildings. Any lighting
or illumination constituting such a nuisance is hereby strictly
prohibited.
E. Location of parking and loading.
(1) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in fire lanes, driveways,
landscaped areas, aisles, buffer areas, sidewalks or turning areas
or within five feet from any property line.
(2) Off-street parking facilities required for nonresidential uses shall
be provided within 300 feet of the building they are intended to
serve, measured between the nearest point of the off-street parking
facilities and the nearest point of the building. All such parking
spaces shall be owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the
user of the nonresidential use.
(3) No parking space or aisle shall be provided within a ten-foot
setback from the public street right-of-way.
F. The provision of parking spaces shall also include adequate driveway
and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicles for which
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-4.2
1:399
§ 600-4.3. Waiver of parking requirements.
provision is made. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
G. Notwithstanding the requirements herein, whenever a building existing
at the time of the adoption of this article shall be structurally altered or
added to in an amount less than 10% of its total floor area, only that
portion of the area of the existing building which has been structurally
altered or added to need comply with the Schedule of Minimum Spaces
Required.
H. The applicant shall cause a parking plan to be prepared by a licensed
engineer, licensed architect or licensed landscape architect at a scale
sufficient in size to permit adequate review as determined by the Board
of Trustees. Said plans shall show the location, layout, design and
arrangement of all off-street parking and loading spaces, including
ingress and egress, curb cuts, sizes of such spaces, width of circulation
aisles and distances from property lines.
I. All off-street parking shall consist of parking spaces having a direct
means of access thereto from the public street, all paved to
specifications of the Village.
J. All off-street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet wide by 20 feet
long. The Board of Trustees, as part of its site plan and/or parking plan
review, may vary the size of off-street parking spaces to provide for
small-car parking.
K. All off-street parking spaces shall be on or below ground level.
A. Municipal parking within 300 feet of the building may be used to satisfy
all or part of the parking requirements, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees in connection with site plan and/or parking plan
approval. Before approving any waiver of parking requirements
pursuant hereto, the Board of Trustees shall find that such waiver will
not:
(1) Cause undue congestion on adjoining streets;
(2) Limit the accessibility of the property for fire and police protection;
and
(3) Be detrimental to the neighborhood.
B. Prior to making such findings and granting any waiver pursuant hereto,
the Board of Trustees may require the applicant to submit traffic and/or
parking studies prepared by recognized experts and may request
advisory reports from the Village Traffic Commission, Police
Commissioner, Fire Chief or other Village officials or agencies.
Requested advisory reports shall be submitted within 30 days of the
§ 600-4.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-4.3
1:400
§ 600-4.4. Schedule of Minimum Spaces Required.
In any district, the following regulations with respect to off-street parking
shall apply. No application shall be made for a building permit for the
construction, alteration or use of any building, structure or premises for any
purposes, and no building permit for such purposes shall be issued, unless
the parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Building supply or lumber yards,
garden centers
1 per 200 square feet of indoor sales
area and 1 per 500 square feet of
outdoor sales area
Clubs, dance studios, martial arts
schools, or commercial recreation
facilities
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Health care and assisted-living
facilities
1 per 2 beds
Hotels or motels 1 per guest room
Medical offices 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
area
Multifamily dwellings:
Studio 1
1-bedroom unit 1 1/2
2-bedroom unit 2
3+ bedroom unit 2 1/2
Age-restricted senior citizen
housing (62 years of age and
over)
1 per dwelling unit
Museums, libraries 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Offices, except medical offices 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Board's request. The applicant shall reimburse the Village for the cost
of such reports or studies.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Board of Trustees
may waive up to 90% of the parking requirement if applicant shall pay
to the capital reserve fund for parking the substitute value of all
parking spaces so waived by the Board of Trustees, provided that the
applicant's site is within 500 feet of a municipal lot. The Board of
Trustees shall, from time to time, establish the value of such parking
spaces and such value shall be set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 600-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-4.4
1:401
Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Places of assembly, such as movie
theaters, places of worship,
community centers, etc.
1 per 4 seats
Restaurants; eating and drinking
establishments
The greater of: 1 for every 3 seats plus
1 additional space for every 3 linear
feet of bar plus 1 space for every 2
employees; or 1 space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area
Retail stores and banks 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, or for retail stores with 20 or
fewer seats in which food is served or
eaten, 1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area or 1 per 3 seats, whichever
is greater
Retail uses with outdoor sales 1 per 200 square feet of indoor sales
areas; 1 per 1,000 square feet of an
additional outdoor sales area
Single-family houses 2
Storage establishments 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Two-family houses 2 per dwelling unit
Warehousing, wholesale or
manufacturing establishments
1 per 750 square feet of gross floor
area
Uses not listed above According to that category which most
nearly approximates the use
§ 600-4.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-4.4
1:402
ARTICLE V
Applications and Permits
§ 600-5.0. Building permits.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, extended, altered,
reconstructed, demolished, or moved until a building permit therefor
has been approved by the Superintendent of Buildings and issued by
the Village Clerk.
B. Every application for a building permit shall be in duplicate and sworn
to by the applicant authorized, in writing, by the owner and shall be
filed with the Superintendent of Buildings.
C. Such application shall be accompanied by an existing survey, two copies
of plans for any building or structure and plot plan, together with two
copies of specifications for the construction covered by the application.
D. Said plan for any building or structure and said plot plan shall be drawn
to scale by an architect or professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of New York and his or her seal affixed thereto; provided,
however, that said plan for any building or structure and said plot plan
need not be drawn by such an architect or engineer if the application is
for a permit for the alteration or extension of a building or structure and
the Superintendent of Buildings finds, and so endorses on the plan for
such building or structure and the plot plan, that the proposed
construction would not affect the structural safety of the building or the
safety of the occupants thereof.
E. Said plan for such building or structure and said plot plan shall show
exactly the following:
(1) The lines, angles and dimensions of the lot.
(2) The location and dimensions of any existing building or structure,
including any porch or accessory building on the lot.
(3) The lines within which any proposed building or structure,
including any porch or accessory building, is to be erected,
showing all setback lines.
(4) The existing and intended use of each building or structure or part
thereof, including the number of dwelling units.
(5) The location, dimensions, surfacing and grades of any existing and
proposed automobile parking area and spaces.
(6) The location, widths, grades and surfacing of existing and proposed
driveways leading to such parking area and spaces.
(7) Such other information as may be prescribed as necessary by the
Superintendent of Buildings for proper determination and
enforcement.
§ 600-5.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-5.0
1:403
§ 600-5.1. Certificates of occupancy.163
See also Chapter 265, Building Construction, § 265-12.
F. Upon approval of the application, one copy of such plan for the
building(s) or structure(s), plot plan and specifications shall be
returned to the applicant, and the other copy shall be filed with the
Superintendent of Buildings.
G. At all times while the work is in progress, the building permit shall be
attached to or be visibly displayed on the front door or a front window
of the building or structure.
H. Building permit approval shall automatically terminate one year after
the building permit is issued unless there is physical evidence to
demonstrate that substantial construction has taken place and is
continuing. Upon application to the Superintendent of Buildings, and
submission of an application fee, which shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, the building permit approval may
be extended for two additional six-month periods, if the Superintendent
of Buildings determines, in his sole discretion, that there is evidence to
demonstrate that substantial action has been taken in connection with
the proposed construction or development and such is continuing. The
Board of Trustees may, upon written application, extend the building
permit approval for additional one-year terms upon finding, in its sole
discretion, that there is evidence to demonstrate that substantial action
continues to be taken in connection with the proposed construction or
development and such is continuing or for just cause. No extension
shall be granted by the Board of Trustees unless applicant has paid an
extension fee in an amount set by the Board of Trustees.
A. A certificate of occupancy, or certifying compliance with this chapter,
shall be required before any building or structure shall be occupied or
used. Such certificate shall be issued only after approval by the
Superintendent of Buildings of:
(1) Use or occupancy of a building or structure hereafter erected,
altered, enlarged, extended or moved, in whole or in part; or
(2) Use, occupancy or change of use of an existing building, land or
premises.
B. Written application for a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance shall be made to the Superintendent of Buildings by an
applicant authorized in writing by the owner. If the proposed use is in
all respects in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable laws and ordinances, said certificate shall be issued by
the Superintendent of Buildings.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-5.0 MALVERNE CODE § 600-5.1
1:404
(1) Written application for such certificate for a building shall be made
at the same time as the application for the building permit for such
building.
(2) Upon the request of the Superintendent of Buildings, and prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or certificate of
compliance, there shall be filed with the Village Clerk an affidavit of
the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who filed
the original plans, or of the registered architect or licensed
professional engineer who supervised the construction of the work
for which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
is sought. This affidavit shall state that the affiant has examined the
approved plans of the structure for which the certificate of
occupancy, or certificate of compliance is sought, and that the
structure has been erected in accordance with the approved plans.
(3) No building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy, or a
certificate of compliance, is required under the provisions of this
section or any other provision of law, or of this or any other
regulations, local law or rule of the Village, shall be used or
occupied until the Superintendent of Buildings has issued a
certificate of temporary use therefor, or, in the event of his refusal
to issue same for reasons of safety, until the issuance of the
certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy required by
this section. The Superintendent of Buildings is hereby authorized
to issue any such certificate of temporary use, or a temporary
certificate of occupancy, if, in the opinion of the Superintendent of
Buildings, such certificate would not expose any person to such
hazards during completion of construction as to endanger the life,
health or safety of any such person, provided that the duration of
such certificate of temporary use or temporary certificate of
occupancy shall not exceed six months. The Superintendent of
Buildings may extend the certificate of temporary use or the
temporary certificate of occupancy for up to six months. Such
temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering
the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or of the
Village relating to the use or occupancy of the land or building or
any other matter covered by this chapter.
C. If an improvement was made prior to the requirement for either a
certificate of occupancy or compliance, the Superintendent of Buildings
may issue a letter-in-lieu confirming that the improvement was made
prior to the requirements for a certificate of occupancy or compliance,
provided that the Superintendent of Buildings can confirm that the
improvement was made prior to such requirement.
D. In the case of any change in the use or occupancy, or in the case of any
new construction, alteration, erection, modification, enlargement, or
addition, or other change to an existing building or structure subject to
the terms of this or any other regulation, local law or ordinance of the
Village or of the State of New York, no certificate of occupancy or
§ 600-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-5.1
1:405
certificate of compliance shall be issued, or amended, before the
Superintendent of Buildings shall examine or cause to be examined all
buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed
for a permit for a change in the use or type of occupancy, or in the
case of any new construction, or in the case of any alteration, erection,
modification, reconstruction, addition, or other change to an existing
building or structure; and the Superintendent of Buildings may conduct
such inspections as he or she deems appropriate from time to time
during and upon completion of the work for which a building permit has
been issued.
E. In the event that an inspection required by this section reveals
violations of any provision of this Municipal Code or of the New York
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, or of any other building,
plumbing or zoning regulation of the Village, then a notice of violation
shall be issued to the owner of the premises and said owners shall have
30 days to remove or correct said violation(s) or, failing same, an
application for any certificate under the provisions of this section shall
be denied and a summons or appearance ticket issued for such
violation(s).
F. Applications for a certificate of occupancy, or certificate of compliance,
or for a letter-in-lieu thereof, as the case may be, shall be made on
forms provided therefor by the Superintendent of Buildings' office. Said
applications shall be accompanied at the time of filing by an application
and inspection fee in an amount established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Trustees and by a copy of an up-to-date
property survey or, in lieu thereof, a copy of an existing survey updated
by a survey inspection.
G. In the event that any person(s) other than the owner of the premises
shall apply for a certificate required by this section, such person shall
provide satisfactory evidence that he is acting as the attorney-in-fact or
lawful agent of the actual owner, or shall submit an authorization from
said owner, duly executed and acknowledged by him, stating that said
other person is authorized to act on his behalf. Absent such evidence, in
form satisfactory to the Village Clerk at the time of applying therefor, no
application for the processing of such certificates shall be filed or
accepted by the Village.
H. Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material,
construction, equipment or assembly does not conform to any
regulation, rule, ordinance, or law of the Village of Malverne, the
Superintendent of Buildings may require the same to be subjected to
tests, at the owner's expense, in order to furnish proof of such
compliance.
I. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, an owner, anyone
acting on behalf of the owner or any other person shall be entitled to
obtain a photocopy of a previously issued certificate of occupancy,
certificate of completion or letter-in-lieu thereof as a copy of a public
§ 600-5.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-5.1
1:406
§ 600-5.2. Special use permits.
record; provided, however, that in such event the Superintendent of
Buildings shall endorse on said photocopy a statement indicating that
no reliance may be placed on the legal validity of said certificate or
letter, as the case may be, from the date of original issuance appearing,
thereon, unless and until such certificate or letter has been revalidated
by the Superintendent of Buildings, as provided in this section.
J. No certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to validate any violation of
any provisions of this or any other law or ordinance.
K. The Superintendent of Buildings shall index all building code, zoning
code, and other violations issued by the Superintendent of Buildings, or
by those acting at his direction, against the records maintained for
certificates of occupancy by the Building Department, and any such
violations shall be listed when any request is made for a certificate of
occupancy, a certificate of compliance, or for a letter-in-lieu thereof.
L. Applicant shall be required to pay those fees as set forth from time to
time by resolution of Board of Trustees.
A. Applications for special use permits.
(1) Where a special use permit is required by any provision of this
chapter, an application for such permit shall be made to the Board
of Trustees.
(2) Application. Any application for a special use permit shall be made
in writing and contain such information and be in such form as may
be required by the Board of Trustees.
(3) Applicant. An application for a special use permit shall be made
only by the owner of the property involved or by an agent
authorized in writing by the owner or by a person, firm or
corporation or other business entity under bona fide contract to
purchase the same.
B. Public hearing. Before any decision on or authorization of a special use
permit, the Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing after due
notice. Notice shall be provided by applicant to all those record owners
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the application by
certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than 15 days and no
more than 25 days before the hearing. Proof of service shall be
presented at the public hearing. In addition, the Village Clerk shall
cause to be published notice of the hearing not less than 10 days prior
to the hearing date.
C. Standards. The Board of Trustees, in its consideration of and decision
on an application for a special use permit, shall be guided (without
limitations) by the following standards and considerations:
§ 600-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-5.2
1:407
(1) The purposes of zoning set forth in the Village Law of the State of
New York.
(2) That the proposed use is of such character, size, location, design
and site layout as to be appropriate to and in harmony with the
surrounding properties, the neighborhood and the Village.
(3) That the proposed use is or will be necessary or desirable to the
neighborhood or Village in that it will provide a service, facility or
convenience or otherwise contribute to the proper growth and
development of the community and to its general welfare.
(4) That the proposed use shall not be hazardous, inconvenient,
conflicting or incongruous to the surroundings, neighborhood or
Village by reason of excessive traffic, assembly of persons or
vehicles, proximity to normal travel routes or congregation of
children or pedestrians.
(5) That the location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, its site
layout and its relation to streets giving access to it will not be
hazardous or inconvenient to the residential character of the
neighborhood or conflict with the normal traffic on the residential
streets.
(6) That the proposed use, site layout, location, heights, signs, walls,
fences and landscaping will not hinder or discourage the
appropriate use and development of adjacent uses or impair the
value thereof.
(7) That the proposed use, site layout, location, size or operation will
not be objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of noise, lights
or impacts.
(8) That the proposed use, location, size, site layout and nature of use
will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is to be situated.
(9) That the location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations in or conducted in connection with it, its site layout and
its relation to streets giving access to it will be such that vehicular
traffic will not be more hazardous than the normal traffic of the
district, taking into account such factors as street intersections,
traffic flow, sight distances and pedestrian traffic.
D. Authority.
(1) The Board of Trustees, pursuant to this section, may authorize a
special use permit and, furthermore, may impose such conditions,
modifications and safeguards as it deems appropriate, necessary or
desirable to preserve the intent of this chapter.
§ 600-5.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-5.2
1:408
(2) The Board of Trustees shall not authorize any special use permit
unless specifically authorized to do so in accordance with this
chapter.
(3) Any decision with regard to an application for a special use permit
shall be by a resolution of the Board of Trustees and shall include a
statement of the reasons therefor.
(4) The Board of Trustees may make such rules as it deems
appropriate for implementing this section.
E. Expiration, lapse, extension and reinstatement of special use permit.
Any special use permit shall automatically terminate one year after
issuance. Prior to the expiration of one-year period, upon application
and the submission of an application fee, which shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, to the Superintendent of
Buildings, the special use permit may be extended for two additional
six-month periods, upon good cause shown. The Board of Trustees may,
upon written application, extend the special use permit for additional
one-year terms upon good cause shown. No extension shall be granted
by the Board of Trustees unless the applicant has paid an extension fee
in an amount set by the Board of Trustees.
F. Extinguishment of special use permit. Whenever a use established
pursuant to a special use permit shall have been abandoned for a term
of six months, or whenever the location of such a use is substantially
destroyed, the land, building or structure in which said use shall have
existed shall not thereafter be used for the previously established
special use. The use shall not be abandoned if, within the six-month
term, the use shall be reestablished for a period of at least 30 days. A
use shall be substantially destroyed if the cost to repair and replace the
structure exceeds 50% of the current structural replacement value
thereof. Any use that has been extinguished as a result of abandonment
or destruction as set forth herein may be reinstated within two years of
extinguishment by special use permit by the Board of Trustees.
G. Revocation of special use permit. Any special use permit granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be revocable on the order of the Board of
Trustees at any time upon the failure of the owner or the operator of the
use or structure covered by the special use permit to observe all
requirements of this chapter with respect to the maintenance and
conduct of the use or structure or upon failure to observe all conditions
and restrictions of such permit. The Board of Trustees shall give the
holder of the special use permit at least 10 days' written notice of
violation. If within such 10 days the special use permit holder so
requests in writing, the Board of Trustees shall hold a hearing on the
revocation of such special use permit and shall give at least 10 days'
written notice of the hearing either by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service. If no hearing is requested within the
ten-day notice-of-violation period, the special use permit shall be
immediately revoked and upon the expiration of such ten-day period, a
§ 600-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-5.2
1:409
§ 600-5.3. Application fees.
Applications for any permit or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by
a fee which shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the Board
of Trustees. The payment of any fee or deposit in connection with the
application shall be a condition precedent to the acceptance of the
application.
§ 600-5.4. Penalties for offenses.
new application for the special use previously granted shall be
required. The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to preclude the
use of any other remedy prescribed by law or by this chapter or of
any conditions of the special use permit. The violation of any condition
imposed by the Board of Trustees as part of a special use permit shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter.
H. Reimbursement of expenses required. All applicants under this article
shall be required to pay the cost associated with engineering,
environmental, architectural, legal and other consulting professionals
retained by or on behalf of the Village. No special use permit shall be
issued until the applicant reimburses the Village for all such fees and
expenses. At the time of application, and throughout the review
process, the Superintendent of Buildings may require applicant to
deposit with the Village Clerk such amounts to cover such fees and
expenses. In instances where such expenses are minimal, the
requirement for reimbursement of expenses may be waived by the
Board of Trustees.
A. Authority. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, or
reconstructed, altered, converted, located or maintained, or any
building, structure, land or premises is used in violation of this chapter,
any regulation or requirement made pursuant thereto, or under the
authorization conferred thereby or is in violation of any other applicable
law or regulation, in addition to other lawful remedies, the Board of
Trustees or, with its approval, the Code Enforcement Officer may,
pursuant to the New York Village Law, institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
alteration, conversion, repair, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct
or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy or residency of such
building, land or premises or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises; or to promote public safety
and protect the general welfare of those individuals in and about the
premises.
B. Discovery of violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine
the existence of violations of the provisions of this article through such
investigations as he or she shall conduct pursuant to the issuance of
building permits and certificates of occupancy and through the prompt
investigation of such written complaints as are filed with him or her by
§ 600-5.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-5.4
1:410
persons having reason to believe that such violations exist. The Code
Enforcement Officer may also determine the existence of such
violations by means of investigations conducted upon his or her own
initiative.
C. Procedure for abatement of violations.
(1) Notice of violation. Upon notice of a violation of the provisions of
this article, the Code Enforcement Officer shall serve written notice
either by personal service or certified mail, addressed to the
premises of such violation, on the person committing or permitting
such violation or on the owner of the property. Such notice shall
specify the nature of such violations as exist and specify a
reasonable time limit of not less than five days within which such
violations shall be removed, abated or corrected and compliance
with this chapter achieved.
(2) Penalties for violation. Any person, corporation, or other entity,
whether as owner, lessee, architect, contractor or the agent or
employee of any of them, who or which violates or is accessory to
the violation of any provision of this article or any regulation made
under the authority conferred by this article or who or which shall
erect, construct, alter, enlarge, convert or move any building or
structure without a building permit or in violation of any statement
or plans submitted and approved under the provisions of this
article or who or which shall use any building, structure or land in
violation of this article or any regulation made under the authority
conferred by this article or in violation of the provisions of any
building permit (including a special use permit) without a building
permit or certificate of occupancy where one is required by this
article shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days,
or both; and upon conviction for subsequent offenses, all of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine
of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
15 days, or both. Each week during which a condition, building,
structure or use prohibited by this article or any requirement or
regulation made pursuant thereto (including the violation of a
condition imposed as part of a variance grant or as part of a special
use permit issuance, the violation of which shall be a violation of
this article) continues or is maintained shall constitute a separate
additional violation. In addition, anyone found to be in violation of
this article for failure to file and obtain any required permit or
approval as set forth in this article shall pay an additional
application fee in an amount which shall be set, from time to time,
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 600-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-5.4
1:411

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 600-6.0. Organization and membership.
A. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals established in accordance
with the provisions of the Village Law of the State of New York. Said
Board shall consist of five members and two alternate members and
shall be appointed as provided by statute.
B. Alternate members.
(1) Appointment. Alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees for a term of one year. A maximum of two
alternate members may be appointed. Each alternate member shall
be designated as either "First Alternate" or "Second Alternate," and
each shall be called upon to serve on a rotation basis when a
member is absent or unable to participate on an application or
matter before the Board.
(2) Notice. Alternate members shall be given notice of and shall be
encouraged to attend all meetings of such Board.
(3) Designation. The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
immediately designate an alternate to substitute for a member
when such member is unable to participate on an application or
matter before the Board. Alternates shall be designated in order of
priority. If an alternate member is not available to serve on a date
when such alternate member is called to serve, then the next
alternate member shall be called to serve. The alternate member
not able to serve shall next serve when that alternate's time comes
around on the rotation. When so designated, the alternate member
shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member of
the Board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of
the initial Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the
substitution is made.
(4) New York State law controlling. All provisions of state law relating
to Zoning Board of Appeals member eligibility, vacancy in office,
removal, compatibility of office and service on other boards, as well
as any education, compensation and attendance, shall also apply to
alternate members.
(5) Supersession of Village law. This section is hereby adopted
pursuant to the provision of § 10 of the New York State Municipal
Home Rule Law. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees, pursuant
to § 10 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law, to
supersede the provisions of § 7-712 et seq. of the Village Law
relating to the appointment of members to the Village Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 600-6.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-6.1
1:413
§ 600-6.1. Powers and duties.
A. General.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties
prescribed by law and by this chapter, which are more particularly
specified as follows, provided that none of the following provisions
shall be deemed to limit any power of the Board conferred upon it
by law.
(2) Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision of a Code Enforcement
Officer, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to decide
any question involving the interpretation of any provision of this
chapter, including determination of the exact location of any
district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
(3) Nonconforming uses. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
power to confirm the existence of a nonconforming use.
(4) The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, shall have the power to grant use and
other area variances, as defined herein.
(5) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both use
variances and area variances, have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions
shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and
shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
such variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
B. Use variances.
(1) "Use variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not
permitted or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
(2) No such use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
the lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question
is unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
§ 600-6.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-6.1
1:414
(c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship demonstrated by
the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of
the community.
C. Area variances.
(1) "Area variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning Board
of Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not permitted or
is prohibited by the dimensional or physical requirements of the
applicable zoning regulations.
(2) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination, the Board shall consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some alternative method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, but shall not in and of itself necessarily
preclude the granting of the area variance.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances,
shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
D. Revocation, expiration and extinguishment of variances.
§ 600-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-6.1
1:415
(1) Revocation of variances. Any variances granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be revocable on the order of the Zoning Board of
Appeals at any time upon the failure of the owner or operator of the
use or structure, covered by the variance, to observe all
requirements of this chapter with respect to the maintenance and
conduct of the use or structure, or upon the failure to observe all
conditions and restrictions of such variance which were designated
by the Zoning Board of Appeals in issuing the same. Prior to
revoking any such variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give
the holder of the variance at least 10 days' written notice of
violation. If within such 10 days the variance holder so requests,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing on the revocation
of such variance and shall give at least 10 days' written notice of
the hearing either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service. If no hearing is requested within the ten-day
notice-of-violation period, the variance shall, upon the expiration of
such period, be immediately revoked and a new application for the
relief previously granted shall be required. The foregoing
provisions shall not be deemed to preclude the use of any other
remedy prescribed by law or by this chapter with respect to
violations of the provisions of this chapter or of any conditions of
the variance. The violation of any condition imposed by the Zoning
Board of Appeals as part of a variance or the variance holder's
failure to observe all the requirements of this chapter with respect
to maintenance and conduct of the use shall also constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(2) Expiration, lapse, extension and reinstatement of variance. Any
variance granted pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
expire and be of no further force and effect one year after the
granting thereof unless, within such one-year period, substantial
construction shall have been commenced. All construction must be
completed within one year of the date of commencement of
substantial construction. If construction is not completed within
the one-year period, the variance shall automatically expire and be
of no further force and effect. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
authorized, upon application and submission of an extension fee,
and without hearing, to grant extensions of the variance for
additional periods, each not to exceed six months, or to reinstate a
lapsed variance for good cause shown. No extension or restatement
shall be granted unless the applicant has paid the extension fee.
(3) Extinguishment of variance. Whenever a use established pursuant
to a variance shall have been abandoned for a term of six months,
or whenever the location of such use is substantially destroyed, the
land, building or structure in which said use shall have existed shall
not thereafter be used for the previously established use. The use
shall not be abandoned if, within the six-month term, the use shall
be reestablished for a period of at least 30 days. A structure shall
be "substantially destroyed" if the cost to repair and replace the
§ 600-6.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-6.1
1:416
§ 600-6.2. Procedure.
structure exceeds 50% of the current structural replacement value
thereof. Any variance which shall have been extinguished as a
result of abandonment or destruction as set forth herein may be
reinstated within two years of extinguishment following an
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon good cause
shown.
A. All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board. Each appeal or
application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case. It shall
refer to the specific provision of this chapter that is involved and shall
exactly set forth, as the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed
on an allegation of error or the variance that is applied for and the
grounds on which it is claimed that the same should be granted. The
Clerk of the Board shall not receive nor shall the Board consider any
appeal or application that does not fully contain the information
required herein.
B. Any further proposal by the applicant or appellant with respect to either
any addition to or modification of the content of the proposal covered by
the application or appeal or any offer made in connection therewith
shall be made only in the form of an amended application or appeal. The
filing of any such amended application or appeal shall terminate all
proceedings on the original application or appeal and shall require the
holding of a new hearing, of which notice shall be given as in the first
instance.
C. Meetings, minutes, records. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the New
York Public Officers Law. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
D. Filing requirements. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal
thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
within five business days and shall be a public record, and a copy
thereof mailed to the applicant.
E. Hearing appeals. Unless otherwise provided by local law, the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appellate only, and
shall be limited to hearing and deciding appeals from and reviewing any
order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination made by
the Code Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of this
chapter or any local law adopted pursuant to this chapter. The
concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such Code Enforcement Officer, or to grant a
§ 600-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-6.2
1:417
use variance or area variance. Such appeal may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village
other than the Board of Trustees.
F. Time of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the
filing of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer charged with the
enforcement of such local law by filing with such Code Enforcement
Officer and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought. The Code
Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
G. The applicant or appellant shall be required to provide notice of the
hearing upon a form approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals to all
record landowners within a two-hundred-foot radius of the property
which forms the subject of the appeal or application as said record
owners appear on the most current tax rolls of the Nassau County
Assessor's Office. Such notice shall be sent to the record landowners by
mail not less than 15 days and no more than 25 days before the public
hearing. Evidence of compliance with this subsection shall be provided
by the appellant or applicant prior to or at the public hearing. In
addition, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall publish
notice of the hearing not less than 10 days prior to the hearing date.
H. Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Code Enforcement Officer charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, from whom the appeal is taken,
certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall
have been filed with the Code Enforcement Officer, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on
notice to the Code Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on good cause shown.
I. Time of decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide upon the
appeal within 62 days after the closing of said hearing. The time within
which the Zoning Board of Appeals must render its decision may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.
J. Rehearing. A motion for the Zoning Board of Appeals to hold a
rehearing to review any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Board not previously reviewed may be made by any member of
the Board. A unanimous vote of all members of the Board then present
is required for such rehearing to occur. Such rehearing is subject to the
same notice provisions as an original hearing. Upon such rehearing, the
Board may reverse, modify or annul its original order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination upon the unanimous vote of
§ 600-6.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-6.2
1:418
§ 600-6.3. Application fees.
Application fees for variance applications and other matters submitted to
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in the amounts as set forth, from time
to time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 600-6.4. Reimbursement of expenses required.
Assistance to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such Board shall have the
authority to call upon any department, agency or employee of the Village
or to seek consultation or professional assistance (including but not limited
to engineering, architectural and legal). All applicants under this article
shall be required to pay the cost associated with such consultants or
professionals. No variance or building permit shall be issued pursuant to
the provisions of this article until the applicant reimburses the Village for
all such expenses. At the time of application, and throughout the review
process, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Superintendent of Buildings
may require an applicant to deposit with the Village Clerk such amounts
to cover such fees and expenses. In instances where such expenses are
minimal, the requirement for reimbursement of expenses may be waived by
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
all members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that the Board
finds that the rights vested in persons acting in good faith in reliance
upon the reviewed order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
§ 600-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-6.4
1:419

ARTICLE VII
Architectural and Site Plan Review
§ 600-7.0. Policy and findings.
§ 600-7.1. Creation of Board.
There is hereby created a Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review,
which shall consist of the Board of Trustees. All members of the Board shall
be residents of the Village.
§ 600-7.2. Procedures of Board.
A. It is the purpose of this article to preserve and promote the character
and appearance and conserve the property values of the Village; to
encourage good qualities of exterior building design and good
appearances and to relate such design and appearances to the site and
surrounding structures; to permit originality and resourcefulness in
building design and appearances which are appropriate to the sites and
surroundings; to prevent such design and appearances as are
unnecessarily offensive to visual sensibilities; to discourage and
prohibit structures which are visually offensive or inappropriate by
reason of poor qualities of exterior design, monotonous similarity or
striking visual discord in relation to their sites or surroundings, mar the
appearances of the surrounding area, impair the use, enjoyment and
desirability and reduce the values of properties, are detrimental to the
character of neighborhoods, prevent the most appropriate development
and utilization of land, and therefore adversely affect the functioning,
economic stability, prosperity, health, safety and general welfare of the
entire community.
B. It is also the purpose of this article to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the Village through the process of site plan review,
reviewing the arrangement, layout, use, relationships and impacts of
sites intended for development or redevelopment.
A. Meeting of the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review shall be
held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board
shall determine. The Board may hold a public hearing when it deems
the same to be in the public interest. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep copies of its examinations and other official actions. The
Board shall have power from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law or other provisions of
this chapter, governing its procedure and the transaction of its
business, and for the purpose of carrying into effect the standards
outlined herein. Such action shall be taken after public hearing and
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 600-7.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-7.2
1:421
§ 600-7.3. Architectural and site plan approval required.
B. To avoid delays in the final review and approval process, applicants may
first apply for a preliminary conference. A preliminary conference may
be held with the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review and the
applicant prior to the preparation and submission of a final design
submission. The purpose of such a conference is to enable the applicant
to inform the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review of his/her
proposal prior to the preparation of a detailed design submission and to
provide the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review with an
opportunity to review the basic design concept, to advise the applicant
as to potential problems and concerns and to generally determine the
information to be required in the final submission to the Board of
Architectural and Site Plan Review for approval. Preliminary
conferences with the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review are
available to all applicants, provided applicants comply with the
procedures indicated above.
A. No building permit shall be issued without site plan and architectural
review approval for:
(1) Any new building or structure;
(2) Any exterior alteration to a commercial property, including any
alterations made from the exterior facade of the commercial
building to the property line;
(3) Any alteration to the exterior of a residential building or structure;
or
(4) Any new or altered land use activities.
B. Application; contents. An application for site plan or architectural
review approval shall be made, in writing, to the Superintendent of
Buildings. The Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review shall review
all site plan and architectural review applications. Site plans shall be
prepared by a licensed design professional or licensed surveyor. The
applicant for architectural and site plan approval shall submit the
following information and provide the number of copies specified by the
Superintendent of Buildings:
(1) Original photographs of the site and adjacent areas and structures
sufficient to provide adequate representation thereof.
(2) Samples of exterior building materials and finishes and color
palette for painted surfaces.
(3) Detailed drawings of decorative elements.
(4) The location, size, design and type of construction of all proposed
signs.
(5) Sectional drawings to explain the character of the design.
§ 600-7.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-7.3
1:422
(6) Complete and accurate exterior elevations of all facades, drawn at
a scale adequate to show clearly the appearance of all proposed
buildings and structures.
(7) A scale model detailed to the degree deemed necessary by the
Board.
(8) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that portion of
the applicant's property under consideration and all properties,
subdivisions, streets, easements, deed restrictions and areas
dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the applicant's property,
upon the discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings.164
(9) A map of site topography at two-foot contour intervals.
(10) The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant, the owner and the person responsible for preparation of
such drawings.
(11) A North arrow, scale and date.
(12) Boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
(13) Existing buildings and structures.
(14) Existing grading and drainage plan showing existing contours, soil
characteristics and watercourses and a proposed grading and
drainage plan showing all drainage on site and all proposed
contours, soil characteristics and watercourses.
(15) The location, design, type of construction, proposed use and
exterior dimensions of all buildings.
(16) The location, design and type of construction of all parking spaces
and loading areas, showing ingress and egress, curb cuts, the size
of such spaces and areas, the width of circulation aisles and
distances from property lines.
(17) The location, design and type of construction of all pedestrian
access.
(18) An exterior lighting plan adequate to determine its character, the
location and design of outdoor lighting facilities and means of
illumination, and to enable review of possible hazards and
disturbances to the public and adjacent properties.
(19) The location and design of all existing and proposed site
improvements, including drains, culverts, walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings and all existing trees on the subject property
which have a diameter of eight inches or greater, measured 18
inches above the ground.
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-7.3
1:423
§ 600-7.4. Standards for Board action.
(20) A description of the method of public water supply and sewage
disposal and the location of such facilities.
(21) The location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants.
(22) The location and design of all utilities, including electrical, gas and
solar energy, telephone and cable television.
(23) The location and proposed development of all buffer areas,
including existing vegetative cover.
(24) Identification of the location and amount of building area proposed
for each intended use, including storage and common areas, and
the location of outdoor storage, if any.
(25) A general landscaping plan and planting schedule.
(26) An estimated project construction schedule.
(27) Identification of state, county, town or other agency approval or
permits required for the execution of the project along with copies
of all applications for such approval or permits.
(28) Part 1 of an environmental assessment form (EAF) in accordance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act and regulations
(SEQRA).
(29) Any other item deemed to be necessary by the Superintendent of
Buildings or the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review,
including but not limited to traffic studies.
C. The Superintendent of Buildings or Board of Architectural and Site Plan
Review may waive any of the required submissions in this section if it
determines that one or more are not necessary for a particular
proposal.
D. If the Superintendent of Buildings determines that any variances or
special use permits are required, the application may be rejected
pending the application for, and approval of, the required permits or
variances.
A. Approval of an application shall be by a vote of at least a majority of the
members of the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review.
B. In considering an application for a permit, the Board of Architectural
and Site Plan Review shall take into account natural features of the site
and surroundings, exterior design and appearances of existing
structures, and the character of the district and its peculiar suitability
for particular purposes, with a view to conserving the values of
property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
§ 600-7.3 MALVERNE CODE § 600-7.4
1:424
C. The Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review may approve any
application referred to it upon finding that the building or structure for
which the permit was requested, if erected or altered in accordance
with this article, would not be visually offensive or inappropriate by
reason of poor quality of exterior design, monotonous similarity or
striking visual discord in relation to the sites or surroundings, would
not mar the appearance of the area, would not impair the use,
enjoyment and desirability and reduce the values of the properties in
the area, would not be detrimental to the character of the
neighborhood, would not prevent the most appropriate development
and utilization of the site or of adjacent lands and would not adversely
affect the functioning, economic stability, prosperity, health, safety and
general welfare of the entire community.
D. In approving any application, the Board of Architectural and Site Plan
Review may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards designed to
prevent the harmful effects as set forth in this article.
E. The Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review may disapprove any
application, provided that the Board has afforded the applicant an
opportunity to confer upon suggestions for change of the plan, and
provided that the Board finds and states that the structure for which the
permit was requested would, if erected as indicated, provoke one or
more of the harmful effects set forth herein by reason of:
(1) Monotonous similarity to any other structure or structures located
or proposed to be located on the same street or corner thereof and
within 150 feet of the site of the structure for which a building
permit is requested, in respect to one or more of the following
features of exterior design and appearance:
(a) Substantially identical facade;
(b) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos, porches or garages or other openings or
breaks or extensions in the facade, including reverse
arrangements; or
(c) Other substantially identical features, such as, but not limited
to, setbacks from street lines, heights, widths and lengths of
element of the building design, and exterior material and
treatments.
(2) Striking dissimilarity, visual discord or inappropriateness with
respect to other structures located or proposed to be located on the
same street or a corner thereof and within 150 feet of the site of the
structure for which a building permit is requested, in respect to one
or more of the following features of exterior design and
appearance:
(a) Facade;
§ 600-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-7.4
1:425
§ 600-7.5. Action by Board.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall refuse any building permit
application disapproved as provided herein. If the Board of Architectural
and Site Plan Review fails to render its decision on any application referred
to it under the provision of this article within 90 days of the date of
a completed application being received by it, the application shall be
considered to have been approved. The time within which the Board of
Architectural and Site Plan Review shall render its decision may be
extended upon the consent of the Board and applicant. An application
shall not be deemed complete for the purposes of this section unless and
until the applicant has submitted all materials requested by the Board of
Architectural and Site Plan Review.
§ 600-7.6. Power to modify and vary requirements.
(b) Size and arrangement of doors, windows, porticos, porches or
garages or other openings, breaks or extensions in the facade;
or
(c) Other significant design features, such as, but not limited to,
heights, widths and lengths of elements of design, exterior
materials and treatments, roof structures, exposed mechanical
equipment, service and storage areas, retaining walls,
landscaping, signs, light posts, parking areas and fences,
service and loading areas.
(3) Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of exterior design,
including, with respect to signs, considerations of the harmony or
discord of colors, or incompatibility of the proposed structure with
the terrain on which it is to be located, including, but not limited to,
excessive divergences of the height or levels of any part of the
structure from the grade of the terrain.
(4) Adequacy of overall plan in minimizing harmful effects upon the
environment and the plan's compliance with SEQRA.
(5) That the location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, its site
layout and its relation to streets giving access to it will be
hazardous or inconvenient to the residential character of the
neighborhood or conflict with the normal traffic on the residential
streets.
(6) That the proposed use, site layout, location, size or operation will
be objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of noise, sights or
other objectionable impacts.
(7) That the proposed use, location, size, site layout and nature of use
will not be a harmonious part of the district in which it is to be
situated.
§ 600-7.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-7.6
1:426
§ 600-7.7. Hearings.
The Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review may conduct a public
hearing on the site plan if a majority of the members deem that such a
hearing is in the public interest. The applicant shall provide evidence at
the hearing that all record landowners within a two-hundred-foot radius of
the proposed project, as said record owners appear on the most current
tax rolls of the Nassau County Assessor's Office, were notified by mail not
less than 15 days but no more than 25 days before the public hearing. In
addition, the Village Clerk shall publish notice of the hearing not less than
10 days prior to the hearing date. No hearing before any other board shall
diminish the authority of the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review to
conduct a public hearing.
§ 600-7.8. Application fees.
An applicant shall be required to pay those fees as set forth, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 600-7.9. Reimbursement of expenses required.
All applicants under this article shall be required to pay the cost associated
with engineering, environmental, architectural, legal and other consulting
professionals retained by or on behalf of the Village. No architectural
or site plan approval or building permit shall be issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article until the applicant reimburses the Village for
all such expenses. At the time of application, and throughout the review
process, the Board of the Board of Trustees or the Superintendent of
Buildings may require an applicant to deposit with the Village Clerk such
A. With the purpose of encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Village, the Board of Trustees may vary the minimum or
maximum zoning requirements set forth in this chapter so as to reduce
said requirements by not more than 10% if the result of said variation
will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and will
enhance the development of the area.
B. With the purpose of achieving the most appropriate design and site
planning in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, the Board of
Trustees, in passing on any application before it, may modify the
requirements of this chapter so as to permit minor encroachments on
required yards by railings, bays, chimneys or other architectural
details, or so as to permit minor variations with respect to the location
of accessory buildings, provided that no accessory building shall in any
case be permitted to encroach on any front or side yard.
C. The reservation of parkland requirements set forth in § 600-8.9 shall be
applicable to all site plan approvals. No building permit shall be used
unless the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review undertakes the
study and complies with the requirements set forth in § 600-8.9 for all
site plan reviews.
§ 600-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-7.9
1:427
amounts to cover such fees and expenses. In instances where such are
minimal, the requirement for reimbursement of expenses may be waived by
the Board of Architectural and Site Plan Review.
§ 600-7.10. Financial responsibility.
In connection with its site plan review, the Board of Architectural and
Site Plan Review may require a performance bond in an amount it shall
determine to ensure that upon completion of the project all the public
improvements shown on the site plan are completed and furthermore to
ensure that, in the event that the project is abandoned, the project is either
completed or the site is restored to its condition prior to the commencement
of the project. The project shall be deemed abandoned if no substantial
construction is performed on the site for a period of one year and the
site plan approval has expired. The Board of Architectural and Site Plan
Review may also require documentary demonstration to its satisfaction of
the financial responsibility of the applicant to complete the project.
§ 600-7.11. Termination of approval; extensions.
Architectural and site plan approval shall automatically terminate one year
after issuance. Prior to the expiration of the one-year period, upon
application and the submission of an application fee, which shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, to the Superintendent
of Buildings, the architectural and site plan approval may be extended for
two additional six-month periods, upon good cause shown. The Board of
Trustees may, upon written application, extend the architectural and site
plan approval for additional one-year terms upon good cause shown. No
extension shall be granted by the Board of Trustees unless the applicant has
paid an extension fee in an amount set by the Board of Trustees.
§ 600-7.9 MALVERNE CODE § 600-7.11
1:428
ARTICLE VIII
Planning Board; Subdivision of Land
§ 600-8.0. Title.
This article shall be known as and cited as the "Planning Board Law" of the
Incorporated Village of Malverne.
§ 600-8.1. Appointments; terms of office; alternate members.
§ 600-8.2. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board of the Village of Malverne is hereby authorized and
empowered to:
A. There shall be a Planning Board of five members pursuant to the
provisions of the Village Law. Each member shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
B. The term of each member of the Planning Board shall be five official
years. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by the expiration of term,
it shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
C. The Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, may
appoint not more than three alternate members of the Planning Board.
Each such alternate member shall attend meetings of the Planning
Board and participate in its deliberations but shall vote only in the
event that a member of the Planning Board is absent or otherwise
unable to act with respect to a particular matter. When acting pursuant
to the authority provided hereby, such alternate member shall have all
of the rights and privileges of a member of the Planning Board. This
subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by § 10,
Subdivision (1)(ii)(e)(3), of the Municipal Home Rule Law and shall
supersede any provision of the Village Law which is inconsistent
herewith.
D. The Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall each
year designate one member of the Planning Board as Chairperson, who
shall serve until the commencement of the next official year or until a
successor has been designated and qualified. The Chairperson shall
have the duties and powers set forth in § 7-718 of the Village Law. This
subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by § 10,
Subdivision (1)(ii)(e)(3), of the Municipal Home Rule Law and shall
supersede any provision of the Village Law which is inconsistent
herewith.
E. In making appointments to the Planning Board, the Mayor and Board of
Trustees may require Planning Board members to complete training
and continuing education courses.
F. The Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall be
authorized to appoint a Secretary to the Planning Board.
§ 600-8.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.2
1:429
A. Upon the request of the Board of Trustees, study, report and make
recommendations on any proposed final action to be taken by the Board
of Trustees:
(1) Change or add to the Official Map of the Village so as to create or
abandon streets, highways or parks or to change the Village Zoning
Map or the Village Code provisions on zoning and related matters;
(2) Adopt or change any map of the Village or any part thereof relating
to extensions or relocations into new areas of primary elements of
the storm drainage or sanitary sewerage systems or the water
distribution pipe system, but excluding replacements or
reinforcements to meet operating problems;
(3) Act with respect to the location and site plan for public buildings
and the location and development of bridges, statues or
monuments, parking areas, parks, parkways, squares, playgrounds
or recreation grounds or public open spaces in the Village; and
(4) Preliminarily approve site plans where permitted by law.
B. Approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or
highways, and conditionally approve preliminary plats.
C. Approve subdivision applications submitted pursuant to Village Law
§ 7-728.
D. Advertise and hold public hearings when the Planning Board desires or
when required by law or the Planning Board's rules and regulations.
E. Consider changes to the rules and regulations relating to any subject
matter over which the Planning Board has jurisdiction, after a public
hearing. Recommendations for changes to the rules and regulations
shall be made to the Board of Trustees, and adoption shall be by local
law.
F. Make recommendations to the Board of Trustees on monetary
payments in lieu of land donations in new subdivisions, pursuant to
Village Law § 7-730, Subdivision (4)(c).
G. Require such performance bonds, letters of credit, insurance and
warranties as may be provided for under Article 7 of the Village Law.
H. Subject to the advance approval of the Board of Trustees, employ
experts, clerks and a secretary and pay for the services and such other
expenses as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the
appropriations which may be made for the Planning Board by the Board
of Trustees.
I. Impose such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
appropriate in connection with the approval of any application.
§ 600-8.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.2
1:430
§ 600-8.3. Approval of subdivisions.
§ 600-8.4. Subdivision procedures.
J. Consider and report on such other matters as may from time to time be
referred to the Planning Board by the Board of Trustees.
K. Exercise such further powers as may be delegated by resolution or local
law adopted or enacted by the Board of Trustees or conferred on
Planning Boards by state law.
A. No land may be subdivided without the approval of the Planning Board,
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Required submissions,
as set forth in this article, may be waived when the Planning Board, or
the Superintendent of Buildings or Public Works determines that
compliance is unnecessary for the comprehensive review of the
proposed subdivision. In addition, the Planning Board may require
additional information that it determines to be necessary to its review.
B. Where subdivision review is required, no building permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued by the Superintendent of Buildings, except
upon authorization of and in conformity with this chapter.
C. In all cases where a variance or special use permit is required, the
applicant shall first obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals,
or a special use permit from the appropriate reviewing board, before
proceeding with subdivision review.
D. Planning Board approval is not required when the Superintendent of
Buildings has issued a written determination that the proposed
development involves a subdivision of property into four or fewer lots,
provided that the subdivision does not involve a new street or road or
extension of water or sewer facilities or the installation of drainage
improvements through, or which serve, more than one lot.
A. Administrative review by the Superintendent of Buildings and
Superintendent of Public Works.
(1) Prior to a formal submission to the Building Department, the
applicant shall meet with a representative of the Building
Department to review the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall
submit an informal plan which shows the following:
(a) General layout of roads, blocks and lots.
(b) Areas of land reservations or open space.
(c) Proposed street improvements and utilities, including water
supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, electricity, fire
protection, lighting and landscaping.
(d) Availability of existing public services, such as police, fire,
sanitation, recreation and schools.
§ 600-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.4
1:431
(2) The Superintendent of Buildings shall refer the plan to the
Superintendent of Public Works, who shall address all engineering
issues, and may also refer the plan for comment to any Village
department that is relevant to the review of the plan.
B. Formal submission.
(1) A subdivision application shall be submitted along with a
preliminary plat, which shall be prepared by a New York State
registered architect, licensed professional engineer or licensed
land surveyor. The preliminary plat shall be submitted to the
Superintendent of Buildings and Superintendent of Public Works,
who shall review the plan and prepare recommendations on all
zoning and engineering issues, including, but not limited to, streets
and cul-de-sac dimensions, sewage, water, drainage, electric,
traffic, and fire protection access, that are included in or affected
by the plan. In addition, the Superintendent of Buildings or Public
Works may refer the proposal to any other Village department
relevant to the review of the submission for recommendations on
all subdivision issues included in or affected by the plan.
(2) Final plat. When required by the Planning Board, the final plat shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for its approval and shall
include the following:
(a) Approvals required by any other agencies or authorities.
(b) A complete set of all subdivision and construction plans.
(c) Irrevocable offers of dedication and/or development
agreements.
(d) Performance bonds, as determined to be necessary by the
Superintendent of Buildings or Public Works.
C. Fees.
(1) All submissions for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a
fee, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
(2) Such fees do not cover the cost of the Village's review of an
environmental assessment form (EAF) or an environmental impact
statement (EIS), if an EIS is determined to be necessary. The
applicant shall be responsible for the total cost of any
environmental review that is determined by the Superintendent of
Buildings, the Superintendent of Public Works or the Planning
Board to be necessary to meet the requirements of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
D. Required submissions to be provided prior to referring an application to
the Planning Board for a public hearing:
§ 600-8.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.4
1:432
(1) An application for subdivision review shall not be accepted by the
Village and shall not be referred to the Planning Board for a public
hearing until the Superintendent of Buildings determines it to be
complete, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Completeness. No application shall be deemed complete unless it
meets the information requirements listed in this section, and
unless it is accompanied by an environmental assessment form
(EAF).
(3) Submission requirements. The following items must be submitted
with an application for subdivision review:
(a) Subdivision review application on a form provided by or
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings.
(b) The name and address of the applicant and licensed
professionals engaged to work on the project shall be shown.
Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, this shall
include the names and addresses of all officers, directors and
principal stockholders.
(c) Filing fee.
(d) Twelve plot plans prepared by a professional engineer,
registered architect or professional licensed land surveyor,
which shall show the following:
[1] For each lot, the proposed setback, side yards, rear yard
and plot area coverage.
[2] Proposed and existing elevations of the four corners of the
subject property and elevation of adjacent properties.
[3] Location of driveways, curb cuts, roads and pedestrian
walkways.
[4] All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the
subdivision onto public streets, and design and type of
construction of all pedestrian access and circulation.
[5] Location of outdoor storage, including but not limited to
materials, refuse and similar items.
[6] Any proposed streets and culs-de-sac, showing the width
and grade.
[7] Location and size of any required dry well(s).
[8] The title of the drawing, including the name and address of
the applicant, the owner and the person responsible for
preparation of such drawings and date.
§ 600-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.4
1:433
[9] North arrow, with the true north direction at the top of the
map.
[10] The location of existing water mains, culverts and drains
on the property, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of
flow.
[11] Location and design of all existing and proposed site
improvements, including walls, fences, hedges and screen
plantings and all existing trees on the subject property
which have at least one trunk of eight inches in diameter
or greater, at a height of 4 1/2 feet above the ground.
[12] Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants.
[13] Location and design of all utilities, including electrical, gas
and solar energy, telephone and cable television.
[14] Location, size, design and type of construction of all
proposed signs.
[15] Local and proposed development of all buffer areas,
including existing vegetative cover.
[16] Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities and
means of illumination showing lighting levels achieved
over the entire site.
[17] General landscaping plan and planting schedule.
[18] Existing reference monuments with their symbol and
additional monuments as required.
[19] Title of the proposed subdivision.
[20]Key map at a scale of 250 feet to the inch and location
diagram at a scale of 3,000 feet to the inch.
(e) Certified survey of the property to be subdivided that has been
prepared no more than one year prior to submission.
(f) Twelve copies of a radius map, which shall include the
following information:
[1] Radius map from the Village Tax Map showing all lots
within a radius of 200 feet from all corners of the property
in question, designating map name, block, lot(s), street
addresses, size of plot and name of the owner of each
parcel within said radius in accordance with the Village tax
description.
[2] Existing school, zoning and special district boundaries.
§ 600-8.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.4
1:434
(g) If applicable, setback from the street line of all existing
dwellings on the same side of the street within the same block
of the proposed dwelling or dwellings.
(h) Reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public
use, if any.
(i) Existing site conditions, which shall include the location of
existing buildings and, if applicable, water bodies, floodplains,
and floodplain boundaries as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetative cover, all trees
eight inches in diameter or greater at a height of 4 1/2 feet
above the ground, and other significant existing features on
the site. This submission shall include a report of any trees of
the above stated dimensions that have been removed within a
twelve-month period prior to the subdivision application, along
with a tree replacement plan satisfactory to the
Superintendent of Buildings.
(j) If the building plot is a split-off from an existing plot with
dwelling, 12 surveys of the existing dwelling and all structures
showing setback, side yards, front yard, rear yard, and plot
area coverage.
(k) The extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas,
including before-and-after profiles and cross-section of typical
development areas, parking lots and roads, and including any
erosion and sedimentation control plan, if applicable.
(l) Lines and dimensions of all property offered, or to be offered,
for dedication for public use, indicating the purpose of all
property that is proposed to be served by deed covenant for the
common use of the property owners of the development.
(m) Any park to be developed for a playground or other
recreational purpose.
(n) Estimated project construction schedule and completion date,
after all requisite approvals have been obtained.
(o) Identification of any federal, state or county permits required
for project execution.
(p) Record of application and approval status of all necessary
permits from federal, state and county agencies or authorities.
(q) A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended
to cover all or any part of the tract.
(r) Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less, referring to
Village of Malverne datum and showing at least one
benchmark.
§ 600-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.4
1:435
§ 600-8.5. Public hearings.
(s) All proposed lots, easements and public and community areas;
all proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and crosssections
showing width of roadway, location and width of
sidewalk and location and size of utility lines according to the
standards and specifications established or approved by the
Superintendent of Buildings and the Village of Malverne.
(t) A description of the method of public water supply, stormwater
and sewage disposal and the location of such facilities and
estimated volumes.
(u) Identification of the location and amount of building area
proposed for each intended use, including storage and
common areas.
(v) Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Planning Board, including but not
limited to traffic studies, elevations and scale models.
(w) Any other information that may be required by the
Superintendent of Buildings, Public Works or the Planning
Board.
A. Every referral by the Superintendent of Buildings to the Planning Board
for public hearing and action on an application for subdivision review
shall be accompanied by a report prepared by the Superintendents of
Buildings and Public Works and any other Village department which has
reviewed the formal submission. The report shall state that the
application is complete, and shall include all required submissions and
recommendations.
B. Scheduling of public hearing.
(1) Upon the acceptance of a completed application, the application
shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with New
York State Village Law § 7-728. The public hearing shall be
scheduled to review the preliminary plat, in accordance with
Village Law § 7-728(5).
(2) At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall
have the option to either convert the preliminary plat into a final
plat or to direct the developer to prepare a final plat, for review at a
subsequent public hearing, in accordance with New York State
Village Law § 7-728(6). Prior to exercising its option to convert the
preliminary plat into a final plat, the Planning Board shall take into
consideration any comments from the public and the
Superintendent of Buildings and Public Works in making this
determination.
§ 600-8.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.5
1:436
§ 600-8.6. Standards for subdivision review.
C. Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). For
its review of any subdivision, the Planning Board shall comply with
SEQRA and its implementing regulations and shall conduct and
complete its SEQRA review in coordination with commencing the public
hearing on the review of the plats, and in accordance with New York
State Village Law.
D. Notice to property owners within a two-hundred-foot radius. The public
hearing shall not commence unless the applicant has provided the
Secretary of the Planning Board with the following:
(1) Names and addresses of owners, designating the map name, block,
and lot(s) in accordance with the Village tax description.
(2) Proof that notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, has
been provided to all owners within the required two-hundred-foot
radius at least 15 days, and no more than 25 days, before the
scheduled hearing date. The notice to the owners must state the
nature of the application, date of hearing, location, and address of
the property to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Buildings.165
(3) Certified mail receipts given to the Secretary of the Planning Board
no later than two days before the date of the meeting.
A. In reviewing an application for subdivision approval, the Planning
Board shall consider the requirements and recommendations submitted
by the Superintendent of Buildings and Public Works, as well as
requirements and recommendations of any other Village department
which has reviewed the application.
B. The Planning Board shall consider the:
(1) Relationship of and compatibility of the proposed development to
the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Ecological considerations, including the adequacy of water supply,
electrical power, preservation of trees, preservation of topography,
preservation of environmentally sensitive land, natural resources,
and tree replacement.
(3) Adequacy of proposed sidewalks, streets and culs-de-sac, including
length, width and suitable grade, and the ability of proposed
streets to facilitate and provide access, ingress, egress and
maneuverability of fire-fighting equipment and waste collection
vehicles.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.6
1:437
§ 600-8.7. Planning Board action on subdivision applications.
(4) Adequacy of proposed streets to create a safe vehicular and
pedestrian traffic system to mitigate the impact to adjacent
properties and to minimize the impact of off-site properties from
traffic generated by the development.
(5) Adequacy of proposed streets to complement adjacent street
systems.
(6) Adequacy of proposed design of streets to ensure that they are of
sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably located to
accommodate the prospective traffic.
(7) Adequacy of storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewer systems,
waste disposal facilities, utility services, and water mains, as
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works or a New York
State licensed professional acceptable to the Planning Board, to
ensure that the lots that result from the subdivision can be
adequately drained without damaging neighboring properties.
(8) Traffic impact on surrounding streets and on the Village overall to
ensure adequate access, visibility and safety.
(9) Adequacy of on-site circulation, including but not limited to the
arrangement of vehicular traffic, ingress and egress, driveway
connections to public streets, intersections, road widths and traffic
control, with satisfactory access for emergency vehicles and
maintenance equipment.
(10) On-site pedestrian and bicyclist circulation, including but not
limited to the separation of pedestrian traffic from vehicular traffic,
and locations of walkways and intersections.
(11) Provision of parkland or recreation area.
(12) Conformance to local Comprehensive Plan, local zoning and land
use controls.
(13) Compliance with County Department of Health and Department of
Public Works requirements.
(14) Compliance with New York State Department of Transportation
requirements, where applicable.
A. Required referrals, decisions, notice of decision, and filing of decision
shall be made in accordance with New York State Village Law
§ 7-728(7), (9) and (11), and shall include findings of fact pertaining to
the general standards set forth in § 600-8.6B.
B. The Planning Board shall act by written resolution to approve,
disapprove, or approve with modifications the subdivision plans. A
resolution of either approval or approval with modifications shall
§ 600-8.6 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.7
1:438
§ 600-8.8. Stamping of subdivision.
§ 600-8.9. Reservation of parkland on subdivision plats containing
residential units.
include Planning Board authorization to the Planning Board Chair to
stamp and sign the site plan upon the applicant's compliance with the
submission requirements stated therein.
C. If the Planning Board's resolution includes a requirement that
modifications be incorporated in the subdivision plan, conformance
with the modifications shall be considered a condition of approval and
shall be satisfied prior to signing of the subdivision.
D. If the subdivision is disapproved, the Planning Board's resolution shall
state specific reasons for such decision. The reasons must be based
upon professional standards and may not be based upon generalized
community opposition to a particular project.
E. Upon approval or approval with modifications, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall issue the appropriate permit if the project conforms to
all other applicable requirements.
F. Upon disapproval, the Planning Board shall inform the Superintendent
of Buildings, in writing, who shall not issue a building permit for the
proposed use or action.
G. No time limit upon which the Planning Board shall be required to act
shall begin to run until the conclusion of the public hearings on the
subdivision and the issuance of SEQRA findings. Failure on the part of
the Planning Board to act within the time limits set forth in New York
State Village Law § 7-728(6) and (7) shall not be deemed to constitute
approval. Any time limits may be extended at the sole discretion of the
Planning Board.
A. After receiving approval from the Planning Board, with or without
modifications, the applicant shall, within six calendar months, submit
originals of the approved subdivision plat to the Planning Board for
stamping and signature by the Planning Board Chair. The subdivision
plat submitted for stamping shall conform strictly to the subdivision
plat approved by the Planning Board, except that it shall further
incorporate any revisions or other modifications required by the
Planning Board's resolution.
B. Upon stamping and signature by the Planning Board Chair, the
Planning Board shall forward a copy of the approved subdivision plat to
the Superintendent of Buildings and the applicant.
A. Legislative intent. The Village of Malverne (Village) finds that the
provision of parkland and recreation facilities in conjunction with a
development containing residential units is necessary to meet the
needs of its residents. Where it is not practical for a particular
§ 600-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.9
1:439
§ 600-8.10. Reimbursement of expenses required.
Assistance to the Planning Board. Such Board shall have the authority
to call upon any department, agency or employee of the Village or to
seek consultation or professional assistance (including but not limited to
engineering, architectural and legal). All applicants under this article shall
be required to pay the cost associated with such consultants or
professionals. No subdivision approval or building permit shall be issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter until the applicant reimburses the
Village for all such expenses. At the time of application, and throughout the
review process, the Planning Board or the Superintendent of Buildings may
require an applicant to deposit with the Village Clerk such amounts to cover
such fees and expenses. In instances where such expenses are minimal, the
development to provide parkland and recreational facilities, the Village
finds that in lieu of providing such facilities, funds shall be deposited
with the Village to be used exclusively for parks, playgrounds or
recreation facilities, including the acquisition of property.
B. Before the Planning Board may approve a subdivision, the subdivision
plat shall also show, when required by such Planning Board, a park or
parks suitably located for playground or other recreational facilities.
C. Land for park, playground or other recreational facilities may not be
required until the Planning Board has made a finding that a proper case
exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreation facilities within the Village. Such
findings shall include an evaluation of the present and anticipated
future needs for park and recreation facilities in the Village based on
projected population growth to which the particular subdivision will
contribute.
D. In the event the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to Subsection
C that the proposed subdivision presents a proper case for requiring a
park or parks suitably located for playgrounds or other recreation
purposes, but that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be
properly located on such subdivision, the Planning Board may require a
sum of money in lieu thereof, to be established by the Village Board of
Trustees. In making a determination of suitability, the Planning Board
shall assess the size and suitability of land shown on the subdivision
that could be possible locations for park or recreational facilities, as
well as practical factors, including whether there is a need for
additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood or a need for
improvements to or the acquisition of parks, playgrounds or other
recreational purposes that may be used by the population of the
particular subdivision. Any fee required by the Planning Board in lieu of
land for park, playground or other recreation purposes or facilities
pursuant to this section shall be deposited into a trust fund to be used
by the Village exclusively for park, playground and other recreational
purposes, including the acquisition of property.
§ 600-8.9 MALVERNE CODE § 600-8.10
1:440
requirement for reimbursement of expenses may be waived by the Planning
Board.
§ 600-8.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8.10
1:441

ARTICLE IX
Signs
§ 600-9.0. Purpose; definitions; legal notices.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable
regulations for all signs in the Village of Malverne in order to:
(1) Further the objectives of the Village Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Protect the value of property in the Village;
(3) Protect the health, safety and general welfare;
(4) Protect the essential character of residential neighborhoods and
nonresidential areas of the Village;
(5) Facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community;
and
(6) Reduce traffic hazards.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated, unless the context otherwise indicates:
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SIGN — That portion of any building or structure or any billboard,
signboard, sandwich board, banner, pennant or other temporary or
permanent object, shape, device, image or merchandise, displayed or
used as an advertisement, announcement or direction, and all text,
symbols, shapes, lights, marks, letters or figures affixed thereto,
painted thereon or incorporated therein. Any motor vehicles habitually
parked so that markings, signboards, merchandise, images, etc.,
positioned thereon or located therein as business advertising may be
viewed from an adjacent street or highway shall be deemed to
constitute a sign. Any vending machine located on premises occupied
by a business shall not be deemed a sign, provided that the same is not
illuminated. Illuminated machines shall be deemed signs.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign directing attention to a business,
commodity, service, event, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or
existing other than upon the same lot where such sign is sited or only
incidentally sold, offered or existing upon such lot.
SIGN PERMIT — A type of building permit issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings, or the Building Inspector, authorizing the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of a sign.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE OR CONSTRUCTION — A type of temporary sign
advertising the availability for sale or rental of a realty subdivision, a
parcel of land or a lot or improvements thereto during the period of
such availability but in no case for a period of more than 180 days.
§ 600-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-9.0
1:443
§ 600-9.1. Signs in residential districts.
No sign shall be displayed in any residential district, other than by a
governmental authority, except as follows:
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which directs attention to an activity or
event on the lot on which the sign is located immediately prior to and/or
during the pendency of such event, and which is removed immediately
upon the conclusion of same.
C. Legal notices. These regulations shall not apply to signs placed on any
property to provide legal notice to the public where such notice and
such sign are required by the terms of any law, ordinance,
governmental regulation, court decree or administrative order.
However, in the case of gasoline price signs and other similar external
signs required by law to be posted by certain businesses or special use
permits, any characteristic of the sign, such as maximum size, color,
exact on-site location, etc., not specifically determined by the law
requiring the sign shall be subject to site plan and/or architectural and
design approval in the same manner as any other sign on the property.
A. Temporary signs as permitted in § 600-9.2.
B. An identification sign shall be required for each residence, which shall
be one sign, which shall not exceed two square feet in area, displaying
not more than the name and street number of the occupant of the
premises and, in the case of a permitted office, studio or occupational
room, the identification thereof. Such sign shall not be placed within a
distance of three feet from any street or property line, and all
freestanding signs shall not exceed four feet in height above ground
level.
C. One sign or bulletin board, not exceeding eight square feet in area, on
church, institutional or school property, giving the identification thereof
or advertising the activities thereof, or both. Such sign shall not be
placed within a distance of 10 feet from any street or property line and
shall not exceed six feet in height above ground level.
D. One sign, which shall not exceed one square foot in area, indicating that
the premises are protected by a security company. Such sign shall not
be placed within a distance of three feet from any property line and
shall not exceed two feet in height above ground level. Signs on
windows, not exceeding 36 square inches, indicating that the premises
are protected by a security company, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
E. No signs shall have characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes or use reflective or
fluorescent paint or material.
F. All signs permitted pursuant to this section shall have lettering only on
one side and shall be attached to the premises or shall be displayed on a
§ 600-9.0 MALVERNE CODE § 600-9.1
1:444
§ 600-9.2. Temporary signs in residential districts.
stationary rod or post. As set forth in these sections, no sign shall be
attached to a tree, bush, hydrant, telephone pole, car or lamp post. No
sign shall be placed so as to obstruct a clear view of a street from any
intersecting street.
A. Temporary signs. Real estate, construction, open house and other
temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with this section.
B. Real estate signs shall be permitted, provided such signs contain only
the words "for sale," "for lease," "for rent" or "open house" and, at the
option of the applicant, the word "owner" or "broker" and a telephone
number.
C. No more than one temporary sign may be in effect at any one time for a
single parcel of property.
D. Size of real estate or construction signs. No real estate or construction
sign shall be larger than one square foot in area.166
E. Placement of real estate and construction signs. No real estate or
construction sign shall be posted, erected or maintained other than in
the front window of a residence.167
F. Expiration and removal of temporary signs.
(1) Real estate signs must be removed within 24 hours of the transfer
of the title to the property or the giving of possession of the
property, whichever event first occurs, except that "open house"
signs shall be removed at the conclusion of the open house.
(2) All other temporary signs shall be erected no more than 10 days
prior to the event or activity advertised and shall be removed at the
conclusion of the event or activity.
G. Special regulations for "open house" signs.
(1) "Open house" signs shall require a permit from the Superintendent
of Buildings. Upon proper application and submission of an
application fee which shall be set, from time to time, by resolution
of the Board of Trustees and upon such conditions as the Board of
Trustees may prescribe, the placement of "open house" signs is
permitted on Saturdays and Sundays solely between the hours of
12:00 noon and 4:00 p.m. Only one such sign may be placed on any
property.
(2) Any such sign may be double-sided and shall contain no more than
the words "open house," the property address, and the name and
telephone number of the owner or agent of the open house location.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-9.2
1:445
§ 600-9.3. Signs in nonresidential districts.
Such sign shall not exceed a total of four square feet. Such sign
shall be placed on a location on the property so not to impede,
hinder, or make unsafe any sidewalk or public right-of-way. No sign
shall be placed in any location on any corner property in any way
that shall impede, hinder, or make unsafe the line-of-sight triangle
for traffic.
(3) Any such sign may be placed only on private property and only with
the consent of the property owner.
(4) Directional signs to the "open house," up to a maximum of four such
signs, may be placed curbside. Any such directional signs may
contain only the words "open house," the property address, and a
directional arrow. Such directional signs shall in all other respects
comply with the requirements of Subsection G(1), (2) and (3) of this
section.
(5) "Open house" and directional signs shall be removed immediately
upon the completion of the open house but in no event more than
one hour after the completion of the open house.
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be
unlawful to erect, construct, paint, alter, relocate, reconstruct, display
or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, painted altered,
relocated, reconstructed, displayed or maintained within the
nonresidential districts any sign unless a written permit therefor has
been obtained from the Superintendent of Buildings as hereinafter
provided. An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the
following:
(1) A drawing showing the lettering, color and pictorial matter of the
sign, a description of the construction details of the sign structure,
a location plan showing the position of the sign on the building or
premises, and such other information as the Superintendent of
Buildings may reasonably require to show compliance with
provisions of this section.
(2) A written statement showing the name of the owner and the name
of the person in control of the building or the premises where such
sign is to be located, and the right or authority of the applicant to
apply for a permit.
B. Placement, size and other requirements. In addition to the other
requirements of this article, any sign, other than political signs as
defined in § 600-9.5, erected, constructed, painted, altered, relocated,
reconstructed, displayed or maintained in a nonresidential district shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Except as provided for in this article, a sign may be placed only
upon the front or face or side of a building or on the interior or
§ 600-9.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-9.3
1:446
exterior surface of any front, side or rear window thereof or on
an awning or canopy and must be constructed and maintained
parallel with the building wall to which it is attached and extending
outward from such wall not more than 12 inches unless located
upon an awning or canopy where it shall extend no more than
three feet from such wall. No more than one sign per exterior wall
shall be permitted. One of the signs shall be deemed the main
sign. An additional three signs shall be permitted and be deemed
subordinate to the main sign. Each of the three subordinate signs
shall be no greater than 75% of the main sign and no sign shall
adjoin or face a residential district or parcel. There shall be no
more than four signs, except that the Board of Trustees may permit
one additional sign in accordance with Subsection H.
(2) The maximum area of the main sign referenced in Subsection B(1)
shall not exceed 24 square feet and the vertical dimension shall not
exceed two feet.
(3) The upper edge of each sign shall not be located above the top of
the building, and no part of such sign shall extend above the top or
beyond the ends of the building wall upon which it is placed.
(4) More than one sign for each building is permitted, provided that
the combined signs for each such building do not exceed the
maximum limitations for a single sign as herein prescribed.
(5) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any sign may be
painted on the inner or outer surface of a window, provided that it
meets with all other requirements of this section.
(6) Such signs shall advertise only the business conducted or products
sold on the premises.
C. No neon signs or internally illuminated signs shall be permitted. All
lighting on signs must be through detached fixtures directed at the
sign. In addition, lighting in a nonresidential district shall be arranged
and affixed in such a way that no direct light rays from any light used in
such illumination shall penetrate a residential district or impede traffic
within the Village. Any lighting constituting a nuisance to neighboring
residences or buildings or the occupants thereof is strictly prohibited.
D. No illuminated signs of a flashing, flickering, intermittently lighted or
similar nature, nor animated illuminated signs known as "spectaculars,"
shall be permitted.
E. No right-angle or projecting signs shall be permitted.
F. No sign or other advertising structure or device shall be erected or
maintained where, because of the size, location, shape, height,
wording, design or lighting, such sign might be confused as a traffic
directional or "stop" sign, or might interfere with the vision or
§ 600-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-9.3
1:447
§ 600-9.4. Temporary signs in nonresidential districts.
A temporary sign shall be permitted for advertising and sales of
merchandise or other special occasions, subject to the following conditions:
§ 600-9.5. Political signs.
discernment of a traffic directional or stop-and-go sign, or might
otherwise imperil the safety of travel on streets and highways.
G. Signs erected or maintained by the Village, or other governmental
authorities, in the discharge of their official duties or functions are
exempt from the regulations of this article.
H. If a building abuts on a public parking field, one additional sign
conforming to the conditions of this article may be erected on the rear
or side wall facing such parking field by special use permit from the
Board of Trustees.
I. Billboard signs shall be prohibited.
A. No more than one sign, which shall cover no more than 40% of each
window, shall be used to advertise special occasions or the sale of
merchandise.
B. The legend on the sign shall be directly related to the business activity
carried on by the occupant of the business premises.
C. The duration of the temporary sign shall be no longer than two calendar
weeks, except that where the second calendar week expires on a
Thursday or Friday, the sign may be displayed for the weekend
immediately following.
D. No signs shall be on neon or neon paper, or internally illuminated.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary signs placed
within the windows of retail establishments of the business district by
charitable, religious or eleemosynary organizations.
F. All temporary signs in nonresidential districts shall satisfy all of the
requirements of § 600-9.2.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and protect the
public health, welfare and safety by regulating the use of political signs
so that they are compatible with their surroundings. It is intended to
protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the
community, preserve the scenic and natural beauty and provide a more
enjoyable and pleasing community. It is further intended to reduce sign
clutter, distractions, and obstructions that may contribute to traffic
accidents, to provide more open space and to curb the deterioration of
the community environment.
§ 600-9.3 MALVERNE CODE § 600-9.5
1:448
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
POLITICAL SIGN — Any device, illuminated or nonilluminated,
identification, description or illustration, which is visible by the public,
which indicates the name, cause or affiliation of anyone seeking public
office, or which indicates any issue for which a public election is
scheduled to be held.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of
the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof
that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, graphic
illustration, picture, symbol or other display, together with any material
or color forming an integral part of the background of the sign and used
to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it is placed. No sign shall have more than two display faces. The sign
area for a sign with two faces shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When a sign having
two faces is such that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at
the same time, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of
the larger of the two faces.
C. General political sign requirements.
(1) All political signs permitted by this section shall be erected and
maintained not more than 10 feet from any side property line, and
not less than 15 feet from a driveway.
(2) All political signs permitted by this section shall not exceed four
square feet.
(3) No more than two political signs regulated by this section are
permitted for the premises or parcel.
(4) No political signs may be erected prior to 30 days before the public
action for which signs were placed.
(5) Political signs must be removed no later than three days after the
public action for which said signs were placed.
D. Prohibited political signs and political sign features:
(1) Signs which are not designed, constructed or maintained in
accordance with these provisions, which are not compatible with
the objectives of this section or which do not meet the
requirements of all applicable state, county, town and federal
codes.
(2) Signs which, by reason of location, size, color or design, interfere
with public traffic or are confused with or obstruct the view or
effectiveness of any official traffic signal or traffic marking; signs
which interfere with traffic or driver vision, impede pedestrian
traffic, or otherwise present a safety hazard.
§ 600-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-9.5
1:449
§ 600-9.6. Removal of sign identifying tenant or business.
No later than 60 days after a tenant has vacated a premises, any exterior
signs identifying such tenant or business shall be removed by the building
owner and the facade of the building shall be restored.
§ 600-9.7. Enforcement; appeals.
§ 600-9.8. Application fees.
Applicant shall be required to pay those fees as set forth, from time to time,
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(3) Billboards, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or other similar
devices.
(4) Flashing signs, illuminated signs, neon signs, roof signs, signs
containing moving parts or appearing to move, and signs which
sparkle or twinkle in the sunlight.
(5) "A" frame signs and sandwich board signs.
(6) Signs which are attached to any utility pole, telephone or lighting
pole, traffic device, hydrant, tree, sign posts.
(7) Portable signs not supported by a sign structure in the ground or
attached to or erected against a building or structure, except as
may be specifically permitted by the terms of this section.
(8) Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, pornographic or immoral character or which contain
advertising matter which is untruthful, or as otherwise prohibited
by state or federal law.
(9) Signs located wholly within the residence, subject to any other
ordinances or regulations enacted by the Village of Malverne
related thereto.
(10) Signs along public roadways and on public property.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Buildings and
of any other person authorized by resolution of the Board of Trustees to
enforce the provisions of this article. Any sign not in conformity with
this article may be removed without notice to the property owner or the
owner of the sign.
B. Appeals. Any person seeking review of the action of the Superintendent
of Buildings, the Building Inspector or any other Code Enforcement
Officer may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 600-9.5 MALVERNE CODE § 600-9.9
1:450
§ 600-9.9. Additional regulations.168
For additional sign regulations, see Chapter 491, Signs, of the Village Code.
168. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-9.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-9.9
1:451

ARTICLE X
Fences
§ 600-10.0. Permit required; notification of adjacent properties.
§ 600-10.1. Contractor's license required.
Contractors that erect fences or who contract with residents to erect fences
within the Village shall obtain a contractor's license issued by the Village,
after payment of the appropriate fee, as established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, valid for the date or dates of erection of
the fence.
§ 600-10.2. Regulations for permitted fences.
A. No fence may be erected on any property within the Village unless an
application is submitted to, approved by and a permit issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings. Such applicant must also pay a permit fee,
as established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
and present a survey of the premises or lot so that a true and accurate
location of the proposed fence can be determined. It shall be a violation
to commence to erect a fence, or to allow a fence to be erected, without
first obtaining a fence permit.
B. Applications for fences that require Zoning Board of Appeals approval
shall not require a two-hundred-foot radius map notification for a
variance pertaining to the height of a fence involving non-front-yard
fences. Those applications shall require certified mailings to all
adjoining properties only. All other fence variances shall require the
two-hundred-foot radius map notification.169
A. Regulations in residential districts. Fences may be erected to a height
not to exceed five feet, measured from adjacent finished grade to the
highest point of the fence, except that fence posts may be 5 1/2 feet
measured from adjacent finished grade. Where the contour of the land
contains abrupt changes of grade, the fence may be stepped with the
five-foot height measured over grade, as an average for an eight-foot
linear section of fence.
B. Regulations in nonresidential districts.
(1) In nonresidential districts, or on any residential lot which is
adjacent to any nonresidential district or lot, fences may be
finished to a height of six feet, measured from adjacent finished
grade to the highest point of the fence, except that fence posts may
be 6 1/2 feet measured from adjacent finished grade. Where the
contour of the land contains abrupt changes of grade, the fence
may be stepped with the six-foot height measured over grade, as an
average for an eight-foot linear section of fence.
169. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-10.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-10.2
1:453
(2) Where a nonresidential lot abuts a residential zone to the rear of
the lot, an appropriately landscaped and screened buffer of no less
than 10% of the nonresidential lot depth shall be created along
such abutting line.
(3) Where a nonresidential lot abuts a residential zone, which zone is
located to the side of the nonresidential lot, an appropriately
landscaped and screened buffer of no less than five feet shall be
created on the nonresidential plot along such abutting line.
C. Supplemental regulations applicable to all districts.
(1) No fence, except as provided in this article, shall be constructed or
installed in any front yard, or along or adjoining any street line, or
between the street line and the front building line of any improved
lot. No fences now existing in any front yard, or along or adjoining
any street line, or between the street line and the front building
line of any improved lot shall be replaced. Fences may be installed
in the interior side yards and the rear yards. No fence shall be
constructed or installed beyond the front corner of the primary
structure of the property upon which the fence will be constructed;
the primary structure shall not include any freestanding garage,
shed or storage facility. When a property abuts two or more streets,
the boundary of the property adjacent to a street which has the
shortest distance in linear feet shall be considered the front yard.
The boundary of the property adjacent to a street which has the
longest distance in linear feet shall be considered the "secondary
front" yard.
(2) No decorative fence as provided for in Subsection C(3) shall be
constructed or installed beyond the front corner of the primary
structure of the property upon which the fence will be constructed,
except that a decorative fence may be constructed or installed in a
secondary front yard adjoining or adjacent to streets, provided that
such decorative fencing as provided for in Subsection C(3) is
erected in any residential zone, parallel to said street at a
maximum distance from the primary structure of 1/2 of the
secondary front yard setback for the property but in no event closer
than 10 feet to the property line.
(3) Decorative fences may be erected to a height of four feet measured
from adjacent finished grade to the highest point of the fence,
except that fence posts may be 4 1/2 feet measured from adjacent
finished grade. Where the contour of the land contains abrupt
changes of grade, the fence may be stepped with the four-foot
height measured over average grade for an eight-foot linear section
of the fence. Said decorative fences shall be 50% open and shall be
of split rail or picket design.
(4) All fences, except those listed below, shall be constructed as near
as practicable to, but not more than 12 inches from, a property line:
§ 600-10.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-10.2
1:454
(a) Decorative fences as described in Subsection C(2) and (3).
(b) Any fence used to connect a primary structure to a fence
located along a property line.
(c) Landscaping fences less than one foot in height which are
intended to protect landscaping, including, but not limited to,
trees, shrubbery and gardens; however, such fences are not to
be placed in any manner that would present a hazard to
pedestrians on any public sidewalk or right-of-way.
(d) Fences surrounding swimming pools.
(5) A gate or permanent opening of at least three feet in width shall be
provided in any fence that fully encloses an area. No gate, when in
the open position, shall obstruct a public walkway.
(6) Except as allowed under this article, no fence shall be erected on
any lot adjacent to and/or adjoining the street line of that lot or at
any point between the street line of that lot and the primary
structure of that lot without the prior approval of the Zoning Board
of Appeals on proper application made to such Board. No fence now
existing on any lot adjacent to and/or adjoining the street line of
that lot or at any point between the street line of that lot and the
primary structure of that lot shall be replaced without the prior
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals on proper application
made to such Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in reviewing an
application for a variance for the erection of a fence other than a
fence allowed in this article, shall, in addition to other factors,
consider the following:
(a) The parcel size;
(b) The placement of structures upon the parcel, if any;
(c) The needs of the applicant;
(d) The type, size and height of the fence to be installed;
(e) The proximity of structures upon adjacent parcels;
(f) The type, size and height of fences upon adjacent parcels;
(g) The proximity of driveways upon the parcel;
(h) The proximity of driveways upon adjacent parcels;
(i) The safety and welfare of persons using sidewalks and public
rights-of-way on the parcel;
(j) The safety and welfare of persons using sidewalks and public
rights-of-way on adjacent parcels;
(k) The safety and welfare of the applicant; and
§ 600-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-10.2
1:455
§ 600-10.3. Prohibited fences.
The following fences are prohibited in the Village of Malverne:
§ 600-10.4. Special fencing districts.
The Board of Trustees may, after a public hearing, designate any street
or streets as a Special Fencing District, due to the unique situation(s)
(l) Any other factors relevant to the application.
(7) Nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the
repair, as distinguished from replacement, of a legally preexisting,
nonconforming fence. A fence shall be deemed to be replaced and
not repaired if the cost of such alteration or repair is greater than
50% of the current structural replacement value of the
nonconforming fence.
A. Chicken wire, barbed wire, razor wire, welded mesh wire, electrically
charged fences and any material intended to cause injury to a person or
animal making contact with the same.
B. Snow fences.
C. Fences made of solid plywood, flake board, scrap lumber, and similar
noncustomary fence materials.
D. Fences made of common concrete or cinder block.
E. Fences topped with sharp-edged or spiked material, except this shall
not prohibit picket fences.
F. Fences on any portion of any public right-of-way, except fences erected
by a government entity or authority.
G. Fences, shrubs or hedges that interfere with clear vision at or near a
street intersection. No fence, hedge and/or shrubbery shall be erected
less than 15 feet from a street intersection, as measured by a triangle
from the closest intersecting corner.
H. Fences so constructed as to prevent natural water drainage and/or
runoff.
I. Fences with posts with the rough or unfinished side of the fence facing
toward the street or neighboring property, except when such fence is
abutting a commercial property, a property operating as a railroad, or a
property operating as a state parkway.
J. Construction fences, except that such fences shall be permitted when
construction has been approved by the Superintendent of Buildings and
commenced. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition at all
times and shall be removed upon the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or completion.
§ 600-10.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-10.4
1:456
arising on said street(s). When a Special Fencing District is designated, the
Board of Trustees shall delineate the type, location, size, height and the
requirements for fences in said district.
§ 600-10.5. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be
administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer. Violators are
subject to court action.
§ 600-10.6. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article is hereby declared to be an offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500. A person shall be subject to the penalties imposed
by this section in any case where an order to remove any violation of any
provision of this article has been served by the Superintendent of Buildings
upon the owner, general agent, managing agent, lessee or tenant of the
building, premises or lot, or any part thereof, or upon the architect, builder,
contractor or anyone who commits or assists in any such violation and
where such person shall fail to comply with such order within 10 calendar
days after the service thereof. Each calendar week's continued violation
shall constitute a separate and additional offense and shall be punishable as
such.
§ 600-10.7. Interpretation.
Whenever any provision of this article is in conflict with any statute or local
law applicable or covering the same subject matter, the most restrictive
provision or the one imposing the highest standard shall govern and be
supreme.
§ 600-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-10.7
1:457

ARTICLE XI
Swimming Pools
§ 600-11.0. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water
having a depth at any point greater than two feet, and constructed, installed
or maintained in or above the ground outside any building. A private
swimming pool shall be deemed a structure as defined in § 600-1.2B.
§ 600-11.1. Regulations for permitted swimming pools.
A. A private swimming pool may be constructed, installed and maintained
in any district only as an accessory structure to a main building used for
dwelling purposes and intended for occupancy by not more than one
family, for the exclusive use of the occupants of said main building and
their guests and only upon the conditions set forth in this article.
B. No private swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or maintained
unless:
(1) A permit therefor has been issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings in accordance with § 600-5.0.
(2) Such pool is installed entirely within the rear yard of the premises.
(3) The top level of an in-ground pool structure shall be not more than
six inches above the normal level of the rear yard of the premises.
(4) The pool shall be watertight and constructed of reinforced
concrete, welded steel sheets or any other material which is
watertight and nonabsorbent, having a thickness or gauge
approved by the Superintendent of Buildings, sufficient to insure
against collapse of the pool and leakage of water from the pool,
with a smooth inside surface and rounded corners, and so designed
and constructed to facilitate its cleaning.
(5) Distance from street line.
(a) The inside face of each wall of the pool shall be not less than:
[1] Five feet from any side or rear line of the premises;
[2] Twelve feet from the nearest point on the main building on
said premises; and
[3] Ten feet from the nearest point on any accessory building
or other accessory structure on said premises.
(b) The distance between any such inside face and the nearest
street line bounding the premises shall not be less than the
§ 600-11.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-11.1
1:459
§ 600-11.2. Fencing requirements.
§ 600-11.3. Water requirements; treatment; filters.
distance between such street line and that point on such main
building nearest such street line.
(6) Pools, and any other structures, excluding temporary structures,
shall not occupy more than 40% of the area of the rear yard. In
determining such rear-yard area, the portion or portions of the yard
occupied by any garage or other accessory structure located in the
rear yard shall be considered as part of the area of the rear yard.
(7) Diving boards or platforms or other structures used in connection
with such pool, excluding slides, shall be prohibited.
(8) All types of swimming pools shall be considered in calculating the
building area within a lot.170
A. There shall be erected and maintained a good quality split, sapling,
stockade or PVC picket fence, five feet in height above average grade,
enclosing entirely the area occupied by such pool, except that no fence
need be erected along any boundary of the pool area abutting on any
wall or walls of the main building on the premises, provided such fence
and wall or walls completely enclose the pool area. The pickets shall be
erected vertically and shall be butted against each other. The distance
between such fence and the nearest street line bounding the premises
shall at no point on such fence be less than the distance between such
street line and that point on the main building on said premises nearest
such street line.
B. There shall be only one opening in the fence enclosing such pool area,
and such opening shall be equipped with a gate or door of the selfclosing,
self-latching type, which shall be kept locked at all times except
when the pool is in actual use by the occupants of the premises or their
guests.
A. If the water for such pool is supplied from a private well, there shall be
no cross-connection with the public water supply system. If the water
for such pool is supplied from the public water supply system, the inlet
shall be not less than six inches above the overflow level of the pool.
B. Every private swimming pool shall be chemically treated in a manner
sufficient to maintain the bacterial standards presently and hereafter
established by the provisions of the New York State Sanitary Code
relating to public swimming pools.
C. Every private swimming pool shall be equipped with a permanent
(nonportable) pressure sand-filter system or an approved equal, having
170. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-11.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-11.3
1:460
§ 600-11.4. Peace and good order.
§ 600-11.5. Refilling upon discontinued use.
If the use of any private swimming pool shall be discontinued, the owner of
the premises on which such pool is located shall completely fill in the pool
with clean earth fill.
§ 600-11.6. Dry wells.
A dry well with the capacity of 10% of the pool volume shall be constructed
or installed within the rear yard of applicant's property.
sufficient capacity to provide a complete turnover of the pool water
each 24 hours or less.
A. No lighting shall be installed or maintained in connection with any
private swimming pool in such a manner as to throw any rays beyond
the property lines bounding the premises on which the pool is erected.
B. The use of radios, televisions, musical instruments, phonographs or
other devices for the production of sound in such a manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants is
prohibited.
§ 600-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-11.6
1:461

ARTICLE XII
Performance Standards
§ 600-12.0. Purpose and scope.
For the purpose of limiting the creation of effects of dangerous or
objectionable elements incident to the use of land or buildings, uses shall be
subject to the performance standard limitations of this article. Dangerous
and objectionable elements are disturbances which are hazardous,
injurious, noxious or otherwise offensive by reason of fire, explosion,
radioactivity or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, effluent
discharge or other pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare or flash;
and storage or discharge of waste or other material conducive to the
breeding of insects, rodents or other vermin.
§ 600-12.1. Procedure for issuance of permits.
§ 600-12.2. Performance standards.
No use shall be permitted in any district, the operation of which would
normally cause or result in:
A. An application for a building permit and certificate of occupancy for a
use subject to performance standards shall be accompanied by a plan of
the proposed use, including a description of proposed machinery,
operations and products, and specifications for devices and techniques
to be used in restricting the emission of dangerous or objectionable
elements, but no description of secret processes need be submitted. An
affidavit signifying that the use applied for meets the standards of this
article shall accompany the permit application.
B. After a determination that the proposed use conforms to the applicable
standards, the Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a permit,
provided that all other requirements of this chapter have been met. If
any reasonable doubt as to compliance with performance standards
exists, the Superintendent of Buildings shall refer the application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for determination. The Zoning Board may
employ expert consultants to investigate and report upon the proposed
use and shall specify a time within which the report shall be received. A
public hearing shall not be held until the report of the consultants has
been received. Any reasonable cost of such investigation and report
shall be paid by the applicant, and an estimate thereof shall be
furnished before a consultant is retained by the Board.
C. Any use subject to performance standards shall conform to the
regulations set forth in this section.
A. Dissemination of dust, smoke, gas, fumes or other atmospheric
pollutant beyond the boundaries of the parcel of land on which the
building in which such use is conducted is situation;
§ 600-12.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-12.2
1:463
§ 600-12.3. Enforcement.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall investigate any alleged violation
of performance standards, and if there is reasonable evidence of such
violation he shall order the violator to abate same. Each day's or hour's
continuing violation, as the case may be, shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation. The continued validity of a certificate of occupancy shall
be subject to compliance with performance standards.
B. Dissemination of any noise, vibration, radiation or odor beyond the
boundaries of the parcel of land on which such use is located;
C. Glare or flashing of lights in any manner that will cause hazard or
annoyance to the public generally or to the occupants of neighboring
property;
D. Hazard of fire or explosions;
E. Hauling of materials, goods or products to or from the site of such in a
volume or manner materially incongruous with the normal traffic on
streets in the neighborhood;
F. Danger or hazard to the health, safety or comfort of the community or
unreasonable disturbance or annoyance to the occupants of
neighboring property; or
G. The storage, discharge or use of waste or other material conducive to
the breeding of insects, rodents or other vermin.
§ 600-12.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-12.3
1:464
ARTICLE XIII
Supplemental District Regulations
§ 600-13.0. Additional commercial and business district
requirements.
§ 600-13.1. Additional lot and area requirements.
A. In any business district where any part of an upper story of a
nonresidence building is used for offices, studios or workshops, a court
is required along at least one side of such building when said building is
over 50 feet deep from a main front wall. The minimum width of such
court shall be four feet for a two-story building, and for each additional
story, one foot shall be added as the required width. For each foot that a
building is more than 25 feet in width, two inches shall be added to the
width of the required court. The depth of an inner court shall be nine
feet for a two-story building, 12 feet for a three- or four-story building,
and for each additional story, one foot shall be added. Where any part of
a story in such a district is used for residence purposes, the width of an
outer court on the lot line, measured from the lot line to the nearest
wall of the building, shall be at least five feet for a one-story building,
6 1/2 feet for a two-story building, eight feet for a three-story building,
and shall be increased in width one foot for each additional story in
height throughout the entire length of said court, beginning at a point
35 feet back from the main front wall. If no part of a building is
occupied for offices, studios, workshops or residence purposes, no
court is required.
B. In any commercial district, where no part of a building is used for
residence purposes, except by a janitor or watchman, no court shall be
required; otherwise, all courts shall conform to the requirements of
Subsection A.
C. In any business or commercial district, side yards are not required for
nonresidence buildings in the event that a fire passage is provided as
herein required, but a side yard may be used in place of a fire passage,
or a required court if of corresponding width; but, for a building used
entirely for residence purposes in any such districts, the same yards
shall be required as are prescribed for residence districts.
A. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained,
nearer the corner than a line connecting points in each street 10 feet
from the measured line along such street or which may cause danger to
traffic on the street by obscuring the view.
B. No lot area shall be so reduced and no building shall be erected or
altered so that the dimensions of any of the open spaces shall be less
than herein prescribed.
§ 600-13.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.1
1:465
§ 600-13.2. Allowed projections and encroachments.
Steps and landings solely used for egress, chimneys not projecting more
than two feet, and bay windows that do not aggregate in width more
than 1/2 of the width of the frontage of the building may project not
more than three feet in front of it. No porch or piazza may project in
front of the main wall above the second story. No projections shall project
beyond the front line of apartment buildings except molded cornices, sills,
pilasters and base courses not to exceed four inches; also, ornamental,
nonsupporting pilasters or columns, entablatures, pediments and steps at
the main entrance doorways may project out 18 inches beyond the wall line
where the buildings sit back 15 feet or more. This section shall not apply,
however, to buildings erected in a Residence A District.
§ 600-13.3. Decks.
C. The area required in a yard at any given level shall be open from such
level to the sky unobstructed except for parapets above the bottom of
such yard and except for the ordinary projection of window sills,
cornices and other ornamental features to the extent of not more than
18 inches.
A. A deck is defined as any fabrication of any material other than earth or
masonry product, that is constructed above the grade level of the
location where situated. Except to the extent that an exemption is
provided herein, all requirements heretofore established for structures
shall continue to apply to those structures generally referred to or
described as a "deck."
B. Regulations.
(1) Building permits shall be required for the construction of decks,
subject to inspection by the Superintendent of Buildings, to the
same extent as are required for other structures. The application
for a permit shall include a diagram of the proposed deck
satisfactory to the Building Department, showing dimensions and
distances of the deck to the boundary of the parcel in addition to
the materials to be utilized in said construction.
(2) No deck shall be constructed closer to the street than the front
building line of the main structure upon the property.
(3) No deck(s) shall be constructed or maintained so that any portion
thereof exists above the first story of the dwelling to which it is
accessory, except in the case of a high-ranch-type house, in which
case the deck shall not be constructed at a level higher than the
lowest floor of the residence in question. [Amended 6-21-2018 by
L.L. No. 3-2018]
(4) Decks above 10 inches in height above average grade shall be
considered structures for the purpose of calculating the
§ 600-13.1 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.3
1:466
§ 600-13.4. Fees and deposits.
permissible area of coverage on the building lot; and if removable,
decks shall not be deemed a permanent improvement.171
(5) A deck or similar structure, including patios, constructed at grade
level or less than 10 inches above grade in the rear yard shall not
require a permit.
(6) All decks shall comply with the side yard and rear yard setback
requirements for the zoning district in which the deck is located as
set forth in the Schedule of Regulations.172
(7) All decks and patios less than 10 inches above average grade shall
be no closer than four feet to the rear and side property lines.173
A. Fees and deposits for various permits, licenses and proceedings
authorized by the chapter shall be in the amounts set forth, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. Costs incurred by the Village. On all applications to the Board of
Trustees, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Board of
Architectural and Site Plan Review, and Traffic Commission, the
applicant shall be liable to the Village for and shall pay the following
costs and fees which are actually and necessarily incurred by the
Village in processing the application, which costs and fees shall be
consistent with the costs and fees for the services then prevailing in the
community:
(1) Advertising.
(2) Stenographic minutes of meetings.
(3) Engineering costs.
(4) Inspection costs.
(5) Legal fees.
(6) Planning, traffic, environmental or other specialized studies.
C. Advertising. The applicant shall incur all fees associated with
advertising, public notice(s) and/or hearing dates published in the
official and/or alternate newspaper designated by the Board of
Trustees.
D. Stenographic minutes of meeting. The applicant shall be responsible for
all expenses incurred by the Village.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
172. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
173. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.4
1:467
§ 600-13.5. Garages and other accessory buildings and structures;
basements.
E. Engineering costs. The applicant shall be responsible for all reasonable
engineering costs incurred by the Village.174
F. Inspection costs. In case of inspections not otherwise provided by the
Building Department of the Village, the applicant shall be responsible
for any costs incurred.
G. Legal fees. Legal fees shall be charged at a reasonable hourly rate
approved by the Board of Trustees multiplied by the number of hours or
portions thereof actually spent on the application.175
H. Planning, traffic, environmental or other specialized studies. The
applicant shall be responsible for any/all reasonable fees incurred for
applications before the Planning Board and Traffic Commission. The
applicant shall also be responsible for all costs incurred for
environmental studies and SEQRA requirements and/or any other
specialized studies required by these boards, commissions or the Board
of Trustees.
I. Action held until payment of fees. No action shall be taken by any
Village board or by any Village official on any application subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless and until all fees required under
this section and fee code of the Building Department shall have been
paid.
A. In the residential districts, a private detached or attached garage
accessory to a dwelling on the same lot or parcel shall be permitted in a
rear yard or side yard only.
B. In any residential district where residential use is permitted, a private
detached or attached garage shall be permitted as an accessory use to a
multiple-family dwelling as part of the site plan approval process.
C. In any residential district, an accessory garage for more than two
passenger vehicles shall be prohibited unless a special use permit
therefor shall have been granted by the Board of Trustees.
D. No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored in any accessory
residential garage.
E. No garage shall exceed 12 feet in height.
F. No detached garage shall have less than a two-foot side yard setback
and a two-foot rear yard setback.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-13.4 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.5
1:468
§ 600-13.6. Hempstead Avenue setback.
G. Except for outdoor pools and attached decks, the following regulations
shall apply to accessory buildings and structures in any residential
district:
(1) Detached accessory buildings or structures, which are greater than
100 square feet, or decks in excess of 10 inches in height above
grade, may be located in, and may occupy, not more than 40% of
the area of any rear yard and shall be located a distance of at least:
(a) Eight feet from any dwelling or main building.
(b) Four feet from any lot line, with no cornice overhanging such
building more than six inches.
(2) No structure shall be permitted less than four feet from any lot line.
H. No accessory building or structure shall be located closer to the street
upon which the property abuts than the existing building line of the
house.
I. Except for garages, no accessory building or structure shall exceed 10
feet in height.
J. No accessory building may be used as habitable space.
K. (Reserved)176
L. Exterior basement entrances shall be prohibited unless expressly
permitted by a special use permit from the Board of Trustees.
M. An open porch may extend into the required front yard no more than six
feet.
N. In a residential district, where a lot abuts on a parkway, the lot may be
considered to have a front and front yard on the street and also on the
parkway, and where a building accords with this subsection, a private
accessory garage may be incorporated in the building or attached
thereto, regardless of distance from streets, provided the front yard
required in the district in which it is erected is maintained.
O. In any residential district, no accessory building shall be nearer the
front street line than 60 feet, and if on a corner plot, not less than 25
feet from the side street.
A. Map and lines adopted. The map entitled "Department of Public Works,
Nassau County, New York, Detail Showing Proposed Alteration of
Alignment of Hempstead Avenue from Park Boulevard Northerly to
Dogwood Avenue, Malverne," dated March 28, 1952, a copy of which
accompanies this chapter, referred to herein as the "Hempstead Avenue
176. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K, prohibiting decks constructed or maintained above
the first story, was repealed by 6-21-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018.
§ 600-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.6
1:469
§ 600-13.7. Illegal occupancies.
Setback Map," is hereby adopted and made a part hereof, and the
lines, both of which are designated thereon as "Proposed New Property
Line," are hereby adopted as the front setback lines for that part of
Hempstead Avenue shown on said map.
B. Front yard setback. Subject to the provisions of Subsections C and D
hereof, the provisions of this chapter requiring a minimum front yard
shall not apply to any land abutting on that part of Hempstead Avenue
shown on the Hempstead Avenue Setback Map along the lines each
designated thereon as a proposed new property line.
C. Proposed new property line. Any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary notwithstanding, no building or structure hereafter erected on
any lot, piece or parcel of land abutting that part of Hempstead Avenue
shown on the Hempstead Avenue Setback Map along the lines
designated thereon as a proposed new property line shall be so
constructed that any part thereof shall extend into the area on said map
between said lines.
D. Setback determined. Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, each building or structure hereafter erected on any
lot, piece or parcel of land abutting that part of Hempstead Avenue
shown on the Hempstead Avenue Setback Map along the lines each
designated thereon as a proposed new property line shall be set back
from such line on the same side of said avenue a distance equal to the
average distance which all other business buildings and structures
within the same block on such side of said avenue shall then be set back
from such line; provided, however, that no such building or structure
shall be so constructed that any part thereof shall be nearer to such
lines than any part of the then nearest existing business building or
structure located within 30 feet thereof.
E. Existing buildings. Buildings and structures existing on or completed on
or before July 15, 1953, and extending into the area on the Hempstead
Avenue Setback Map between the lines each designated thereon as a
proposed new property line shall not be deemed existing buildings or
structures for the purpose of applying the provision of Subsection D
hereof, and such buildings and structures, if relocated, remodeled or
reconstructed at any time after that date, shall conform to the
provisions of this section.
A. Legislative findings. The Incorporated Village of Malverne Board of
Trustees has found that there are instances in the Village of owners of
residential properties exploiting their buildings by creating illegal
occupancies which expose their residents therein to living in
substandard rooms or apartments. Such practices are in derogation of
the health, safety and welfare of members of the public, who are
entitled to such suitable and safe housing. Such illegal occupancies in
residential properties also have a detrimental effect on Village services
§ 600-13.6 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.7
1:470
to the community. Accordingly, enforcement of applicable Village Code
provisions is a legitimate governmental obligation which requires
appropriate consideration.
B. Provisions relating to illegal occupancy prosecutions.
(1) It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit to be occupied or to assist
in the occupancy of a building or dwelling unit where the number of
occupants exceeds the permitted number of occupants. It shall be
unlawful to occupy any building or dwelling in violation of the
certificate of occupancy.
(2) Evidence of nonpermitted occupancy.
(a) In all civil and criminal prosecutions brought for enforcement
of provisions of the Village Code in respect to nonpermitted
occupancy of single- and two-family dwellings, the existence of
any of the conditions set forth below shall constitute evidence,
but not prima facie evidence, that a nonpermitted occupancy
exists at the premises. The existence of two or more of the
conditions set forth below shall constitute prima facie evidence
that a nonpermitted occupancy exists at the premises:
[1] Any dwelling which maintains more than one gas meter or
more than one electric meter or more than one water
meter is being used as the residence of two or more
families.
[2] Any dwelling which maintains more than two gas meters
or more than two electric meters or more than two water
meters is being used as the residence of three or more
families.
[3] A single-family dwelling which maintains any entrances
thereto, which entrance(s) has not been set forth on any
plans approved by and on file with the Village Building
Department, is being used as the residence of two or more
families.
[4] A two-family dwelling which maintains any third or
additional entrance thereto, which entrance(s) has not
been set forth on any plans approved by and on file with
the Village Building Department, is being used as the
residence of three or more families.
[5] A dwelling which has been advertised in any newspaper,
magazine or local advertising publication as being
available for sale or rent, which advertisement expressly
or implicitly provides that such dwelling contains rooms
for rent, more than one separate dwelling living unit, or
may be occupied by more than one separate family, is
being used as a dwelling containing the number of rooms
§ 600-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.7
1:471
for rent, dwelling units or families stated or implied in
such advertisement.
[6] There exist two or more doorbells such as would indicate
two or more families are residing in the dwelling.
[7] There exists more than one mailbox or post office address
such as would indicate two or more families are residing in
the dwelling.
[8] There exist permanent partitions or internal doors which
may serve to bar access between segregated portions of
the dwelling, including but not limited to bedrooms, or the
inability of the occupant or person in possession thereof to
have unimpeded and/or lawful access to all parts of the
dwelling unit.
[9] There exist two or more kitchens, each containing one or
more of the following: a range, oven hot plate, microwave,
or other similar device customarily used for cooking or
preparation of foods and a refrigerator or sink.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to lessen or modify
any other rights of the Village in the enforcement of the terms
of the Village Zoning Code.
(3) The presumption raised by proof of the existence of any such
conditions as set forth in Subsection B herein may be rebutted by
conclusive evidence that such conditions do not, in fact, exist or
that such conditions, in fact, comply with the Village Code.
(4) A person charged with a violation of the Village Code as described
herein may, if he or she so chooses, demand an inspection of the
subject premises by the Village Building Department to rebut such
presumption(s). Such demand shall be in writing addressed to the
Village Building Department. The Village Building Department
shall prepare a report of the finding of the inspection together with
photographs, if appropriate.
(5) Nothing in this section shall require presumptive evidence to
support a finding of an illegal occupancy, and any direct evidence of
an illegal occupancy shall be sufficient to support a finding of such
illegal occupancy.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FAMILY — A family consists of one or more persons, whether or not
related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption, all of whom
live and cohabit as a single, stable and bona fide housekeeping unit,
provided that such persons together occupy and own, lease or rent
the whole of the building or dwelling unit, in a family-like living
arrangement as the functional and factual equivalent of a natural family
§ 600-13.7 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.7
1:472
and use all rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. Any such
number of persons shall not be deemed to constitute a family if any one
of such persons may not have lawful access to all parts of the principal
building or separate building or dwelling unit or if any one or more of
such persons lease or rent any portion of such principal building and/or
separate accessory building or dwelling unit from any other person.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for not more than one family,
containing a single kitchen in which members of a family all live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. Such a building shall not
contain separate or segregated internal partitions or locked internal
doors barring access between portions of the dwelling.
D. Penalties for offenses.
(1) A violation of a Code provision involving nonpermitted occupancy
of a single- or two-family dwelling is a violation, as that term is
defined in the New York State Penal Law.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this Code inconsistent herewith,
for each Code violation involving a nonpermitted occupancy of a
one- or two-family dwelling, or of an approved three-family
dwelling, the owner, occupant or any person who is in charge of the
subject property at the time of the violation shall be liable for a fine
of not less than $3,500 and not more than $5,000, or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, following
a conviction for a first offense; and not less than $5,000, and no
more than $7,500, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both, for each additional offense.
(3) Each week that the violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
E. Enforcement; severability.
(1) The Superintendent of Buildings and his or her assistants shall be
responsible for investigating and documenting violations of any
case of illegal occupancy within the Village.
(2) Prosecutions for violations hereunder may be instituted in the
Village Justice Court or in the District Court of the County of
Nassau.
(3) The Village Attorney may, upon direction of the Board of Trustees,
institute an action in the Supreme Court of the State of New York,
County of Nassau, for appropriate relief where it appears under the
circumstances that the imposition of a fine alone would not be
adequate.
(4) If any provision of this section shall be determined to be
unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable, it shall not affect the
constitutionality or enforceability of the remaining provisions.
§ 600-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.8
1:473
§ 600-13.8. Discontinuance of junkyards and billboards.
§ 600-13.9. Motor vehicle repairs.
§ 600-13.10. Open storage; storage of motor vehicles and
recreational vehicles.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any automobile or
other junkyard in existence at the date of the passage of this chapter, in
a residence or business district, shall, at the expiration of two years
from such date, be discontinued.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any display sign or
commercial billboard in existence at the date of the passage of this
chapter, in a residence or business district, shall, at the expiration of
three years from such date, be discontinued. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may, however, permit its continuance as a special exception as
herein provided.
A. The following uses shall not be permitted in any residential district:
motor vehicle repairs of a major nature, including, but not limited to,
auto painting, body work or extensive mechanical repairs. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit either emergency repairs
or preventive maintenance of a minor nature, such as an oil change or
tune up; provided, however, that such preventive maintenance is
performed upon the premises by an individual who is an occupant of
said premises and that the motor vehicle upon which the emergency
repairs and/or preventive maintenance is being performed is registered
in the name of the occupant of said premises. No repairs shall be made
to an unlicensed or inoperative motor vehicle outside of enclosed
buildings.
B. All motor vehicle repairs are hereby prohibited, except for emergency
repairs, on all public streets in all zoning districts.
C. All motor vehicle repairs are hereby prohibited in all parking fields.
A. Special use. Other than the open storage permitted in this section, no
property shall be used for the open storage of any article, merchandise,
material or machinery except that permitted in the Commercial District
by special use permit by the Board of Trustees after notice and public
hearing.
B. No open or outdoor storage shall be permitted in any street or roadway.
C. Application required for special use permit for open storage. An
application shall be made in writing by the owner or lessee of the lot or
parcel of land upon which open storage use is applied for, and said
application shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner and/or lessee or other occupant.
§ 600-13.8 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.10
1:474
(2) A general statement of the location of the property and of the
classification of the use district in which such lot, parcel of land or
plot is located.
(3) A survey showing the boundary of such parcel, together with the
size of the parcel by metes and bounds.
(4) A site plan of the parcel showing any buildings or structures on the
property or buildings or structures to be erected thereon and the
proposed location of the open storage.
(5) A radius map depicting adjacent properties, identifying zoning
districts, structures and current use for all properties within 200
feet of the site.
D. Mobile recreational, unregistered or inoperative motor vehicles and
boats. The parking and storage of mobile recreational and unregistered
motor vehicles, boats and similar apparatus on premises in residential
districts shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) No lot or parcel shall be used for the outer storage of an
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle or vehicles except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter. No repairs shall be made to an
unlicensed or inoperative motor vehicle outside of enclosed
buildings. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the storage
of such vehicle or vehicles inside a garage or other building located
on the premises, provided that such vehicle or vehicles are owned
by the owner or occupant of the principal building. Where cars,
parts, junk or implements are stored outside a garage, they shall be
kept at least 60 feet from the street upon which the building fronts
and shall be suitably and adequately screened from all streets
permitting a view thereof.
(2) No automobile trailer, camper, mobile home, house trailer,
recreational vehicle, or other vehicle designed or outfitted with
sleeping accommodations that has an overall length in excess of 25
feet and/or an overall height in excess of 12 feet, as measured from
the ground to its highest point of vertical rise as situated on the
property, shall be parked or stored in a residential district in the
Village, except that such vehicle may be parked or stored and used
for sleeping and/or habitation for a period of time not to exceed 12
months upon an approved application and permit issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings, and provided that the Superintendent
of Buildings determines that the premises have been rendered
uninhabitable due to fire, flood or other natural or man-made
disaster.
(3) No automobile trailer, camper, mobile home, house trailer,
recreational vehicle described in Subsection D(1) herein may be
parked or stored on property located in a residential district unless
the following requirements are satisfied:
§ 600-13.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.10
1:475
(a) Only one such vehicle may be parked or stored on any
premises.
(b) Such vehicle must be owned, leased or rented by the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which it is parked or stored.
(c) In no case shall such vehicle be used for storage while parked
or stored on such lot unless such structure is fully enclosed
within a garage or other access-only structure.
(d) No such vehicle may be parked or stored in the area of any
premises between the street or roadway and the closest point
of the main structure of such premises that is nearest to the
street or roadway, otherwise known as the "front yard," unless
such vehicle is fully enclosed within a garage or other
accessory structure. All properties adjacent to two intersecting
streets shall be deemed to have two front yards under this
section.
(e) No such vehicle shall be parked or stored within three feet of
the property line of any adjacent property, unless such vehicle
is fully enclosed within a garage or other accessory structure.
(4) No unregistered motor vehicles shall be parked or stored on
property located within any residential district unless such vehicle
is fully enclosed within a garage or other accessory structure.
(5) No boats, boats with trailers, trailers, jet skis, wave runners or
other marine apparatus designed or outfitted with sleeping
accommodations and/or rest rooms or bathroom facilities, having
an overall length in excess of 25 feet and/or an overall height in
excess of 12 feet as measured from the ground to its highest point
of vertical rise, including any mast or attached outrigger, as
situated on the property, shall be parked or stored in a residential
district in the Village.177
(6) No boats, boats with trailers, trailers, jet skis, wave runners or
other marine apparatus equal to or less than 25 feet in length or 12
feet in height may be parked or stored on property located in a
residential district unless the following requirements are
satisfied:178
(a) Only one such boat, boat with trailer, trailer or other marine
apparatus may be parked or stored on any premises.
(b) Such boat must be registered and owned, leased or rented by
the owner or occupant of the premises upon which it is parked
or stored.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-13.10 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.10
1:476
§ 600-13.11. Prohibited actions of real estate brokers, agents and/
or salespersons.
(c) In no case shall such boat, boat with trailer, trailer, jet skis,
wave runners or other marine apparatus be used for storage
while parked or stored on such lot unless such boat, boat with
trailer, trailer or other marine apparatus is fully enclosed in a
garage or other accessory structure.
(d) No such boat, boat trailer, trailers, jet skis, wave runners or
other marine apparatus may be parked or stored in the area of
any premises between the street or roadway and the closest
point of the main structure of such premises that is nearest to
the street or roadway, otherwise known as the "front yard,"
unless such vehicle is fully enclosed within a garage or other
accessory structure. All properties adjacent to two intersecting
streets shall be deemed to have two front yards under this
section.
(e) No such boat, boat with trailer, trailers, jet skis, wave runners
or other marine apparatus shall be parked or stored within
three feet of the property line of any adjacent property, unless
such vehicle is fully enclosed within a garage or other
accessory structure.
E. Enforcement and penalties for offenses.
(1) The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall commit an
offense, the fine for which shall not exceed $500 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for each offense. Each
daily violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
F. No such boat, boat with trailer, trailers, jet skis, wave runners or other
marine apparatus shall be parked or stored in any parking lot within the
geographical jurisdiction of the Village of Malverne.179
A. Prohibited actions. No person acting as a real estate broker, agent and/
or salesperson, whether or not licensed by the State of New York, shall
knowingly facilitate the use or occupancy of any dwelling in a manner
which violates the use or occupancy of such dwelling or building which
is permitted by the certificate of occupancy or certificate of existing use
for it or in a manner which violates the permitted use or occupancy of
such dwelling or building under this chapter. A person shall be deemed
to facilitate a use for occupancy of, by, among other things, advertising
or listing a dwelling or building, showing a dwelling or building to a
179. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-13.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.11
1:477
§ 600-13.12. Public garages, stables and gas stations.
No public garage, stable or gasoline-vending station shall be erected or
used within 200 feet of any premises used for a school, public library,
church, hospital or orphanage.
§ 600-13.13. Retaining walls.
prospective user or occupant or otherwise soliciting or encouraging
another person to use or occupy a dwelling or building. Upon the
conviction of a licensed broker, agent or salesperson for a violation of
this section, in addition to the penalties provided for in this section,
the Clerk of the Malverne Justice Court shall forward a record of such
conviction to the New York State Department of State, Division of
Licensing Services.
B. Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this section shall be
administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and any
sworn police officer.
C. Any person, corporation, company, partnership, firm or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall commit an
offense, the fine for which shall not exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for each offense. Each day the
property is advertised in violation of this section or each occasion
where a party knowingly facilitates the use or occupancy of a detached
dwelling or a two-family attached residential building in a manner
which violates the use or occupancy of such dwelling or building in
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Except for decorative retaining walls not exceeding 18 inches in height,
no retaining wall may be built within the Village unless the
Superintendent of Buildings issues a permit for its construction.
Application for a permit shall be made on a form promulgated by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
B. No permit shall be issued for a retaining wall unless:
(1) The application is accompanied by plans for the development of the
land that the retaining wall is intended to support and of any other
land on the same tax lot or lots; or
(2) The application demonstrates serious erosion or flooding problem,
or a serious threat to public health and safety, which the retaining
wall or walls is intended to eliminate; or
(3) The applicant provides any additional information requested by the
Superintendent of Buildings to evaluate the application.
C. In a residential zoning district, or within 50 feet of a residential zoning
district, no retaining wall may exceed five feet in height. In other
districts, no retaining wall may exceed eight feet in height. Height shall
§ 600-13.11 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.13
1:478
§ 600-13.14. Satellite dish antennas.
be measured from the lowest point on the adjoining grade. This
subsection shall not prohibit applications for a series of retaining walls
in a parallel step design.
D. A minimum of five horizontal feet is required between retaining walls in
parallel step design. The area between such retaining walls must be
landscaped with natural material and must be maintained.
E. No retaining wall may exceed the height of the adjoining grade that it
supports or retains.
F. Provision must be made to accommodate stormwater on a property
during construction and after completion of a retaining wall.
G. The height restrictions of this section do not apply to retaining walls
whose construction was completed and which were backfilled prior to
the effective date of this chapter. If such walls are determined to be
unsafe by the Superintendent of Buildings or by a licensed engineer or
architect, they may be repaired, subject to approval by the
Superintendent of Buildings, provided that the repaired structure is of
the same, or smaller, size and type. If such walls are demolished or
abandoned, however, any replacement retaining wall must conform to
this section.
H. No retaining wall may be constructed in a front yard.
A. Purpose. The Board of Trustees hereby determines that in a community
such as the Village of Malverne, comprised principally of one-family
homes, the aesthetic impact of large parabolic or hemispheric discs or
other similar antennas or devices, measuring several feet in diameter,
can be offensive to the residential community and be inconsistent with
the character of the neighborhood. If unregulated, such devices can be
disruptive to the appearance of the skyline and disrupt the pleasant
nature and character of the community. Also, the interests of public
safety require that such devices be installed in accordance with welldefined
engineering standards, and other safety measures, such as
fencing around the base, may be necessary. These aesthetic and safety
concerns do not arise in connection with dipole antennas, which blend
into the skyline. The Board also finds that a regulatory scheme such as
is set forth herein allows a reasonable balancing of the needs of the
community and the rights of persons to reasonable access to television
or radio stations that they desire and to allow such antennas to fit into
the character of the community.
B. Permits; when required. No person shall cause, suffer or permit the
erection, construction, installation, relocation and/or maintenance of
any parabolic or hemispheric disc or satellite receive-only antenna or
other similar antenna or device, the purpose of which is to receive
television, radio and/or microwave or other electrical or similar signals
§ 600-13.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.14
1:479
from satellites or from ground facilities which transmit such signals,
except as provided herein.
C. District permit required.
(1) In any commercial or industrial district, a satellite receive-only
antenna two meters or less in diameter is permitted without a
permit.
(2) In any district other than a commercial or industrial district, a
satellite receive-only antenna one meter or less in diameter is
permitted without a permit.
(3) In all other instances, no erection, construction, installation and/or
maintenance of any satellite dish antenna shall be permitted or
continued except when permitted by special use permit by the
Board of Trustees, after public hearing. The first permit granted to
any applicant under this section shall be conditional and shall be
for a period of not more than two years. Any application for renewal
of such conditional permit shall be acted upon in the same manner
as an initial application.
D. Requirements for special use permits.
(1) In evaluating whether a special use permit should be issued, the
Board of Trustees shall consider the purposes set forth in this
section.
(2) The antenna or other device shall be located only in the rear yard of
the lot unless the applicant establishes that other placement is
necessary to obtain reasonable reception.
(3) No permit shall be issued if the Board of Trustees finds that either
the type of antenna or disc, or the method of its placement, will
endanger the safety of residents, neighbors or pedestrians, or
threaten property on the applicant's lot or adjoining lots.
(4) Use of any illumination for the disc or antenna is strictly prohibited.
(5) All connections shall be made so that wiring and supporting cables
shall not be visible from the street or sidewalk.
(6) No more than one parabolic, hemispheric, satellite receive-only, or
similar antenna shall be erected, constructed, installed or
maintained on a single lot or premises.
(7) The Board of Trustees shall impose such screening requirements
that are reasonable to effectuate the purposes set forth in this
section and that will not substantially limit reception.
E. Application for permit. All applications for special use permits shall be
filed with the Board of Trustees. The application shall describe the
subject premises by street address, shall state the section, block and lot
§ 600-13.14 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.14
1:480
§ 600-13.15. Solar energy systems.
number and shall describe the present use of the premises. In addition,
the application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) A location survey showing existing structures upon the premises,
their location and distance from the proposed disc or antenna, the
dimensions of the parabolic disc or antenna; the setbacks of the
parabolic disc or antenna from each property line; and all
properties and structures within a two-hundred-foot radius of the
premises, showing the names and street addresses of the record
owner of each property.
(2) A detailed plan showing the material from which the parabolic disc
or antenna is to be constructed and the proposed color of the
parabolic disc or antenna and details illustrating the structural
support system.
(3) A landscape plan illustrating adequate screening of the parabolic
disc or antenna which will be provided to screen the parabolic disc
or antenna from the roadway and adjoining property owners.
Unless demonstrated to be impracticable, all screening required
shall be by coniferous trees and shall be of sufficient height and
density to screen 100% of the parabolic disc or antenna from sight
at ground level from the roadway and from properties located
within a two-hundred-foot radius of the premises during the entire
year.
(4) An application fee in an amount as set forth, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
F. Notice required. Prior to the public hearing held by Board of Trustees,
the applicant shall file a certification of notice showing that all property
owners within 200 feet of the applicant's property were notified, in
writing, by the applicant of the application, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least 15 days and no more than 25 days before the
date scheduled for the public hearing. In addition, the Village Clerk
shall cause to be published notice of the hearing not less than 10 days
prior to the hearing date.180
A. Permit required. No solar energy system shall be erected or installed
unless an application has been submitted to, and approved by, the
Superintendent of Buildings.
B. Regulations. The Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a permit for
the erection or installation of a solar energy system, provided that the
application, and proposed erection or installation, complies with the
180. Editor's Note: Original § 49-13.15 of L.L. No. 5-2013, Sex offenders, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 600-13.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.15
1:481
§ 600-13.16. Special exceptions for public utilities.
Any provision herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the Board of Trustees
may, upon application and after a public hearing, permit any land to be used
and any building or other structure to be erected or used in any district
of the Village for the office, station or facilities of a public utility and for
the maintenance and operation of public utility machinery and equipment
if said Board shall find that such use is necessary for adequate public
utility service to any of the residents of the Village and that the proposed
location thereof is the most appropriate available location in the Village
therefor, considering the efficient operation of such utility, the use district
in which such property is located, the character of the neighborhood and
the possible effect of the maintenance of such use on the value of buildings
in the vicinity; and said Board may, if it grants such permit, impose such
reasonable conditions thereto as it shall deem necessary or desirable to
carry out the purposes set forth in the Village Law, upon the considerations
set forth in said section.
§ 600-13.17. Telecommunications towers.
Long Island Unified Solar Permit Initiative and all other applicable
local, county, state and federal law.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the safe provision
of telecommunications consistent with applicable federal and state
regulations, and to protect the natural features and aesthetic character
of the Village.
B. Authority. The Village Trustees, upon application and after a public
hearing, and upon the recommendation of the Building Department,
may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove special use
permits and site plans for the development of telecommunications
tower sites in the Village.
C. Applicability. This section applies to the use, erection, moving,
reconstruction, change or alteration of a structure within the Village to
serve as a telecommunications tower site. Where a provision of this
section conflicts with other provisions of this Code, the more restrictive
shall apply.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which serves the principal
use, is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use, and
is located on the same lot as the principal use.
ANTENNAS (AND/OR OTHER RECEIVING AND/OR TRANSMITTING
DEVICES) — Conductors that receive and/or transmit communications
signals.
§ 600-13.15 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.17
1:482
SPECIAL USE — A use which is deemed allowable within a given zoning
district, but which is potentially incompatible with other uses and,
therefore, is subject to special standards and conditions set forth for
such use, subject to approval by the Building Department.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND/OR SITE — A structure or
combination of structures of a height greater than 52 feet above grade,
which is capable of receiving and/or transmitting signals, and/or upon
which antennas and/or other receiving and/or transmitting devices are
located.
E. Special use regulations. No use, erection, moving, reconstruction,
change, or alteration of a telecommunications tower site is permitted
prior to the issuance of a special use permit and site plan approval in
conformity with this section.
F. Special use standards.
(1) Shared use of existing structures. At all times, shared use of
existing structures shall be preferred to the construction of new
telecommunications tower sites.
(2) Applicants for shared use (collocation). An applicant for shared use
of an existing structure shall be required to document intent from
the owner or lessee of the existing structure to share use. The
applicant shall ensure that all fees and costs of adapting the
existing structure to a new shared use are paid and that all
modifications required to adapt the existing structure to shared use
are performed in accordance with Building Department regulations
and in conformance with this section.
(3) Applicants for new construction. An applicant for new construction
of a telecommunications tower site shall be required to identify
existing structures within a one-mile radius of the proposed new
site which are capable of accommodating the applicant's
requirements to provide telecommunications service and shall
demonstrate good faith efforts to secure shared use from the
owners or lessees of the existing structures or that the proposed
telecommunications service cannot be installed or collocated on
the existing structures as an alternative to new construction.
(4) Future shared use of new telecommunications tower sites. Unless
demonstrated by the applicant to be unfeasible, the construction of
a new telecommunications tower site shall include capacity for
future shared use with other providers of telecommunications
services. An applicant for the construction of new
telecommunications tower sites shall document capacity for future
shared use of the proposed site.
(5) Setbacks. Telecommunications towers shall be set back from
abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way, and street lines in
accordance with the setback requirements of the zoning district in
§ 600-13.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.17
1:483
which the installation is to be located, or shall be located with a
minimum setback from any property line equal to 1 1/2 times the
height of the tower, whichever is greater. Setbacks shall apply to
all parts of the tower, including guy wire anchors, antennas and/or
other receiving and/or transmitting devices. Accessory structures
shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located.
(6) Visibility. All telecommunications towers and accessory structures
shall be sited to have the least practical adverse visual effect on the
environment. Telecommunications towers shall not be artificially
lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). Towers shall be a galvanized finish or painted gray above the
surrounding treeline unless other standards are required by the
FAA. In all cases, guyed towers shall be preferable to freestanding
towers. Towers should be designed and sited as to avoid, whenever
possible, application of FAA lighting and painting requirements.
Accessory structures shall maximize use of building materials,
colors and textures designed to blend with natural surroundings.
(7) Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible. No cutting of trees exceeding four
inches in diameter (measured at a height of four feet off the
ground) shall take place prior to the issuance of the special use
permit and plan site approval.
(8) Screening. The adequate planting of trees or shrubs is required to
screen the base of the telecommunications tower and accessory
structures from nearby property.
(9) Access. Adequate emergency and service access shall be provided.
Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
Road construction shall, at all times, minimize ground disturbance
and vegetation cutting to within the toe of fill, the top of cuts, or no
more than 10 feet beyond the edge of the pavement. Road grades
shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbances and reduce soil erosion potential.
(10) Parking. Parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency
and service access. The Building Department shall determine the
number of required parking spaces based upon information
provided by the applicant. No parking spaces shall be located in
any required yard or setback area.
(11) Enclosure. Telecommunications tower sites shall be adequately
secured by a fence or other barrier, unless the applicant
demonstrates that a fence or other barrier is unnecessary to secure
the structure. All fencing or other barrier design is subject to the
approval of the Building Department.
§ 600-13.17 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.17
1:484
(12) Advertising. No portion of a telecommunications tower shall be
used for advertising, including, but not limited to, displaying any
name, logo, banner or the like.
(13) Discontinuance of use; removal. The owner of a
telecommunications tower site shall notify the Village in writing
within 30 days of the discontinuance of use of the tower, antennas
and/or other receiving and/or transmitting devices, and/or
accessory structures at the site. The notice of the discontinuance of
use shall be addressed to the Village Clerk, Malverne Village Hall,
99 Church Street, Malverne, New York 11565, and shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Towers, antennas and/or
other receiving and/or transmitting devices, and/or accessory
structures shall be removed from the site within four months of
their discontinued use. Failure to have the structures removed
within four months following their discontinued use shall subject
the owner to a penalty of $100 per day for each day thereafter in
which the structure has not been removed, in addition to the actual
cost of any repair or clean-up of the site which the Village may be
required to undertake in order to ensure the public safety.
G. Security. The applicant, owner and/or lessee of the telecommunications
tower site shall be required to execute and file with the Village Clerk,
with a copy to the Village Attorney, a performance bond, or other
security, acceptable to the Village Attorney as to form and manner of
execution, in an amount sufficient for the faithful performance of the
terms and conditions of this section, the conditions of the permit or the
approval issued hereunder, for the observation of all Village laws and/or
ordinances, to cover the maintenance of the telecommunications tower
site during the period of its use, and/or to cover the cost of its removal
upon the discontinuance of its use. The amount required shall be
determined by the Board of Trustees upon the recommendation of the
Building Department. In the event of default in any of the provisions of
this section by the applicant, owner, and/or lessee of the
telecommunications tower site, the performance bond, or other
security, shall be forfeited to the Village, which shall be entitled to
maintain an action thereon. The performance bond, or other security,
shall remain in full force and effect until the removal of the
telecommunications tower and all accessory structures thereto
pursuant to this section. The owner and/or lessee of the
telecommunications tower site shall certify annually, in writing, to the
Village Clerk, with a copy to the Village Attorney, that the performance
bond, or other security, is in full force and effect.
H. General public liability insurance. Upon issuance of the special permit
and site plan approval, the applicant, owner and/or lessee of the
telecommunications tower site shall obtain a policy of general public
liability insurance in an amount (per occurrence) to be determined by
the Village Board of Trustees, from a company licensed as an insurer in
the State of New York, naming the Village as an additional insured
§ 600-13.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.17
1:485
under the policy. Such insurance coverage shall be maintained until
such time as the telecommunications tower has been removed pursuant
to this section.
I. General indemnification. In addition to and distinct from the insurance
and security requirements of this section, the applicant, owner and/or
lessee of the telecommunications tower site shall be required to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village, its elected and appointed officials, its
agents and/or employees harmless from and against all damages, losses
and expenses arising out of or resulting from, or alleged to arise out of
or result from, the acts, omissions, failure to act or misconduct of the
applicant, owner, and/or lessee of the telecommunications tower site, or
its/their affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors, in the construction, operation, maintenance, or repair
or removal of the telecommunications tower or any accessory
structures thereto and/or in providing or offering services through such
telecommunications tower or any accessory structures thereto and/or
in providing or offering services through such telecommunications
facility, whether such acts or omissions are authorized or prohibited by
this section or by lease or other agreement entered into pursuant to this
section.
J. Authority to impose other conditions. The Board of Trustees shall have
the authority to impose such other reasonable conditions and
restrictions as are directly related and incidental to the proposed
telecommunications tower special use or site plan.
K. Special use permits and site plan approval. Applications for special use
permits and site plan approval to develop telecommunications tower
sites shall be made in writing in accordance with instructions provided
by the Building Department.
L. Notice. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the application
for the proposed development of the telecommunications tower site, the
applicant shall send notice of the time, date, location and purpose of the
hearing, by United States mail or equivalent means, individually to the
property owners on the tax rolls of the Village (or on an official registry
of a locality adjacent to the Village) whose property is located within
500 feet of the proposed or existing tower site, and shall cause such
notice to be published once a week for four consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation and in the official newspaper
designated by the Village.
M. Decision of the Board of Trustees. The decision of the Village Board of
Trustees to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove special
use permits and site plans for the development of telecommunications
tower sites in the Village shall be filed immediately with the Village
Clerk.
N. Severability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this
section shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
§ 600-13.17 MALVERNE CODE § 600-13.17
1:486
§ 600-13.18. Two-family dwellings.
In any district where a two-family dwelling is a permitted use, a two-family
dwelling may be maintained or constructed, provided:
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
A. The plot on which the two-family dwelling is erected shall have an area
of at least 12,000 square feet;
B. Four parking spaces are provided on site; and
C. No dwelling unit may be located below grade.
§ 600-13.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13.18
1:487

ARTICLE XIV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 600-14.0. Enforcement.
§ 600-14.1. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter where no penalty
is set forth shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding
$350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
15 days, or both; and, upon conviction for a third or subsequent offenses, all
of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine
not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both. However, for the purpose of this chapter or of
such local law or regulation, violations shall be deemed misdemeanors and
for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall
apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a
separate additional violation.
A. Code Enforcement Officer. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officers designated by the Board of Trustees, including
the Superintendent of Buildings, and by such other officers who shall,
from time to time, be designated by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. Inspection authority. In the discharge of their duties, the Code
Enforcement Officers or any duly authorized subordinate shall have the
right, upon proper identification, to enter upon any land or into any
building or structure at any reasonable hour.
C. Records kept. The Superintendent of Buildings shall file and maintain
records of all applications, building permits, certificates of occupancy,
complaints of violation and actions taken.
D. Compliance. No officer, board, agency or employee of the Village shall
issue, grant or approve any permit, license, certificate or other
authorization for any erection, demolition or relocation of any building
or structure or for any use of any land or building that is not in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit,
license, certificate or other authorization issued, granted or approved
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void
and of no effect without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation
or nullification thereof and any work undertaken or use established
pursuant to any such permit, license, certificate or authorization shall
be unlawful and no action shall be taken by any officer, board, agency or
employee of the Village, including the Zoning Board of Appeals,
purporting to validate any such violation.
§ 600-14.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-14.2
1:489
§ 600-14.2. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance or other
regulation made under authority conferred thereby, the proper local
authorities of the Village, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 600-14.3. Interpretation.
Whenever any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other
provision of this chapter or any other statute or local law applicable or
covering the same subject matter, the most restrictive provision or the one
imposing the highest standard shall govern and be supreme.
§ 600-14.4. Amendments.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time, upon its own initiative or on
petition, amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this chapter or any
portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the Zoning Map and Schedule
of Regulations, in accordance with the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 600-14.5. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or
provision of this chapter shall be judged invalid or held unconstitutional,
the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any
part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 600-14.2 MALVERNE CODE § 600-14.5
1:490
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1972 Code to 2017 Code.
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 1A, Alarm Systems Ch. 194
Ch. 2A, Amusement Centers Ch. 208
Ch. 3, Animals
Art. I, Keeping of Certain Animals Ch. 215, Art. I
Art. II, Dogs Ch. 215, Art. II
Ch. 5, Brush and Trash Burning: Open Fires REP
Ch. 6, Building Code Ch. 265
Ch. 10, Compensation of Officers Ch. 165, Art. I
Ch. 11, Disorderly Conduct REP
§ 1-11H, Loitering Ch. 399
Ch. 12, Enforcement of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
Ch. 12, Regulation of Public Places Ch. 200, Art. I
Ch. 13, Establishment of Emergency
Management Commission
Sec. I, Established Ch. 68, Art. I
Sec. II, Continuity of Government Ch. 68, Art. II
Ch. 14, Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control
Ch. 507
Ch. 16, Fees for Permits and Applications for
Permits
Ch. 301
Ch. 17, Fire Department Ch. 74, Art. I
Ch. 17B, Volunteer Ambulance Worker Service
Award Program
Ch. 7, Art. I
Ch. 18, Fire Prevention Bureau Ch. 79
Ch. 19, Garage Sales Ch. 322
Ch. 20, Garbage, Refuse and Littering Ch. 500, Art. I
§ 600-14.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:491
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 20-A, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 460
Ch. 22, Graffiti Ch. 330
Ch. 23, Hawkers, Peddlers and Soliciting
Art. I, Hawkers and Peddlers Ch. 443, Art. I
Art. II, Solicitation of Orders and
Distribution of Handbills
Ch. 443, Art. II
Ch. 25, High-Tension Lines Ch. 455
Ch. 28, Oil-Burning and Gas Heating
Equipment
REP
Ch. 29, Ordinances: Publication, Proof and
Effective Date
REP
Ch. 29A, Parks Ch. 434
Ch. 30, Police Department
Art. I, Special Policemen Ch. 138, Art. I
Art. II, Retirement Ch. 138, Art. II
Ch. 30A, Public Assembly, Parades and Other
Recreational Type Assemblies of Persons on
Outside Public Spaces
Ch. 229
Ch. 31, Public Hearing on Local Laws Ch. 120
Ch. 32, Records Management Ch. 154
Ch. 33, Recycling Ch. 500, Art. II
Ch. 35, Shade Trees Ch. 540, Art. I
Ch. 36, Signs
Art. I, Signs, Banners, Etc. Ch. 491, Art. I
Art. II, Advertising Signs or Signboards Ch. 491, Art. II
Ch. 38, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 512, Art. I
Art. II, Enforcement, Penalties, When
Effective
Ch. 512, Art. I
Art. III, Standard Specifications for Portland
Cement Concrete Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters,
Driveways
Ch. 512, Art. I
Art. IV, Cleaning and Repair Ch. 512, Art. II
Art. V, Awnings Ch. 512, Art. III
Ch. 39, Streets: Openings and Excavations Ch. 512, Art. IV
Ch. 40, Sunday Bowling and Motion-Picture
Exhibitions
REP
Ch. 41, Taxation
§ DT-1 MALVERNE CODE § DT-1
1:492
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. I, Utility Service Tax Ch. 523, Art. I
Art. II, Partial Exemption from Real Property
Taxes
Ch. 523, Art. III
Art. III, Business Investment Exemption Ch. 523, Art. II
Art. IV, Tax Lien Sales Ch. 523, Art. IV
Art. V, Exemption for Improvements to
Accommodate Disabled
Ch. 523, Art. V
Art. V, Partial Property Tax Exemption for
Qualified Members of Malverne Volunteer
Ambulance Corps and Malverne Volunteer
Fire Department
Ch. 523, Art. VI
Art. VII, Alternative Exemption for Veterans Ch. 523, Art. VII
Ch. 42, Trees Repealed by L.L. No.
2-2003
Ch. 42A, Tree Preservation Ch. 540, Art. III
Ch. 42B, Infested and Infected Trees and
Shrubs
Ch. 540, Art. IV
Ch. 43, Taxicabs Ch. 528
Ch. 43A, Vandalism Ch. 564
Ch. 44, Vehicle and Traffic Laws Ch. 44
Art. II, § 44-8.1, Helmet Requirements Ch. 258, Art. I
Ch. 45, Village Liability Ch. 411
Ch. 47, Wells Ch. 586, Art. I
Ch. 48, General Penalty Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 49, Zoning Ch. 600
Ch. 49-A, Actions of Real Estate Brokers,
Agents and/or Salespersons
Ch. 466
Ch. 49-B, Illegal Occupancies REP
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2018 4-11-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:493
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2018 6-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 44
3-2018 6-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 600
§ DL-1 MALVERNE CODE § DL-1
1:494

ZONING
600 Attachment 1
Village of Malverne
Schedule of Regulations
District Permitted Uses
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Area
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Building Height Minimum Yard Dimensions
Maximum
Floor Area
Stories Feet Ratio
Side Yards Front
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Feet
Total
Feet
A See § 600-2.2A 6,000 60 25% 2 1/21,8 301,8 5
3
143
254
255,6 0.408
B See § 600-2.3A 6,000 60 25% 2 1/21,8 301,8 5
3
143
254
255,6 0.408
C See § 600-2.4A 6,000 60 25% 1 1/21,8 181,8 5
3
143
254
255,6 0.408
D See § 600-2.5A
6,000 (singlefamily), but not
less than 1,980
per dwelling
unit for multiple
dwellings
60 25% 2 1/21,8 351,8 5
3
143
254
255,6 0.408
Business See § 600-2.6A
6,000 (singlefamily), but not
less than 1,980
per dwelling
unit for multiple
dwellings
–– 70% 2 1/22,8 352,8
–– –– 104
155,7 1.40
Commercial See § 600-2.7A –– –– –– –– –– –– –– 104
155,7
––
NOTES:
1 Churches, schools, libraries and municipal buildings exempt.
2 Churches, schools, libraries, firehouses, police stations, places of amusement and municipal buildings exempt.
3 For any building other than a single-family dwelling or a building accessory thereto which is equal to or less than 40 feet in height, the minimum side yard shall be at
least 25 feet; if such building is greater than 40 feet in height, the minimum side yard dimensions shall be increased five feet for each 12 feet of the building which
exceeds 40 feet.
4 In case of corner lots, a front yard shall be required on each street on which the lot abuts.
5 For any building which is greater than 40 feet in height, the minimum rear yard shall be increased by five feet for every 12 feet which exceeds 40 feet in height.
6 Accessory buildings or structures may occupy no more than 40% of the rear yard. The height of such building or structure shall not exceed 12 feet, except garages
which cannot exceed 15 feet. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be less than four feet from the rear or side lot line, except garages which shall not be less
than two feet from the rear or side lot line and except that two garages having a party wall shall be permitted.
600 Attachment 1:1 07 - 01 - 2017
MALVERNE CODE
7 For all buildings other than a building used as a dwelling, a minimum of a four-foot-wide, seven-foot-high unobstructed, direct-line passage from the rear yard to the
street shall be required.
8 The following projections shall be permitted above the flat roof deck level:
(a) Parapets not exceeding two feet in height.
(b) Chimneys not exceeding four feet in height.
600 Attachment 1:2 07 - 01 - 2017