Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Massapequa Park shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village
of Massapequa Park," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is
made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the
"Code of the Village of Massapequa Park" to any other local law, ordinance
or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing below, as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had
been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park, and it
is the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Massapequa Park in force on the date of the adoption of this local
law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Massapequa Park prior to the
effective date of this local law, or any action or proceeding brought for
the enforcement of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this local
law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now
or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Massapequa Park, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may
result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Massapequa Park.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Massapequa Park providing
for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Village of Massapequa
Park or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Massapequa Park
appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Massapequa Park or other instruments or
evidence of the village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. All legislation regulating traffic.
M. Any legislation adopted subsequent to November 13, 1989.
§ 1-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Administrator of the Village of Massapequa Park and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on
this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Village Administrator of the Village of Massapequa Park
by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of Massapequa Park, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Village Administrator
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Massapequa Park," or any new local laws or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to keep up-to-date the
certified copy of the book containing the Code of the Village of Massapequa
Park required to be filed in the office of the Village Administrator for use
by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws and resolutions
adopted by the Board of Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local
law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of
said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions
until such changes, local laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Administrator of
the Village of Massapequa Park upon the payment of a fee to be set by
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
resolution of the Board of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by
resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code. [Amended 11-22-1993 by
L.L. No. 14-1993]
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Administrator,
changes or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the
Code of the Village of Massapequa Park or who alters or tampers with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the
Village of Massapequa Park to be misrepresented thereby or who violates
any other provisions of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine or imprisonment for a term of
not more than fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park, no
changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B, the following sections were added or amended:
§§ 34-2A, 38-1, Ch. 42 (§§ 42-1 and 42-2), Art. II of Ch. 70 (§§ 70-5 through 70-10), § 74-1A,
Art. III of Ch. 74 (§§ 74-10 through 74-21), Part 3 of Ch. 74 (§§ 74-46 through 74-49),
§§ 100-3, 110-2, 154-3, 154-15, 154-17B, 154-18A, Ch. 170 (§§ 170-1 through 170-5),
§§ 174-4, 178-4, 198-2, 202-1, Ch. 204 (§§ 204-1 and 204-2), §§ 218-3, 226-7, Ch. 230
(§§ 230-1 through 230-9), §§ 234-3, 240-2, 248-5, 248-7, 248-10, 248-12, 248-13, 248-14B,
248-21B, 248-22, 248-24, 248-26A, 248-27, 248-28, 248-29, 248-30, 248-31, 248-33D,
248-34C, D and E, 248-35, 248-38, 248-39B, 248-70, 248-71C, 248-72, 248-76, 248-78,
248-81, 248-105, 248-122, 248-123, 248-130A, 248-133, 248-136, 248-137, 248-139,
248-145, 248-147, 248-148, 252-12, 260-2, 260-3, 260-4, 260-6, 274-18F, Ch. 286 (§§ 286-1
through 286-25), §§ 298-12, 298-16, 298-20, 298-22, Art. V of Ch. 298 (§§ 298-27 and
298-28), Art. VI of Ch. 298 (§§ 298-29 through 298-40), §§ 300-3A, 300-19B(5)b)[1], Art. IV
of Ch. 300 (§§ 300-35 through 300-42), § 304-18, Art. II of Ch. 304 (§§ 304-19 through
304-22), 306-4, 306-17, 306-19D, 306-29A, Art. II of Ch. 306 (§ 306-39), § 314-7, Ch. 330
(§§ 330-1 through 330-9), Ch. 345 (references throughout to "Board of Appeals" were
revised to refer to "Zoning Board of Appeals."), §§ 345-5, 345-17B, 345-22A(35), 345-23D
and Ch. A350 (§ A350-1). The following original sections were repealed: in Ch. 100,
original Sections 7-206, 7-207, 7-208, 7-209, 7-210, 7-211, 7-212, 7-213, 7-214, 7-215,
7-216, 7-218, 7-225, 7-226 and 7-227; in Ch. 154, original Section 7-3; in Ch. 234, original
Sections 12-131 and 12-132; and in Ch. 248, original Sections 7A-7-2, 7A-7-4, 7A-7-5,
7A-7-6, 7A-11-6, 7A-11-10, 7A-12-1, 7A-12-2, 7A-12-3, 7A-12-14, 7A-12-15, 7A-12-17,
7A-12-19, 7A-13-2, 7A-15-4, 7A-15-5, 7A-17-4, 7A-19-8 and original Articles 8, 9 and 10. A
complete description of each change is included in L.L. No. 1-1991, a copy of which is on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. (Reserved)3
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park, such local law to be entitled
"General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this
local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
C. Fees. The following sections are hereby amended to delete the specific
fees and add the provision that fees shall be as provided for in Chapter
A350, Fees.2
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11C, the following sections were amended: §§ 74-9, 74-25,
74-32A and C, 74-41, 78-1, 90-11C, 116-7, 136-23A(1), (2), (3) and (4), 142-4, 154-24,
154-33, 164-4, 178-2, 192-2, 214-4, 234-2, 240-10, 248-16, 248-19, 248-32, 248-33C,
260-7, 268-4, 268-14, 272-7A and B, 274-12, 298-15, 300-4A and D, 306-25A, 306-34A
314-4, 345-12B(1), (2) and (3), 345-12D and 345-41D(1) and (2).
3. Editor's Note: Former § 1-12, Penalties for offenses, was repealed 9-27-1993 by L.L. No.
8-1993.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
General Penalties
[Adopted 10-6-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
§ 1-15. Penalties for unlawful activity, offenses or violations.
A. Penalties.
(1) Whenever in this Code or in any local law of the Village any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
violation or whenever in this Code or any local law the doing of any
act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, an offense or a violation, and where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the person, firm or corporation who or which
violates the same shall be subject to punishment as follows:
(a) First offense: by a fine not less than $250, not to exceed
$2,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
(b) For a second offense within three months after a first offense:
by a fine not less than $500, not to exceed $3,000, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
(c) For a third offense within three months of a second offense,
which took place within three months of the first offense: by a
fine not less than $1000, not to exceed $5,000, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
(2) The minimum fine to be imposed for any conviction shall be $250.
B. Continuing violations. Each day that any such unlawful act, offense or
violation shall continue or exist shall constitute a separate and
independently punishable offense.
C. Public nuisance. In addition to the penalty hereinabove provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the Village as provided
by law.
D. Penalties not exclusive. No penalty specified in this article shall be the
exclusive penalty or remedy to address any offense or violation of the
Village Code and/or any local law. Each penalty herein shall be in
addition to and not in substitution for or limitation of other penalties
and/or remedies specified in the Village Code and/or local laws and/or
any other applicable law. Any alternative remedy or penalty may be
sought simultaneously with any other penalty or remedy permitted by
law. The Board of Trustees may enforce obedience of its laws by
injunction or institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
any unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, use or division of property, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of a building,
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
§ 1-16. Enforcement of penalties.
Obedience to the provisions herein may be enforced either by criminal
information for the penalties herein prescribed as well as by prosecution of
the offender, or by civil action for a penalty, or by civil remedy at law or in
equity by way of injunction or otherwise to abate or prevent a violation of
the provisions of this Code or any local law. Neither a judgment in nor the
pendency of a criminal prosecution for an alleged violation of the provisions
of this Code nor a judgment in or the pendency of a civil action at law or in
equity shall be a bar to any other form of proceeding. The imposition of a
penalty for a violation of this Code shall not excuse the violation or permit
the violation to continue, and the remedies herein provided for penalties
and civil action to enjoin or abate a violation shall be cumulative.
§ 1-17. Persons liable.
Any person or entity who or which causes, permits, suffers or allows any
other person or entity to perform an act or refrain from the performance
of any act which is a violation and/or offense of the Code and/or local laws
shall be subject to the penalties outlined in this article as if such person and/
or entity committed the offense and/or violation. The owner, agent, landlord
or tenant of any building, structure, premises or land, or any part thereof,
in or on which any violations of any provision of this Code shall have been
committed or shall exist and any agent, builder, contractor, corporation or
any other person who commits, assists or was employed in connection with
such violation or who maintains any building, structure, premises or land in
or on which such violation shall exist shall be deemed to have notice of such
violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and for the offense committed
and shall be punishable as provided herein.
§ 1-18. Failure of officers or employees to perform duties.
The failure of any officer or employee of the Village to perform an official
act imposed by this Code shall not be an offense, and shall not subject such
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision
of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided therefor.
structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use
in or about the Village.
E. Conflict. In the event that the penalty provisions of this article are in
conflict with the penalty or remedial provisions of other portions of the
Village Code, local laws or other applicable law, the penalty which is
most severe shall control and be levied. In all cases where the same
offense or violation may be punishable pursuant to more than one
provision, clause or section of the Village Code and/or local laws of the
Village, the prosecuting officer shall have the discretion under which to
proceed.
§ 1-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 1-19
1:10
§ 1-19. Deputies, assistants and representatives.
Wherever any officer of the Village is granted certain powers or duties or
is designated as the enforcement officer of a specific chapter or portion
thereof, such shall also be construed to include the deputies, assistants
and representatives of such officer as may be designated, delegated or
authorized by the Board of Trustees to exercise such powers or duties.
While acting within the scope of their employment, it shall be presumed that
all acts performed by such deputies, assistants and representatives were
duly delegated and authorized.
§ 1-20. Applicability of Municipal Home Rule Law.
If any provision of the Village Code is inconsistent with any provision of
the New York State Village Law, pursuant to the authority contained in
Subdivision 1, Paragraph (e), Subparagraph [3] of § 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law, the laws of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
shall supersede the New York State Village Law and New York State Village
Law is hereby modified and superseded in its application but only to the
extent that the New York State Village Law is inconsistent with any
provision of the Code of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 1-21. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate
the purposes for which this Code and the laws contained herein are
enacted.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11
Chapter 5
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 5-1. Statutory authorization; authorization of officials. [Amended
8-27-1979 by L.L. No. 14-1979]
Pursuant to Laws of 1978, Chapter 495, Section 150.10, approved and
effective July 20, 1978,4 and pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, the
Village of Massapequa Park is hereby authorizing by this chapter the Village
Administrator or the Executive Assistant or the Assistant Superintendent
of Public Works or the village-designated Foreman, as designated, the
Building Inspector and the Complaint Investigator to issue appearance
tickets directing a designated person, corporation, partnership or other
entity to appear in the designated Village Court at a designated time in
connection with his, its or their alleged commission of a designated offense.
§ 5-2. Offenses for which appearance tickets are authorized.
The designated officers and agents of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park, by virtue of office, title or position as set forth in § 5-1
above, are hereby delegated, authorized and required to issue any
appearance ticket as set forth above to enforce any statute, local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to parking, licensing of occupations or
businesses, fire prevention and safety, health and sanitation, and building,
zoning and planning.
§ 5-3. Issuance and service upon cause.
A public servant of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, other
than a police officer, who is specially authorized by state law or local law
enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law to
issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to designated offenses of
less than felony grade, may in such cases issue and serve upon a person,
corporation, partnership or other entity an appearance ticket when he has
reasonable cause to believe that such person, corporation, partnership or
other entity has committed a misdemeanor or has committed a petty offense
in his presence.
§ 5-4. Notices constituting appearance tickets.
A notice conforming to such definition constitutes an appearance ticket
regardless of whether it is referred to in some other provision of law as a
summons or by any other name or title.
4. Editor's Note: See Criminal Procedure Law § 150.10.
§ 1-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 5-4
5:12
Chapter 10
CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 304.
§ 10-1. Taxes on real property; when effective.
The Village of Massapequa Park is authorized to accept credit cards for the
payment of village taxes on real property within the Village of Massapequa
Park and which credit card companies are to be approved by the Village Tax
Department. The payment of village taxes by credit card for the payment of
village taxes is to take effect on June 1, 2001.
§ 10-2. Fees; when effective.
The payment of village fees, including permits, variances and other charges
by the village, can be paid by credit cards, which credit card companies are
to be approved by the Village Tax Department. This section shall be effective
immediately upon the enactment of this chapter.
§ 10-3. Exclusions.
Credit cards cannot and shall not be used to pay any village court fines or
penalties and shall be inapplicable to this chapter.
Chapter 13
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34. Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
§ 13-1. Insurance coverage provided.
The village shall provide individual insurance coverage for officials so that
when any official shall be sued in his individual name, whether as an
official or an an individual, which action or lawsuit shall pertain to any act,
function, work or job performed in behalf of the Village of Massapequa Park,
whether directly or indirectly, the costs of any and all legal expenses, fees
and charges of any and all legal expenses, fees and charges shall be borne
by the Village of Massapequa Park.
Chapter 17
§ 5-4 CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS § 13-1
10:13
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
§ 17-1. Title.
This chapter shall constitute and shall be known as the "Code of Ethics of
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park."
§ 17-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACT — Any claim, account or demand against or agreement with the
village, express or implied.
OFFICER or EMPLOYEE — Any official, elected or appointed, of the village,
or anyone employed full or part time by the village, whether paid or unpaid,
including members of any administrative or advisory board or committee.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 17-3. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter set forth, for the guidance of the officers and
employees of the village, the standards of conduct reasonably expected of
them.
§ 17-4. Conflict of interest.
No officer or employee of the village shall have any interest, financial or
otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or transaction or
professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict
with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest.
§ 17-5. Standards of conduct.
An officer or employee of the village:
A. Shall not represent private interests before or against the village or any
department, agency, board or committee thereof or before the Village
Court.
B. Shall not engage in any transaction as representative or agent of the
village with any business entity in which he has a financial interest,
direct or indirect, that might reasonably tend to conflict with the proper
discharge of his official duties.
§ 13-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 17-5
17:14
§ 17-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any such officer or employee of the village who shall knowingly and/or
intentionally violate any of the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
or removed from office or employment in the manner provided by law.
C. Shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the
village in such case where he has the power or duty to negotiate,
prepare, authorize or approve the contract or authorize or approve
payment thereunder, audit bills or claims thereunder or appoint an
officer or employee who has any of the powers and duties hereinabove
set forth.
D. Shall publicly disclose, in writing, to the Board of Trustees of the village
the nature and extent of an interest, direct or indirect, in any actual or
proposed legislation before the Board of Trustees as soon as he has
knowledge of such actual or prospective interest, and such written
disclosure shall be made part of and set forth in the official record of the
proceedings of such Board of Trustees.
E. Shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor or thing
of value for or on account of the performance of any official duty.
F. Shall not disclose confidential information acquired by him in the
course of his official duties nor use such information to further his
personal interests.
G. Shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional
activity which will require him to disclose confidential information
which he has gained by reason of his official position or authority.
H. Shall not make personal investments in enterprises which he has
reason to believe may be involved, directly or indirectly, in official
decisions to be made by him or which otherwise will create conflict
between his duty in the public interest and his private interest.
I. Shall not accept other employment or engage in any business or
professional activity which will impair his independence of judgment in
the exercise of his official duties or which will impair the performance
of such duties or which will be incompatible with such duties.
J. Shall not use or attempt to use his official position to secure
unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
K. Shall not, by his conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that
any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in
the performance of his official duties or that he is affected by the
kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or person.
L. Shall not pursue a course of conduct which reasonably will raise
suspicion among the public that he is likely to be engaged in acts that
are in violation of his trust.
§ 17-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-7
17:15
§ 17-7. Board of Ethics.
§ 17-8. Distribution of copies.
Upon enactment of this chapter by the Board of Trustees, the chief
executive officer of the village shall cause a copy of this chapter to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the village. Each officer and
employee elected, appointed or employed on or after the effective date of
this chapter shall be furnished such copy before entering upon the duties
of his office or employment. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of
any officer or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty
of compliance with this chapter nor with the enforcement of the provisions
thereof.
§ 17-9. Construal of provisions.
If any of the provisions hereof conflict in any way with the provisions of
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law, the latter shall be controlling.
Chapter 30
MEETINGS
§ 30-1. Conduct in public.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 108, Subdivision 2b, of the Public
Officers Law, all meetings of the members of the Board of Trustees of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park for the purposes of transacting
public business, including deliberation on such business, shall be conducted
A. The Board of Trustees of the village shall establish a Board of Ethics
and appropriate moneys for maintenance and personal services in
connection therewith. The members of such Board of Ethics shall be
appointed by the Board of Trustees, shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Trustees and shall receive no salary or compensation for their
services as members of such Board of Ethics. Such Board of Ethics shall
consist of at least three members, which shall include at least one
member who is not an officer or employee of the village. The Village
Attorney shall be a member ex officio of the Board of Ethics.
B. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to officers and
employees of the village with respect to the provisions of this chapter
and with respect to the provisions of Article 18 of the General Municipal
Law. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to the written
request of any such officer or employee, under such rules and
regulations as the Board of Ethics may deem advisable, and shall have
the approval of the Village Attorney.
C. The Board of Ethics may make recommendations with respect to
amendments to the provisions of this chapter upon request of the Board
of Trustees.
§ 17-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 30-1
30:16
in public, subject to the exclusions provided for in § 100 of the Public
Officers Law.
Chapter 34
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 38. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 30-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 30-1
34:17

ARTICLE I
Village Administrator
[Adopted 7-10-1972]
§ 34-1. Establishment; designation of Clerk-Treasurer.
The position of Village Administrator of the Village of Massapequa Park
is hereby established, and unless otherwise provided by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Village
Administrator and shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the Board
of Trustees.
§ 34-2. Powers and duties.
Subject to the direction, control and approval of the Mayor and Board of
Trustees, the Village Administrator shall:
A. See that all laws applicable to the village and its officers and employees
and all local laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
village are faithfully executed and enforced.5
B. Supervise and direct all functions and activities of the village and of its
officers and employees and such other boards and committees as
directed by the Board of Trustees.
C. Make reports to the Mayor and Board of Trustees on the affairs of the
village and recommend to them such measures as he may deem
necessary or appropriate for the purpose of obtaining greater efficiency
and economy in the government and operation of the village.
D. Exercise general supervision over all expenditures of the village in
accordance with the budget and keep the Board of Trustees fully
advised of the financial condition of the village and its future financial
needs.
E. Prepare annually a tentative budget for consideration by the Board of
Trustees and serve as Budget Officer when so designated by the Mayor
in accordance with Article 6 of the Village Law.6
F. Have such other powers and duties, not inconsistent with law, as from
time to time the Board of Trustees may by resolution determine.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: This reference should apparently be to Art. 4 of the Village Law.
§ 34-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 34-2
34:19
Chapter 38
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 34-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 34-2
38:20
ARTICLE I
Cash Advances
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as L.L. No. 3-1974]
§ 38-1. Purpose; amount. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 11-1983;
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
Cash advances for attendance at municipal schools, conferences and similar
functions may be made by the Village Treasurer for village officials in an
amount as stated in the annual budget.
§ 38-2. Filing of voucher; return of unexpended balance.
All expenditures shall be accounted for by voucher filed within sixty (60)
days and all unexpended balances returned to the Village Treasurer.
§ 38-3. Repayment by payroll deduction.
Any repayments due the village after the expiration of the sixty-day period
shall be made by direct payroll deductions.
§ 38-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 38-3
38:21

ARTICLE II
Retirement Incentive Program
[Adopted 9-14-1992 as L.L. No. 6-1992; amended in its entirety
6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
§ 38-4. Authorization.
The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park hereby elects to provide all
of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by
Chapter 30, Laws of 1996.
§ 38-5. Commencement date.
The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be
October 7, 1996.
§ 38-6. Open period.
The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the
additional retirement benefit shall be eighty-five (85) days in length.
§ 38-7. Funding.
The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable
pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be paid at one (1) lump sum
or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall
be determined by the actuary of the New York State and local employees'
retirement system, and it shall be paid by the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park for each employee who receives the retirement benefits
payable under this Article.
§ 38-4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 38-7
38:23
Chapter 42
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 42-1. Creation.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park, pursuant to the
authority granted to it under Article 12-A of the General Municipal Law,
hereby creates a Planning Commission, the members thereof thereafter
to be appointed in accordance with said provisions of Article 12-A of the
General Municipal Law.7
§ 42-2. Appointment; powers and duties. [Amended 6-14-1999 by
L.L. No. 7-1999]
Chapter 50
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and Indemnification — See Ch. 13.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 38.
Chapter 54
TERMS OF OFFICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
A. Appointments to the Planning Commission shall be made by the Mayor
of the Village of Massapequa Park upon written recommendation of the
Planning Commission, who shall have interviewed and selected
candidates for membership on the Planning Commission. The
appointment or appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with a
majority consent of the Board of Trustees, at a public meeting of the
Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The Planning Commission shall have the additional powers and duties
as set forth in Article 12-A of the General Municipal Law in addition to
all of the other powers and duties in Subsection A above, as specified
for a Planning Commission under the applicable provision of the Village
Law.
7. Editor's Note: The number of members of the Planning Commission was changed from
seven to five 4-26-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010 and from five to seven 1-27-2014 by L.L. No.
1-2014.
§ 38-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 42-2
50:24
ARTICLE I
Procedures for Changing Terms of Office for Elected Public Officials
[Adopted 1-24-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 54-1. Legislative findings.
This Board has determined that the New York State Law with reference to
changing the terms of office of local officials is totally inadequate. Based
on the current state law, future Boards of Trustees can change the term
of office with a simple resolution and with very little opportunity for public
input. This Board believes the state law does not protect the public
inasmuch as it does not require a public hearing on the question of changing
terms of office and it does not allow time for a fair, open and very public
dialogue. Without these two components, the public is effectively removed
from the process. This article sets forth a series of events which will ensure
that the public is aware, early in the political process, that its elective
officials are attempting to change their terms of office, and this will allow
sufficient time and opportunity for the public to be actively involved in the
decisionmaking process.
§ 54-2. Legislative intent.
It is the specific legislative intent of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park enacting this article to protect, preserve and ensure the integrity
and continuation of the annual elections in the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park.
§ 54-3. Written petition for public hearing required.
In order to change the term of office for any elected public official or
officials, there must be a written petition signed by a minimum of 250
registered voters in the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
requesting a public hearing to be held to change the term of office for said
elected public official or officials, which written petition must be submitted
to the Village Administrator at Village Hall.
§ 54-4. Petition and notification procedures for public hearing.
A. Scheduling of public hearing. After receipt of this written petition,
within 60 days thereafter, this matter shall be placed on the agenda at a
Board of Trustees' meeting for a vote scheduling thereafter a public
hearing, which vote must be approved by a majority of the entire Board
of Trustees, If the vote to hold the public hearing is not approved by a
majority of the entire Board of Trustees, then the issue to change the
term of office for an elected public official or officials is deemed
defeated for all purposes.
B. Conditions for renewal of petition. This same issue cannot be
considered again by the Board of Trustees until such time as there is a
new written petition submitted to the Village Administrator of the
§ 54-1 TERMS OF OFFICE § 54-4
54:25
§ 54-5. Number of votes required for placement of proposition on
ballot.
After a full public hearing has been held concerning this issue relating to
changing the term of office for an elected public official or officials, the
decision to place a proposition to change the said term of office on the
public ballot by permissive referendum or otherwise on the public ballot
must be approved in the affirmative by a vote of at least four members of the
Board of Trustees. If the vote relating to changing the term of office for an
elected public official or officials is not approved by at least four members
of the Board of Trustees, then the issue to change the term of office for
an elected public official or officials is deemed defeated for all purposes
and shall only be submitted at least one year after the initial date that the
Board of Trustees voted not to change the term of office for an elected
public official or officials on the public ballot by permissive referendum or
otherwise.
§ 54-6. Time limitations for placement of proposition on ballot.
The proposition to change the term of office for an elected public official or
officials shall only be put on the ballot no less than nine months prior to the
next mayoral election, and the proposition can only appear on the ballot by
permissive referendum or otherwise during the mayoral election year.
§ 54-7. Approval by majority of votes required.
Once this proposition has been placed on the public ballot by permissive
referendum or otherwise, the proposition must be approved by a majority
of the votes cast by registered voters in the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park.
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, and the said new written
petition, signed by a minimum of 250 registered voters in the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, shall only be submitted at
least one year after the initial date that the Board of Trustees voted
not to hold a public hearing to change the term of office for an elected
public official or officials.
C. Public hearing requirements. If the Board of Trustees votes by the
majority of the entire Board to hold a scheduled public hearing, there
must be a minimum of 90 days' notice of the said scheduled public
hearing, and notice of the scheduled public hearing must be posted in
both of the local newspapers in the Village of Massapequa Park for four
consecutive weeks prior to the scheduled public hearing, and notice of
said scheduled public hearing must also be posted in three conspicuous
areas in the Village of Massapequa Park for four weeks prior to the said
scheduled public hearing.
§ 54-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 54-7
54:26
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 64
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art I.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Special sales — See Ch. 268.
Signs — See Ch. 286.
§ 64-1. Distribution.
§ 64-2. Cleanup. [Amended 10-25-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
Any person, persons, corporation or other legal entity which directly or
indirectly distributes such posters, circulars, flyers or advertisements shall
have the legal responsibility of cleaning up and removing all of said posters,
flyers, circulars, advertisements and other papers within two (2) hours after
distribution of the same; and if the same are not cleaned up or removed,
the village, without notice, shall have the right to use its own personnel
to clean up the litter caused by said distribution and circulation of said
posters, flyers, circulars, advertisements and other papers and charge the
cost of the same to both the distributor and the agent of said distributor,
whichever the village shall choose. No notice of any kind whatsoever shall
be required by the village before the village uses its own employees to clean
up and remove the litter as described above.
A. No persons, person, corporation or other legal entity shall be allowed to
affix any poster, flyer, circular, advertisement or any paper to or on any
car parked in a municipal parking field or on any public street or on any
other property within the control of the village or on any Long Island
Lighting or New York Telephone pole or traffic poles which are located
within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park without the
express written permission of the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park or its designee.
B. No person, persons, corporation or other legal entity shall be allowed to
affix or place any poster, flyer, circular, advertisement or any paper of
any kind whatsoever on Long Island Lighting poles or New York
Telephone Company poles or traffic poles in any municipal parking field
or on any property within the control of the Village of Massapequa Park
located within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park without the
express written permission of the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park or its designee.
§ 54-7 ADVERTISING MATERIALS § 64-3
64:27
§ 64-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-25-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993; 11-22-1993 by L.L. No. 15-1993]
Any party found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fined in addition to
the costs and expenses of removing the litter and debris caused by the party
or parties distributing such materials.
Chapter 70
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art I.
§ 64-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 64-3
70:28
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 7-25-1983 by L.L. No. 10-1983]
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street, road,
sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of amusement, playground,
park or beach located within the Village of Massapequa Park, except that
the definition of a "public place" shall not include those premises duly
licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises or within a person's private property.
§ 70-2. Restrictions.
No person shall drink or consume an alcoholic beverage or possess, with
intent to drink or consume, an open container containing an alcoholic
beverage or with the intent to consume said alcoholic beverage in any
public place or to have the same so consumed by another, except at a block
party, feast or similar function for which a permit or written consent has
been obtained from the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 70-3. Possession of open containers in vehicles.
Possession of an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in any
motor vehicle within the village of Massapequa Park by any person shall
create a rebuttable presumption that such person did intend to consume the
contents thereof in violation of this article.
§ 70-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall be found to have violated any of the provisions of this
article shall be punished by a mandatory minimum fine of $100 for each
violation thereof or shall be imprisoned up to 15 days in jail, or both.
§ 70-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 70-4
70:29

ARTICLE II
Establishments for On-Premises Consumption
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code8]
§ 70-5. Legislative findings.
A. The municipality of Massapequa Park, pursuant to its zoning powers,
may properly restrict the number of places used for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption.
B. A local law prohibiting the use of or the sale of alcoholic beverages
within a particular zone of a building or premises directly devoted to a
similar use is a valid exercise of the zoning powers.
C. The regulation and control of the location of establishments making
alcoholic beverages available for on-premises consumption shall foster
and permit temperance in the consumption of alcohol and respect for
obedience of the law.
D. The use of property for the sale of liquor is construed and deemed by
legislative authority to have a more deleterious effect upon the health
and welfare of the community than ordinary business.
E. A municipality may restrict the number of places where liquor or other
alcoholic beverages are made available for on-premises consumption
within a particular geographical area, and this restriction may differ
substantially from a similar restriction relating to other permitted uses
for property.
F. The power of the state or any subordinate division thereof, including
the municipality of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, is
hereby authorized to act ill the matter to regulate and restrict the use of
property for the business of the sale of liquor, which power is broader
than the power to regulate or restrict property used for ordinary lawful
business.
G. The Village of Massapequa Park has many establishments licensed by
the New York State Liquor Authority for on-premises consumption of
alcoholic beverages. Many problems have been created by the
multitude of such establishments, which has adversely affected the
enjoyment of residential property in areas adjacent to such
establishments.
H. The existence and location of establishments serving alcoholic
beverages within the community has contributed to increased incidents
of vandalism and the destruction of private and public property, which
has imposed significantly difficult problems to the village and its
population in terms of law enforcement.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 70-5
70:31
§ 70-6. Definitions.
I. The existence and location of establishments serving alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption within the community has had
a detrimental ecological and environmental impact with the imposition
of additional burdens to the village in such matters as parking, littering
and noise control, as well as other conditions which have all had an
adverse impact on the quality of life.
J. The existence and location of establishments serving alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption within the community has
contributed to the unauthorized use and improper operation of motor
vehicles and loitering and numerous other activities, all of which
constitute public and private nuisances and undesirable conditions for
the population of the village, which justifies the enactment of this
article.
K. The enactment of this article will not adversely affect any premises
occupied by an existing business at its present location licensed by the
New York State Liquor Authority for on-premises consumption of
alcoholic beverages, but only restrict buildings from being occupied by
similar establishments within a two-hundred-foot radius from any other
building so occupied. This will result in substantial savings to the
residents of the Village of Massapequa Park in terms of police and fire
protection and vandalism deterrence and will prevent court congestion.
L. This article is a valid exercise of the zoning power of this village and, as
such, does not constitute an invasion of the power of the New York
State Liquor Authority.
A. Whenever used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise,
the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirit or wine
from whatever source or by whatever processes produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE or BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits,
wine, beer, cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing
alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a
human being.
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to the local laws of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant
to this article.
LIQUOR — Includes any and all distilled or rectified spirits, brandy,
whiskey, rum, gin, cordials and similar distilled alcoholic beverages,
including all dilutions and mixtures of one or more of the foregoing.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant
to the laws of the State of New York and the local laws of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
§ 70-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 70-6
70:32
§ 70-7. Location; sale or transfer of business.
§ 70-8. Conflict with zoning provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed directly or indirectly to
constitute a waiver or modification of any provision or requirement of any
section of any zoning local law or ordinance regulating construction and
maintenance or use of any building or the use of any lands situated in the
business district.9
§ 70-9. Power of Board of Trustees.
In order to protect the interests of the village, the Board of Trustees
reserves to itself the power to modify specific requirements of this article
or any provisions of the village local laws and ordinances to promote the
health, welfare and safety of its residents.
PERSON — Includes an individual, copartnership, corporation, society
or joint-stock company.
POPULATION — The number of residents in the Village of Massapequa
Park as determined by the last preceding federal census.
SERVE — Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any
means whatsoever for consideration or without consideration and
includes all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor,
agent, servant or employee of any establishment. "To sell and serve"
includes to solicit or receive or order for, to keep or expose for sale and
to keep with the intent to sell.
B. All other language relating to alcoholic beverages shall be as defined by
the definitions in § 3 of Article 1 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
of the State of New York, and all other nonalcoholic words shall be
given an everyday meaning.
A. The Village of Massapequa Park shall not issue any permits and/or
licenses to enable any building to become occupied as an establishment
for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption if said building is located within a two-hundred-foot radius
of any other building which is also occupied as an establishment serving
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prevent the sale, transfer
or other disposition of any business licensed by the State Liquor
Authority and the Village of Massapequa Park occupying a premises on
the effective date of this article.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 70-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 70-10
70:33
§ 70-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a
minimum fine of $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days,
or both, and revocation of his business license issued by the village relating
to the use of the premises. Each day's continued violation shall be deemed
to constitute a separate violation.
§ 70-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 70-10
70:34
Chapter 74
AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 70.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 70-10 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 70-10
74:35

Part 1
5-22-1967G Aesn eCrha.l 4P rOofv Tishioen 1s967 Code]
ARTICLE I
Licenses; Prohibitions
§ 74-1. License required.
§ 74-2. Citizenship requirement.
The provisions of § 202-2 regarding the citizenship of applicants for licenses
or renewals thereof shall apply to the activities regulated in this Part 1.
§ 74-3. Issuance, expiration, revocation and suspension of license.
Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of §§ 202-3 through 202-8
inclusive, regulating the issuance of licenses generally, the expiration,
suspension and revocation thereof, shall be applicable to the activities
regulated by this Part 1.
§ 74-4. Mobile kiddie rides.
The operation of mobile kiddie rides, including carousels, mechanical
horses and similar rides, is prohibited within the village.
§ 74-5. Shooting galleries and ranges.
No person shall operate or maintain a shooting gallery or range in the
village.
A. 10 In addition to the businesses, places, trades, occupations and things
required to be licensed by statute or by other local laws and ordinances
of the village, the following activities must be duly licensed:
(1) Billiard and pocket billiard rooms.11
(2) Bowling alleys.
(3) Rifle ranges.
(4) Common shows, theaters, circuses, carnivals, moving-picture
shows and similar places of amusement.
B. No person shall engage in or carry on any business, trade or occupation
or maintain any place or thing specified in this section without a license
therefor.
10.Editor's Note: Amended Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. A350, Fees, for annual license fee.
§ 74-1 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-5
74:37

ARTICLE II
Bowling Alleys
§ 74-6. Scope.
Any bowling alley in a place open to the public shall be deemed to be
included within the terms of this article.
§ 74-7. Maintenance of order.
Every keeper of a public bowling alley shall maintain good order.
§ 74-8. Minors.
No keeper of a bowling alley shall permit persons actually or apparently
under the age of 18 years to play therein or to frequent the same unless
such minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian or by some other
responsible adult.
§ 74-9. License fee.12
The annual license fee for each public bowling alley shall be as provided in
Chapter A350, Fees.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-6 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-9
74:39

ARTICLE III
Coin-Operated Amusements
[Added at time of adoption of Code13]
§ 74-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINE — One on which the playing,
operation or handling of a game of chance is not for stakes, money prizes or
something of value risked on an event, chance or contingency. "Amusement
machines" may be used solely for the testing of skill or amusement.
§ 74-11. Pinball machines.
Nothing in this article shall be construed in any way to authorize or permit
any pinball machine to be licensed or operated in the village.
§ 74-12. Prohibited establishments.
Amusement centers, playgrounds, penny arcades, shooting galleries or
business enterprises of a similar or same nature of whatever are prohibited.
§ 74-13. License required; fee; expiration; contents; display.
§ 74-14. Number of machines limited.
No place of business shall have more than three amusement machines
located at said place of business. The amusement machines may be an
adjunct of an existing place of business and not the primary means of the
business.
A. An annual license fee in the amount provided in Chapter A350, Fees, for
the operation of each coin-operated amusement machine in any one
particular place of business shall be paid to the village.
B. The license shall expire on May 31 of each year.
C. Any person displaying or keeping for public patronage any amusement
device shall obtain a license from the village for each such device. The
license shall bear the following: the name of licensee, date of issuance,
a brief description of the device, manufacturer's serial number which
appears on the device, the place where the device will be situated and a
facsimile of the Mayor's signature. It shall be attached to the device at
all times in a conspicuous place in such a manner that it cannot be
removed by anyone other than the licensee.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-10 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-15
74:41
§ 74-15. Nontransferability of license.
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. Each person,
partnership, corporation or other entity within the jurisdiction of the village
must apply for a license to operate a coin-operated machine.
§ 74-16. Conspicuous display of license.
The license issued by the Village of Massapequa Park shall be displayed
in such a manner as to be readily visible and accessible to the public in a
conspicuous place at the place of business of the licensee wherein the coinoperated
amusement machines are located.
§ 74-17. Qualification for licensing.
All applicants for a license to operate coin-operated amusement machines in
any place of business in the village must have maintained a going business
in the village for a period of 45 days prior to the submission date of said
application to the village.
§ 74-18. Investigation of applicant
The village shall make a thorough investigation into the applicant's fitness
and character and the type of business to determine whether the license
should be granted.
§ 74-19. Revocation of license.
A license may be revoked at any time during the year if the licensee does not
comply with the terms and conditions as printed on said license and rules
and regulations established by the village.
§ 74-20. Sign.
Upon the village's granting the applicant a license, a sign must be posted
and displayed in such manner as to be in close proximity to the coinoperated
machines in the licensee's place of business. The signature must
be readily visible and accessible and shall read "For Amusement Only--No
Gambling" and not be less than 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in size.
§ 74-21. License required; gambling prohibited.
No person shall offer to play any amusement device without the owner first
obtaining a license therefor or operate such device or permit the same to be
operated for gambling.
§ 74-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 74-21
74:42
ARTICLE IV
Public Entertainment
§ 74-22. License required.
No person shall exhibit to the public in any building, garden or grounds,
concert rooms or other place or room within the village, any minstrelsy or
dancing or any other entertainment of the stage, or any circus or dramatic
performance or other show or entertainment of like character, until a
license for such purpose shall have been first had and obtained as
hereinafter provided.
§ 74-23. Exceptions.
The provisions and requirements of this article shall not be held to apply
to any building, hall or room in which only private theatricals, tableaux and
other exhibitions for charitable and religious purposes are given.
§ 74-24. Issuance of license.
The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to grant and
issue the license referred to in § 74-22.
§ 74-25. License fees.14
The fee for a license required under the terms of this article shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
§ 74-26. Restrictions on license.
A license required by the terms of this article shall, in the discretion of the
Board of Trustees, contain provisions and conditions which, in its judgment,
may be essential for the welfare and benefit of the people of the village,
including provisions and conditions respecting the tickets or other tokens
entitling their holders to admission to such places and respecting the hours
of opening and closing thereof and such sanitary and fire regulations as
shall be deemed necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of
the community.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-22 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-26
74:43

ARTICLE V
Dance Halls, Cabarets and Catering Establishments
§ 74-27. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed:
CABARET — A licensed place of public assembly within the village where
any live entertainment is carried on, whether musical, singing or dancing,
or other similar amusement is permitted in connection with the restaurant
business or the business directly or indirectly of selling food or drink to the
public.[Amended 7-8-1974 by L.L. No. 6-1974]
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, place or space in the village
which is used, leased or hired out in the business of serving food or
beverages for a particular function, occasion or event to which the public is
not invited or admitted and where music or entertainment is permitted.
EMPLOYEE — A person employed in any capacity or title in connection
with a cabaret or public dance hall, including the licensee and any and all
persons responsible for the control or management thereof. It shall also
include a concessionaire and each person employed by such concessionaire.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A permit issued by the Board of Trustees to an
employee of a cabaret or public dance hall as required by this article.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any room, place or space in the village in which
dancing is carried on and to which the public may gain admission, either
with or without the payment of a fee.
PUBLIC DANCE OR BALL — Any dance or ball of any nature or description
to which the public may gain admission.
§ 74-28. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate or
engage in the business of conducting, maintaining or operating a public
dance hall, cabaret or catering establishment unless the premises wherein
the same is conducted, maintained or operated are licensed in the manner
prescribed herein.
§ 74-29. Prerequisites to licensing.
A license shall be issued only after the Board of Trustees is satisfied that
the applicant is a fit and proper person, shall have caused an inspection to
be made of the premises to be licensed and is satisfied that such premises
comply with all laws and the rules and regulations of the Zoning and
Building Codes of the Nassau County Fire Commission, Nassau County
Health Department and State Department of Labor, insofar as the same are
applicable thereto, and is satisfied that the premises to be licensed are a
safe and proper place to be used as a public dance hall, cabaret or catering
establishment.
§ 74-27 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-30
74:45
§ 74-30. Application for license; certification.
Application for the license herein prescribed shall be made on a form
containing such information as may be determined by the Board of Trustees
and shall be certified to by the applicant therefor.
§ 74-31. Issuance of license.
The license herein prescribed shall be issued by the Board of Trustees.
§ 74-32. License fees.
§ 74-33. Expiration of license.
All licenses hereunder shall expire on May 31, unless sooner suspended or
revoked.
§ 74-34. Transferability of license.
No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned to any
person or used by any person other than the licensee to whom it was issued,
nor shall such license be used on any location other than the location stated
in such license.
§ 74-35. Changes in corporate license.
If during the term of the licensing period one or more directors,
stockholders or officers of a corporate licensee are substituted or added,
such substituted or added directors, stockholders or officers shall, within
five days of such substitution or addition, file with the Board of Trustees
an application for an approval of the change of directors, stockholders or
officers on such forms as are prescribed by the Board of Trustees. A waiver
of this provision may be granted at the discretion of the Board of Trustees
A. Generally, the fee for each license prescribed herein shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees, for each year or fraction thereof.
[Amended 4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-198315]
B. Additional rooms. If additional rooms are to be used independently by
the same applicant in the same premises as a public dance hall, cabaret
or catering establishment, the applicant shall indicate on the license
application the location of each and every room or space which is to be
used for such purpose. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 12-1983]
C. Processing fee. A partial fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, shall be
paid upon the filing of an application for a license in order to defray the
cost of processing the application and shall not be refundable. This
processing fee shall be applied against the fee to be paid for the
issuance of said license as provided herein.16
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-30 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 74-35
74:46
to any corporation with regard to stockholders holding less than 10% of the
issued stock.
§ 74-36. Suspension or revocation of license.
A license may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Trustees for any
violation of law or upon the ground that disorderly, obscene or immoral
conduct is permitted on the licensed premises or for any other good cause,
including a violation of any of the provisions of this article or any rules or
regulations promulgated under the authority hereof.
§ 74-37. Applicability.
§ 74-38. Hours of operation.
Premises licensed hereunder shall not be kept open for business, nor shall
the public be permitted to enter or to remain therein, between 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.; and if the occupant is a membership corporation, club,
association or society, its members or their guests shall not be permitted to
enter or to remain therein between such hours. The Board of Trustees, in its
discretion, may permit any premises licensed hereunder to be open to the
public between such hours on special occasions. If it appears to the Board
of Trustees that the place for which a license is sought will be frequented by
minors or if there is in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, any other good
and sufficient reason therefor, it may grant a license upon the condition
that the licensed premises shall not be open for business between 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m.
§ 74-39. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees shall adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as
it may deem necessary for the proper control, operation and supervision of
public dance halls, cabarets and catering establishments.
A. A membership corporation, club, association or society which permits
musical entertainment, singing, dancing or other form of amusement in
premises wherein food or drink is directly or indirectly sold to its
members or their guests, or to the public shall be deemed to be
conducting a cabaret hereunder.
B. This article shall not apply to premises owned, occupied and used
exclusively by a religious, charitable, eleemosynary, educational or
nonprofit corporation or institution; provided, however, that such
corporations or institutions shall nevertheless register with the village.
C. Premises occupied and used as a teen canteen or teen club as such term
is commonly defined, shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions
of this article, insofar as the same are applicable.
§ 74-35 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-39
74:47

ARTICLE VI
Moving Pictures
§ 74-40. License required.
No person shall operate for money or hire within the village any exhibition
or performance commonly known as "moving-picture shows," either with
or without a vaudeville entertainment, without first obtaining a license
therefor.
§ 74-41. License fees.17
The fee for a license required by the terms of this article shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
§ 74-42. Applicability.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the exhibition or
performance of moving pictures for religious or educational purposes, but
no such religious or educational exhibitions aforesaid shall take place
unless the persons exhibiting the same shall first obtain the written
authorization of the Board of Trustees, who shall not issue the same unless
satisfied that proper precautions for the prevention of fire and for security
and safety have been taken.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-40 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-42
74:49

Part 2
10-5C-l1o9th8i1n Bg yR Le.qLu. iNreom. 6en-1t9s81]
ARTICLE VII
Places of Public Assembly
§ 74-43. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to this Part 2:
IN PUBLIC — Any place to which the general public has right to resort; not
necessarily a place devoted solely to the use of public, but a place which is,
in point of fact, public rather than private, a place accessible to the public
to gather or pass to and from.
LIVE PUBLIC SHOW — A public show in which human actors, dancers
or other performers, employees or other persons appear before spectators
or customers. A bona fide drawing, painting, photography, sculpture or
other art class utilizing human models and admitting only participating
instructors, students and models shall not be deemed at "live public show."
PUBLIC SHOW — Any entertainment or exhibition advertised or in any
other fashion held out to be accessible to the public, whether or not an
admission or other charge is levied or collected; the entertainment or
exhibition shall be deemed a "public show," although access to it is only
granted to members of a club or other association, when membership
in such organization is obtained upon payment of an admission price or
contribution or token dues or other smaller fee and the organization in
fact exists primarily for sponsoring or arranging admissions to such
performances.
§ 74-44. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity
conducting, maintaining or operating a cabaret, bar and/or lounge, dance
hall or discotheque establishment or any other place of public assembly
within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to suffer or permit any
entertainer, waitress, barmaid or other person to appear before customers
or patrons of the establishment, or for any person to appear in the presence
of such patrons or customers, with breasts uncovered in such a manner that
the portion of the breast below the top of the areola is not covered with
a fully opaque covering or with the lower part of the torso uncovered or
so thinly covered or draped as to appear uncovered, or to show the human
male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering or to appear or suffer or permit any person to appear in any scene,
sketch, act or entertainment with breasts or the lower part of the torso
uncovered or so thinly draped as to appear uncovered.
§ 74-45. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violations of any part of this Part 2 may be deemed by the Village
Administrator or Village Licensing Officer as sufficient cause to
§ 74-43 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-45
74:51
determine such person, corporation, partnership or other entity unfit to
own, keep, lease, manage or control such place or that the peace, order,
morality and propriety of the village has been disturbed or breached,
and any appropriate legal action taken by the village, such as the
suspension or revocation of any license of such person by the village,
shall be proper.
B. An offense committed against this Part 2 or any provision or section
thereof shall be deemed a violation and punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of the Code of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 74-45 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 74-45
74:52
Part 3
1M-7ec-1h9a9n1ic Baly BLu.Lc.k Ninog. 1D-e1v9i9ce1s]
ARTICLE VIII
Mechanical Bucking Devices
§ 74-46. Legislative intent.
It is the duty of the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the village. In furtherance of that duty, the Village Board
of Trustees has investigated and found that the use of mechanical bucking
devices, commonly referred to as "mechanical bulls," has caused and is
capable of causing severe personal injury to the user thereof. The Village
Board hereby declares that it is the intent of this Part 3 to protect the
residents of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park from dangers
inherent in the use of mechanical bucking devices.
§ 74-47. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL BUCKING DEVICE — Any mechanically operated machine,
apparatus, contrivance or device, the design or purpose of which is to
simulate or copy the movement of a steer, bull or other animal, whether
or not the same has been constructed in the shape, form and likeness of
a steer, bull or other animal, upon which a person or persons is seated as
a rider or riders and which machine, apparatus, contrivance or device is
operated or operates in a vibrating, pulsating, jerking, bucking or similar
fashion in order to or in an attempt to dislodge, unseat or expel the rider or
riders.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association or corporation that is
an owner, landlord, lessee, tenant, occupant or operator or an executor,
administrator, trustee or other legal representative of an owner, landlord,
lessee, tenant, occupant or operator, of any public place as defined herein.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place available to or used by the general public,
whether or not an admission fee is charged, including but not limited to
restaurants, discotheques, cabarets, bars, social clubs, amusement parks,
penny arcades, game rooms and other similar establishments.
§ 74-48. Prohibition.
No mechanical bucking device shall be installed, operated or used in any
public place, whether or not a fee is charged for the operation or use
thereof.
§ 74-46 AMUSEMENTS AND PUBLIC § 74-49
74:53
§ 74-49. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-22-1993 by L.L. No.
16-1993]
Any person violating § 74-48 of this Part 3 shall be guilty of a violation and
shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate violation.
§ 74-49 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 74-49
74:54
Chapter 78
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Special sales — See Ch. 268.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 78-1. License fee. [Amended 4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-198318]
The fee for a license to sell goods, wares or merchandise at public auction or
to conduct the business of an auctioneer in the village shall be as provided
in Chapter A350, Fees, for each and every place wherein such sale by
auction is held or conducted.
§ 78-2. Applicability.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to judicial sales or sales by
executors or administrators, by trustees under deeds of assignment, by
lienors, by attorneys at law or by public officers in the manner prescribed
by law.
Chapter 80
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 222. Property maintenance — See Ch. 254.
§ 80-1. Purpose and intent.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the
property, property values and welfare of the residents of the Village of
Massapequa Park and their guests, and of the visitors to the Village,
and to protect the property and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the
environment of the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. Intent. It is the finding of the Board of Trustees that the planting and/or
the growing of bamboo, a plant not indigenous to Long Island, New
York, within the Village of Massapequa Park has been and will continue
to be destructive to the natural environment, including indigenous
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-49 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 80-1
78:55
§ 80-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAMBOO — Any tropical or semitropical grass of the genera Bambusa,
Dendrocalamus or of any other related genera.
BAMBOO PROPERTY OWNER — A property owner in the Village who
has planted or grown or caused the planting or growing of bamboo on
his property and/or permitted or permits the growing of bamboo on his
property that had initially encroached onto his property from an adjoining
or neighboring property.
§ 80-3. Applicability.
For purposes of this chapter, if bamboo is found growing upon a property,
that shall constitute presumptive evidence that the growing of bamboo on
the property shall have occurred with the consent of the owner of such
property, except that such property owner shall not be presumed to be
a bamboo property owner if the property owner did not plant or grow
or cause said bamboo to be planted or grown in his property, and he
shall provide the Building Inspector with proof, satisfactory to the Building
Inspector, that within a reasonable period of time after he first learned
of the encroachment of bamboo onto his property from an adjoining or
neighboring property, he advised the owner of such adjoining or
neighboring property of his objection to the encroachment of bamboo onto
his property and/or initiated steps for the removal of the bamboo from his
property.
§ 80-4. Prohibited acts.
Effective upon the date this provision shall become law, the planting or
growing of bamboo shall be prohibited within the Village of Massapequa
Park. Any person who thereafter plants or grows, or causes to be planted to
grow, bamboo within the Village shall be deemed to be in violation of this
chapter, and shall be subject to such penalties as are set forth hereunder.
§ 80-5. Growth provisions.
flora, and destructive to structures and walks on properties within
the Village adjoining and neighboring those properties where bamboo
has been planted and/or permitted to grow; that because of these
effects the planting and the growing of bamboo threatens the value and
physical integrity of both public and private property in the Village;
and that therefore, in order to protect and preserve said environment
and values, the Village declares it necessary to regulate or prohibit the
planting and/or growing of bamboo within the Village.
A. Any bamboo which has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow in
any property within the Village of Massapequa Park prior to the
§ 80-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 80-5
78:56
§ 80-6. Removal.
effective date of this chapter may remain on such property, subject
to compliance with this section. Each bamboo property owner shall
be responsible to ensure that the bamboo planted or growing on his
property prior to the effective date of this chapter does not encroach
or grow upon any adjoining or neighboring property or properties,
including all public property and rights-of-way held by the Village, and
shall be required to take such measures as are reasonably expected
to prevent such bamboo from invading or growing onto adjoining or
neighboring properties. Such measures shall include installation of
sheathing comprised of metal or other material impenetrable by
bamboo at a sufficient depth within the property line or lines where the
bamboo is planted or is growing to prevent the growth or encroachment
upon adjoining or neighboring property by said bamboo. The Board of
Trustees may, from time to time, prescribe such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to give effect to this.
B. No bamboo property owner within the Village of Massapequa Park shall
cause, suffer, or allow bamboo to be planted, maintained, or otherwise
permitted to exist within 10 feet of any property line, street. sidewalk,
or public right-of-way in a fashion that blocks or otherwise impedes
lines of sight at intersections or impedes pedestrian access to Village
sidewalks, thoroughfares and rights-of- way.
A. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo property owner's
property invades or grows on an adjoining or neighboring property that
is owned or held on behalf of the Village of Massapequa Park, the
Village shall notify the bamboo property owner that the bamboo said
owner had planted or caused to plant or had permitted to grow on his
property has invaded Village property, and that the bamboo property
owner is responsible for the removal of such bamboo from the Village
property (subject to coordination and approval with the Village on the
means and manner of such removal). This notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail to the
latest address of the bamboo property owner on file with the Village
Clerk and a copy of the notice shall also be left in a conspicuous location
on the bamboo property owner's property in the Village of Massapequa
Park.
B. In the event that the bamboo property owner does not remove or
contract for the removal of said bamboo from the Village property or
does not make an arrangement with the Village for removal of such
bamboo within 30 days from the date the Village first deposited the
notice as provided in Subsection A above with the United States Postal
Service, then the Village, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for
the removal of such bamboo from the Village property. The bamboo
property owner shall be liable and responsible to the Village for the
Village's costs in removing the bamboo from the Village property. Such
costs may be assessed against the property of the bamboo property
§ 80-5 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 80-6
78:57
§ 80-7. Replanting prohibited.
Any bamboo either planted or caused to be planted or existing on a property
prior to the effective date of this chapter may not be replanted or replaced
owner as a tax payable by such bamboo property owner in the event
that the costs remain unpaid more than 30 days after demand for
payment has been made by the Village on the bamboo property owner.
C. In the event that the Village is compelled to undertake the removal or to
contract for the undertaking of removal of bamboo, as provided for in
Subsection B above, neither the Village nor its employees shall have
any liability for damages or other claims to the bamboo property owner
by reason of the removal of such bamboo. In the event such removal
entails or causes damages to the flora or other property of a person
other than the property of the bamboo property owner, the bamboo
property owner in violation of this section shall be responsible for such
damages.
D. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo property owner's
property invades or grows on an adjoining or neighboring private
property, the neighbor so affected shall notify the bamboo property
owner that the bamboo said owner had planted or caused to plant or
had permitted to grow on his property has invaded his property, and
that the bamboo property owner is responsible for the removal of such
bamboo from his neighbor's property. This notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to the latest
address of the bamboo property owner on file with the Building
Department records or as available through other records of the Village
of Massapequa Park, with a copy of said notice required to be sent to
the Village.
E. Notice. If the provisions of Subsection D of the foregoing sections are
not complied with, then the Village shall serve written notice, in person
or by mail, upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the
care or control of such lot or land to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Noncompliance with notice. If the person upon whom the notice is
served fails, neglects or refuses so to comply with such written notice
and demand of the Village within five days after service of such notice,
the Village may cause such condition to be remedied, and the actual
cost of such work, plus 50% for supervision and administration in
connection therewith, shall be certified by the Superintendent of Public
Works to the Treasurer, and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
the property in which such violation of this chapter occurs, and shall be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon said lot or land, and shall bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and shall be enforced by the same officer, and in the same
manner, as taxes.
§ 80-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 80-7
78:58
in kind once such bamboo is or has become, for any reason, dead, destroyed,
uprooted or otherwise removed.
§ 80-8. Notification.
Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, the Village shall give
notice by reasonable means to all property owners in the Village advising
them of the enactment of this chapter and requesting that each property
owner who would be deemed a bamboo property owner hereunder as of
the effective date of this chapter notify the Village, in writing, no later than
60 days after the date of the aforementioned notice from the Village that
bamboo is present on the property of such property owner and such other
information as may be requested in the notice from the Village.
§ 80-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 80-10. Severability.
In the event that any portion or portions of this chapter shall be determined
to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the chapter
and its provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 84
BICYCLES, SCOOTERS, GOPEDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dirt carts — See Ch. 110.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Parks — See Ch. 232.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
Skateboards, in-line skate and roller
skates — See Ch. 289.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
A. Violations. Any property owner who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation thereof. Each and every day that a
violation of this chapter shall exist shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
B. Penalties.
(1) A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $250 (i.e., per day of violation).
(2) The Village may also pursue civil or injunctive relief, or pursue
criminal penalties, irrespective of any determination to prosecute
for a violation of this chapter.
§ 80-7 BICYCLES, SCOOTERS, GOPEDS AND § 84-1
84:59
§ 84-1. Applicability.
This chapter, applicable to bicycles, scooters, gopeds and similar devices,
shall apply whenever a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device is operated
on any street or upon any highway or upon any parking lot or upon any
sidewalk or any place where pedestrians walk, all within the Village of
Massapequa Park.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — As defined and set forth in § 102 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law, every two- or three-wheeled device upon which a person or persons
may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gear, with
such wheels in a tandem or tricycle, except that it should not include such
a bicycle having solid tires and intended for use only on a sidewalk by
preteen-age children.
GOPED — A vehicle that is similar to a skateboard, but with a motor
attached and a handlebar for a standing rider.
SCOOTER — A vehicle with a long footboard between two small end wheels
that is controlled by an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.
§ 84-3. Use on roads and highways.
Every person operating a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device upon a
highway, road or street, dedicated or otherwise, shall operate the same in
strict observance of all laws applicable to a vehicle and the use thereof and
in compliance with all rules of the road applicable to the operation of a
vehicle and in compliance with all traffic laws, except as to those provisions
of law which, by their nature, can have no application.
§ 84-4. Emergence from alleys, driveways and buildings.
The operator of a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device emerging from
an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk.
§ 84-5. Operation on sidewalks.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device upon a
sidewalk within any business district.
B. Whenever any person shall operate a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar
device upon a sidewalk in a residential district, such person shall yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall stand, park or otherwise place or allow to be placed, in
a position of temporary storage, a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar
§ 84-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 84-5
84:60
§ 84-6. Towing.
Any motorcycle or bicycle or personal property which is improperly chained
as set forth above shall be subject to the Village's using its own manpower
to break said chain and tow away said bicycle or personal property to an
area designated and selected by the Village.
§ 84-7. Reflective clothing and other equipment.
No person shall operate a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device at night
unless he or she is wearing reflective clothing, which shall be visible from a
distance of not less than 50 feet and a maximum of 300 feet from the front,
side and rear of the bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device, when directly
in front of the lawful beams of a headlight on a motor vehicle.
§ 84-8. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
The parent of the minor child or the guardian of any minor child shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 84-9. Penalties for offenses.
device upon a highway, street or sidewalk or against any building
abutting a sidewalk in such a manner that shall obstruct or render
injury to a pedestrian or interfere with vehicular traffic. All standing,
storing or parking of a bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device must be
in a rack or space duly designated specifically for such purposes by the
Village.
D. No person, persons, corporations or other legal entity shall be allowed
to chain, attach or affix his or her bicycle, scooter, goped or similar
device or any personal property of any kind whatsoever used for
personal or commercial purposes to any tree, post, stanchion or other
structure within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, except
that storage in any rack or space duly designated specifically for such
purposes by the Village shall be allowed.
A. Any person, persons, corporations or other legal entity found guilty of
the violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine set forth in
Subsection B, plus the costs and expenses of removing or towing such
bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device from such street, sidewalk or
highway.
B. Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense; and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed $100
for the first offense; $200 for the second offense; $300 for the third
offense and $500 for each subsequent offense.
C. Any bicycle, scooter, goped or similar device operated in violation of
this chapter may be immediately impounded. The Village of
§ 84-5 BICYCLES, SCOOTERS, GOPEDS AND § 84-9
84:61
§ 84-10. Modifications; amendments.
Any modifications or amendments shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
Chapter 90
BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 90-1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all waters or waterways within
or adjacent to the village or subject to its jurisdiction, except when
prohibited by laws of the United States and except the waters or waterways
under the supervision of any other municipality.
§ 90-2. Compliance with other rules required.
All provisions of the Navigation Law of this state, of the inland rules enacted
by Congress and governing the navigation of the inland waters of the United
States and of the Pilot Rules for United States' inland waters applicable to
the channel systems, relative to the rules for vessels passing each other,
as to lights on vessels and other matters consistent with the proper use of
waters and waterways, shall be complied with by all vessels navigating said
waters and waterways under the jurisdiction of the village.
§ 90-3. Applicability of state and federal laws to seaplanes.
All provisions of the laws of this state and of the United States relative to
the use and operation of aircraft shall be complied with by all seaplanes
navigating and using waterways under the jurisdiction of the village.
§ 90-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
Massapequa Park shall store such impounded bicycles, scooters,
gopeds or similar devices in a suitable secure location. No impounded
bicycles, scooters, gopeds or similar devices may be released until all
storage costs and fees have been paid. The violator shall be responsible
for the payment of all such costs and fees. The per-diem storage fee
shall be as set by the resolution of the Board of Trustees, from time to
time. The impound fee shall be as set by the resolution of the Board of
Trustees, from time to time.
§ 84-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 90-4
90:62
BOAT or VESSEL — Includes every description of watercraft or other
contrivance used on or capable of being used as a means of transportation
in water and/or in air.
CHANNEL SYSTEM — Main channels, cross channels connecting with
them, basins and bathing areas.
HOUSEBOAT — A barge or similar craft fitted for use as a dwelling or for
leisurely cruising.
SEAPLANES — Includes aircraft of every description having attached
thereto devices or contrivances which permit takeoff and landing from or to
water.
§ 90-5. Manner of operation.
Every person operating a boat shall at all times operate the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at such rate of speed as not to disturb
the reasonable comfort or endanger the property of another or the life or
limb of any person or so as to interfere with the free and proper use of the
waters within the village. Throwing up a dangerous wake when approaching
or passing another boat shall be prohibited.
§ 90-6. Bathing and swimming areas.
No boat except one propelled by hand shall cruise or be operated within
100 feet of any lifelines or bathing float, or if there are no lifelines or
bathing float, then within 200 feet of any beach regularly used for bathing
or swimming, except at inlets or where a channel approaches the lifelines,
bathing float or beach, as the case may be, closer than such applicable
distances.
§ 90-7. Speed limits.
No boat shall be operated at a speed greater than four miles per hour in
any basin, dock anchorage, bathing area, creek, canal or elsewhere in the
waters of the village within 500 feet of the shoreline, nor at a speed greater
than 12 miles per hour elsewhere within 1,500 feet of the shoreline.
§ 90-8. Races.
The racing of power-driven boats of any type shall be prohibited unless
written permission shall have been received from the Village Board. The
application therefor shall state the time and place of the proposed race or
races, the types of boats participating therein and the type and kind of race
to be conducted.
§ 90-9. Muffler required.
No person shall operate a boat propelled wholly or partly by an engine
operated by gas, gasoline, naphtha, diesel oil or other substance without
having the exhaust from the engine run through a muffler or so controlled
§ 90-4 BOATING § 90-9
90:63
by the introduction of water into the exhaust pipe or line as to muffle the
noise of exhaust in a reasonable manner.
§ 90-10. Mooring and anchoring.
§ 90-11. Houseboats and similar craft.
A. Generally. Boats shall not moor or anchor so as to endanger the safety
of or cause damage to any boat previously anchored or moored, nor so
as to interfere with the mooring of any boat previously laid down, nor in
any case within 50 feet of a channel marker or in such manner as to
interfere with full use of the channel. Not more than two boats shall be
docked within any 100 feet of bulkhead. Boat shall be anchored to the
bulkhead in the owner's name.
B. Projection. Boats shall be moored at the edge of the channel and shall
be anchored parallel to the bulkhead. No boat shall be moored on any
waterway of the village so that such boat or any part or projection
thereof extends into the waterway more than 1/4 of the width of such
waterway as measured between the mean low-water lines along the
waterway at the point or place such boat is moored.
C. Applicability. Subsection B above shall apply only to such points or
places along the waterways within the village less than 100 feet in
width as measured from the mean high-water line at the point or place
to the closest point or place along the mean high-water line of the
opposite bank, shore or bulkhead.
D. Removal. Any boats moored or anchored in violation of this section shall
be removed by the owner or person in charge thereof on order of the
Village Board or any duly authorized officer or agent thereof. If said
boat is not removed after orders to so remove it, it may be removed by
or at the discretion of the Village Board or any duly authorized officer or
agent thereof at the expense of the owner or person in charge of said
vessel.
E. Rental. It shall be unlawful to rent space for the mooring of boats.
A. License required. No person shall moor or anchor any houseboat or
similar craft within village waters for a period of more than 48 hours
without having obtained a license therefor, after having filed an
application and otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter.
Such license shall be renewed weekly.
B. Inspection. Inspection of every such craft shall be made upon orders of
the Mayor, and if the applicant's use of maritime waters would, in the
Mayor's opinion, endanger the safety, good order, morals or welfare of
the community, the Mayor shall refuse to issue a license.
C. Fee. A fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, shall be paid for each
license and for every renewal thereof.19
§ 90-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 90-12
90:64
§ 90-12. Location of piles.
No piles shall be installed in a Residential AA Zone unless authorized by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 90-13. Seaplanes.
§ 90-14. Removal of hazardous or disabled vessels.
Any vessel which becomes a menace to navigation or unseaworthy or sinks,
grounds or becomes otherwise disabled shall be removed by the owner
or person in charge thereof on order of the Village Board or any duly
authorized officer or agent thereof. If said boat is not removed after order to
so remove it, it may be removed by or at the direction of the Village Board
or any duly authorized officer or agent thereof at the expense of the owner
or person in charge of said vessel.
§ 90-15. Water sports.
§ 90-16. Spear guns and similar apparatus.
No person shall use or discharge under water any spear gun or similar
apparatus within 200 feet of any beach regularly used for bathing or
swimming or within 100 feet of any bather or swimmer.
§ 90-17. Special permits.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village Board from issuing
special permits for aquatic events, boat races or similar events, under
proper supervision, in limited areas and for limited periods.
§ 90-18. Maintenance of waterfront properties.
A. Restricted. No seaplane shall take off or land upon any waters or
waterways under the jurisdiction of the village and within 500 feet of
the shoreline except in case of an emergency.
B. Scope of section. For the purposes of this section, the term
"emergency" shall mean a situation or circumstance endangering any
person.
A. Water skiing, aquaplaning or similar sports are hereby prohibited in any
waters within the village or within 500 feet of the shoreline.
B. No skin diving shall be undertaken in any waterway under the
jurisdiction of the village where the same may interfere with the
reasonable and proper operation of vessels or within 200 feet of any
beach regularly used for bathing or swimming or within 100 feet of any
person bathing or swimming.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-12 BOATING § 90-18
90:65
§ 90-19. Dumping.
Dumping of oil, refuse, garbage, grass cuttings or similar landscaping waste
or any other offensive materials into any of the waters within the village
shall be prohibited, whether such dumping is from boats or vessels or from
land.
§ 90-20. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the County of Nassau is hereby empowered to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and every person in charge of a vessel
or seaplane navigating or using waterways under the jurisdiction of the
village shall at all times obey the lawful orders of the members of said Police
Department. Such Department shall have the right to stop any vessel or
seaplane navigating or using said waterways for the purpose of enforcing
this chapter.
Chapter 94
(RESERVED)
Chapter 97
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 97-1. Establishment of District; boundaries.
The Business Improvement District shall be and is hereby established in the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park by the Board of Trustees, having
found that the establishment of the District is in the public interest, that
all notice, mailing and hearing requirements have been complied with, that
A. Duty. The owner, lessee or occupant of waterfront property shall keep
the same clean and in good repair, and he shall keep the waters
adjacent thereto properly dredged in order not to constitute a menace
to navigation or to the health and well-being of the community.
B. Inspections; notices. Regular inspection shall be made by village
officials of waterfront properties, their structures and appurtenances to
determine their condition and methods of operation. If defects or
violations of law or ordinances are found upon such inspection, notice
shall be served upon the owner, lessee or occupant to correct the same
in the manner specified in the notice. Failure to comply therewith shall
constitute a violation of this section.
§ 90-18 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 97-1
97:66
all properties within the District will benefit from the establishment and
that all property benefited is included in the boundaries of the District. The
boundaries of said District are contained in the district plan adopted by the
Board of Trustees on December 11, 2000, and as set forth below:
§ 97-2. Improvements and services.
The construction improvements and the provision of services within the
District shall be pursuant to such District plan of the Business Improvement
District. All said services shall be in addition to, and not a substitution for,
required municipal services provided by the Village of Massapequa Park on
a village-wide basis.
§ 97-3. Applicability of state law; effect on other laws.
§ 97-4. Amendments.
Any amendments to the Business Improvement District or to the Business
Improvement District Plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions
set forth in § 980-i of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 97-5. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon compliance with the requirements
set forth in § 980-g of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law and upon
compliance with all other requirements of law.
A. Park Boulevard, from Clark to Glengariff Road.
B. Front Street, from Seventh Avenue to Mayflower Avenue.
C. Sunrise Highway, from Lakeshore Boulevard to Cartwright Boulevard.
D. Merrick Road, from Massapequa High School to Park Boulevard, north
and south sides.
A. To the extent not otherwise explicitly herein, the provision set forth in
Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall govern the operation of
the Business Improvement District.
B. Insofar as the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other local law or act, the provisions of this chapter
shall be controlling.
§ 97-1 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT § 97-5
97:67
Chapter 100
CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 97-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 97-5
100:68
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. VIII of Ch. 7 of the 1967 Code]
§ 100-1. Gutters, leaders and dry wells.20
§ 100-2. Prohibited connections to stormwater drainage system.
No dry wells, gutters, leaders, air conditioning, refrigeration or pools of any
kind or any similar drainage from any building shall be connected to the
stormwater drainage system of the village.
§ 100-3. Materials for new construction.21
All cesspools installed for new construction or replacement of existing
cesspools may be of precast concrete steel-reinforced or block construction.
§ 100-4. Number of blocks for pools.
A. Required. All buildings, whether business or residential, shall have
gutters, leaders and dry wells. The dry wells shall be located no less
than eight feet from the foundation wall and shall be at least two feet by
two feet by four feet.
B. Exception. The above requirements of dry wells shall not apply to that
area south of Nassau Street in Residential AA Zone. In that area, houses
shall be constructed with splash pans or other hard surface at the base
of the leaders to conduct rainwater to the road, using the driveway or
other means as a valley to the road in order to prevent erosion. Any
builder in said area shall submit to the Building Department a detailed
sketch or plan showing the location of leaders or splash pans or other
hard surface to accomplish the above.
A. Generally, If one pool is installed, there shall be a minimum of 225
eighteen-inch blocks or 250 sixteen-inch blocks. If two pools are built,
each pool shall have a minimum of 125 blocks.
B. Number below waste line. Either 250 or 125 blocks shall be below the
waste line entering the pool.
20.Editor's Note: Former Secs. 7-206, Inspection, testing of plumbing; 7-207, Independence
of plumbing and drainage systems,; 7-208, Alterations to existing system; L copper piping
authorized; 7-209, Lead pipe; quality, connection; 7-210, Size of cast-iron waste, vent,
stack, cleanout; 7-211, Extension of soil, vent pipes through roof; 7-212, Branches; 7-213,
Traps for fixtures; location, connection; 7-214, Backventing, 7-215, Safe and refrigerator
waste pipes; and 7-216, Lead closet bands; size, connections, which immediately preceded
this section, and former Sec. 7-218, Housing sewers and drains, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
In addition, former Secs. 7-225, Approval of plans, inspection by Building Inspector;
7-226, Location; and 7-227, Distance requirements for pools, which immediately preceded
this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I.
§ 100-1 CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS § 100-5
100:69
§ 100-5. Diameter of pools.
When 250 blocks are used in an installation, the pool shall be nine feet
outside diameter or approximately 18 blocks around the bottom.
§ 100-6. Shape of sides.
A pool shall begin tapering in six feet or approximately nine courses from
the bottom of the pool.
§ 100-7. Depth of pools.
All pools shall be kept two feet above the water table and shall finish with
a minimum of one foot or a maximum of two feet below the finished grade.
The top three courses shall be cemented in place.
§ 100-8. Waste pipe to pool.
The waste pipe from house to pool, with a minimum pitch of 1/4 inch to the
foot, shall connect to the pool a minimum of two feet from the top of the
pool.
§ 100-9. Bends and sweeps.
Waste lines extending from the house to pools or septic tanks shall have no
bends or sweeps.
§ 100-10. Grease traps.
When two pools are installed, a grease trap shall also he installed.
§ 100-11. Top of pool.
The top of a pool shall be three feet in diameter and shall be covered with a
reinforced cement cover.
§ 100-12. Drawings of tanks and leaching fields or pools.
The Building Inspector shall request two drawings showing the size of a
proposed septic tank and either leaching fields or leaching pools, which
shall be determined by soil conditions and/or groundwater and which shall
be approved or disapproved by him.
§ 100-13. Capacity and dimensions of tanks for houses.
The minimum capacity of a septic tank for a two- or three-bedroom house
shall be 700 gallons; for a four-bedroom house, 800 gallons; and for a fivebedroom
house, 950 gallons. The minimum size shall be three feet by six
feet and five feet deep, with four feet to the flow line leaving tank, allowing
one foot for air space.
§ 100-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 100-14
100:70
§ 100-14. Size and type of tanks for commercial buildings.
The size and type of septic tanks for commercial buildings shall be
determined by the floor area and the number of fixtures to be served
thereby.
§ 100-15. Width of tanks for commercial buildings.
When a septic tank is installed for a commercial building, the width of the
tank shall not exceed 50% of its length.
§ 100-16. Depth and covering of pool.
§ 100-17. Use of baffle in septic tank.
The Building Inspector shall determine whether or not a baffle shall be used
in a septic tank.
§ 100-18. Distribution box for tank.
All septic tanks shall have a distribution box of a minimum of two feet by
two feet by two feet deep, with a separate cover with a lifting ring, and the
distribution box shall be built on the opposite end of the tank from the place
where the waste enters. The top of the distribution box shall extend to the
top of the tank.
§ 100-19. Waste line to tank.
The waste line from a house to a septic tank shall be iron for the first four
feet from the house, then five-inch transite, and shall have a minimum pitch
of 1/4 inch to the foot.
§ 100-20. Specifications for leaching fields.
A. Depth. The top of a septic tank shall be a minimum of one foot and a
maximum of 18 inches below the finished grade.
B. Roof. Each septic tank shall have a twenty-four-inch hole in the roof
thereof, for cleaning, with a reinforced cover. The roof of a septic tank
shall be no less than four-inch reinforced steel mat, and the reinforced
steel rods shall not be more than six inches apart and shall be tied at all
joints with proper wire.
A. Location. If leaching pools are approved, they shall be a minimum of 10
feet apart and a minimum distance of 10 feet from the septic tank.
B. Depth. The leaching field shall be a minimum of two feet above the
water table and a maximum of two feet below the finished grade.
C. Dimensions. The leaching field of a two- or three-bedroom house shall
be a minimum of 75 feet, divided into three twenty-five-foot lengths
from the distribution box on all sixty-foot plots. These fields start a
§ 100-14 CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS § 100-20
100:71
§ 100-21. Procedure for leaching field construction.
If leaching fields are to be used for either commercial or residential
buildings, all bog, clay and other foreign matter shall be removed and
backfilled with bank run. Leaching fields shall be laid in a bed of washed
gravel which shall be a minimum of two feet wide and one foot deep with
eight inches below pipe. The leaching field shall be covered with rubberoid
or forty-five-pound cap sheet.
minimum distance of 10 feet from the house to the center of the inside
leaching field, six feet to the center of the middle field, six feet to the
center of the outer field and three feet from the property line, and shall
terminate a minimum of three feet from the side property line.
D. Pitch. Leaching fields shall have a pitch of 1/8 inch to the foot.
§ 100-20 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 100-21
100:72
ARTICLE II
Disposal of Contents of Vaults and Privies
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Sec. 11-5 of the 1967 Code]
§ 100-22. Prohibited acts.
No person shall deposit or allow to run into or remain in any street or other
public place in the village, or deposit or allow to run into any stream or
other body of water within the village, the contents or any part thereof
of any vault, privy, cesspool, cistern or sink; nor shall any owner, tenant
or occupant of any building to which any vault, sink, privy or cesspool
shall pertain or be attached permit the contents of any part thereof to
flow therefrom or to rise within two feet of any part of the top thereof
or permit said contents to become offensive; nor shall any vault, privy,
cistern, cesspool or sink be filled or covered with dirt until it shall have been
emptied of its filthy contents.
§ 100-22 CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS § 100-22
100:73
Chapter 110
DIRT CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Licensed occupations — See Ch, 202.
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRT CART — Every vehicle of whatever description used in carting or
transporting dirt, ashes, garbage, swill, offal, manure or other nauseous or
offensive substance. 22
§ 110-2. Issuance and display of license.23
The Board of Trustees may issue a license to the owner of the vehicle
licensed, together with a plate, to be affixed to a conspicuous and
indispensable part of such dirt cart, on which shall be clearly set forth the
official number of the vehicle with the words "Dirt Cart."
§ 110-3. Containment of contents.
Every dirt cart, whether or not described as such, shall be furnished with
a good and tight container and shall be securely covered when loaded to
prevent the contents from being scattered upon the streets.
§ 110-4. Standing and loading.
No cart or other vehicle used for carrying or containing any manure,
swill, garbage, offal or rubbish or other nauseous or offensive substance or
the contents of any privy, vault, cesspool or sink shall, without necessity
therefor, be allowed to stand or remain before or near any building, place of
business or other premises where any person may be, nor shall the loading
or unloading of any such cart or vehicle or the conveying thereof through
any street, place or premises consume an unreasonable period of time.
22.Editor's Note: Former § 12-81, Annual fee for license, renewal, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 2-14-1977 by L.L. No. 2-1977.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-22 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 110-5
110:74
§ 110-5. Transport of dead animals.
Any dirt cart or other vehicle used for carrying or containing a dead animal
shall be equipped with a cover to conceal such animal from view while the
same is being transported for final disposition.
§ 110-6. Maintenance.
All dirt carts and all implements used in connection therewith shall be kept
and maintained in an inoffensive and sanitary condition.
§ 110-7. Storage.
All dirt carts and all implements used in connection therewith, when not in
use, shall be stored and kept in a place where no needless offense shall be
given to the people of the village.
Chapter 116
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 110-5 DIRT CARTS § 110-7
110:75

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Amended 5-12-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; 7-13-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981; 4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 8-22-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988;
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; 11-22-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 116-1. License application; term; fees.
A. The owner of any dog four months of age or older, unless otherwise
exempted, is required to make regular applications for a dog license to
the Village Clerk. The owner of each dog required to be licensed shall
obtain, complete and return to the Village Clerk a dog license
application together with the license application fee, any applicable
license surcharges and such additional fees as may be established by
the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
Each license application shall be accompanied by proof that the dog has
been vaccinated against rabies or a statement from a licensed
veterinarian that such vaccinations would endanger the dog's life, in
which case vaccination shall not be required.
B. Each license issued shall be valid for a period of one year. The term of
the license shall not exceed the last day of the eleventh month following
the expiration date of the current rabies certificate for the dog being
licensed.
C. The annual fee for each dog license issued shall be:
(1) Nine dollars for each spayed or neutered dog. In the case of an
altered dog, every application shall be accompanied by a certificate
signed by a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been
spayed or neutered, except that such certificate or affidavit is not
required if same is already on file with the Village Clerk. In lieu of
the spay or neuter certificate, an owner may present a statement
certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he or she has
examined the dog and found that because of old age or other
reason, the life of the dog would be endangered by spaying or
neutering. In such case, the license fee for the dog shall be the
same as an altered dog.
(2) Fifteen dollars for each spayed or unneutered dog.
(3) In addition to the fees set forth in Subsections (1) and (2) of this
section, there shall be imposed a surcharge of $1 if the dog to be
licensed is altered, or a fee of $3 if the dog sought to be licensed is
unaltered. This surcharge will be paid over to the agency
designated pursuant to Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law to be used for animal population control efforts.
(4) Senior citizens, over the age of 65, are entitled to a discount. The
fee for a spayed/neutered dog will be $5 and the fee for unspayed/
unneutered dogs will be $9.
§ 116-1 DIRT CARTS § 116-1
110:77
§ 116-2. License required.
§ 116-3. Identification tag required.
§ 116-4. Notification of change of ownership; lost dog; death of dog.
D. Excepted from payment of the license fee are applications submitted for
a dog license for any guide, hearing, service, war, working search,
detection or police dog. The person owning, possessing or harboring
such a dog bears the burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
Village Clerk that the dog is a service dog and exempt from the
licensing fee.
E. All license fees shall be nonrefundable.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep a
dog which is not licensed. The fact that a dog is without a tag attached
to the collar shall be presumptive evidence that such dog is unlicensed.
B. Any dog harbored within the Village of Massapequa Park which is
owned by a resident of New York City or licensed by the City of New
York, or which is owned by a nonresident of New York State and
licensed by a jurisdiction outside of the State of New York, shall for a
period of 30 days be exempt from the licensing and identification
provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep a dog which
has not been identified.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog to
permit such dog off the premises of such person without an
identification tag attached to the dog's collar.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly affix any false or
improper identification to any dog.
D. Tags issued by the Village Clerk shall be inscribed with "Inc. Village of
Massapequa Park." current telephone number for the Office of the
Village Clerk, and a unique identification number for each dog licensed
by the Village.
A. In the event of a change in ownership of any dog licensed pursuant to
this article or the address of the owner of record of any such dog, the
owner of record shall, within 10 days of such change, file with the
Village Clerk a written report of such change. Such owner shall remain
liable for any violation of this article until such filing is made or until the
dog is licensed in the name of the new owner.
B. If any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this article is lost or
stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days after the discovery of
such event, file with the Village Clerk a written report of such loss or
§ 116-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 116-4
110:78
§ 116-5. Running at large; restraint.
§ 116-6. Noisy or dangerous dogs.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or otherwise maintain
a dog in the Village which shall disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood or which shall attack any person or which shall cause danger
or fear to any person or neighborhood.
§ 116-7. Confinement of dangerous dogs.
Any dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities shall be confined by the
owner on the owner's premises at all times in such manner that it cannot
reach persons who may have occasion to lawfully enter upon said premises.
§ 116-7.1. Dogs in heat.
The owner of any female dog in heat shall not keep, harbor or otherwise
maintain such dog in the Village unless the same is confined in a kennel
or veterinary hospital or in an enclosed building on the owner's property
during the entire period such dog is in heat. Any female dog in heat which
is not confined is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
apprehended and impounded upon the order of the Village Clerk.
§ 116-7.2. Seizure and redemption.
theft. The owner shall not be responsible for any violation of this article
with respect to such dog after such report is filed.
C. In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall notify the Village
Clerk of the dog's death either before or upon receipt of a renewal
notice from the Village.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring any
dog to allow the same to run loose or be at large upon any public
highway, street or other public place in the Village.
B. All dogs must be under the immediate and full control of the owner or
person in charge thereof and restrained on a leash.
A. Seizure. The Village Dog Warden or any other person or agency duly
authorized by the Village shall seize any dog found at large or not under
the immediate control of the owner or person in charge thereof. Every
dog not licensed or tagged as provided by the Agriculture and Markets
Law shall be held by said Dog Warden for seven days; every dog so
seized which is unleashed but licensed shall be held for 12 days. All
dogs seized shall be properly fed and cared for at the expense of the
municipality until disposed of.
B. Redemption. The owner of a tagged or untagged dog which as been
seized may redeem the same in accordance with the regulations of the
agency or person authorized by the Village to impound such dogs.
§ 116-4 DIRT CARTS § 116-7.2
110:79
§ 116-7.3. Nuisances.
§ 116-7.4. Other state regulations.
This article shall include any other New York State regulations as set forth
in the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7, Licensing,
Indemnification and Control of Dogs.
C. Failure to redeem. Any dog not redeemed as provided in Subsection B
shall be sold or destroyed by the Warden. In case of a sale, the
purchaser must pay the purchase price therefor to the Village Clerk and
shall also obtain a license for the dog.
D. Application of statutes. All proceedings by the Village Warden for
seizing and impounding a dog, the redemption, destruction or sale
thereof and the fees of such Dog Warden shall be conducted pursuant to
the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. Dogs shall not create a nuisance by defecating on public property or
private property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any dog to create a nuisance by defecating on
public property or private property other than the property owned or
leased by the person owning, possessing, harboring or having control
over such dog.
C. Any person owning, possessing, harboring or having control over such
dog shall be in violation of this section unless the feces are immediately
removed in a suitable container and sanitarily disposed of.
§ 116-7.2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 116-7.4
110:80
ARTICLE II
Fowl and Other Animals
§ 116-8. Buildings and pens prohibited; exception.
No house, building, pen or yard for the keeping of fowl or other animals,
wild or domestic, except dogs, shall be built or shall be maintained in the
Village by any person.
§ 116-9. Keeping certain animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain on premises owned,
rented or controlled by him any fowl, rabbits, reptiles or wild animals.
§ 116-10. Livery stables and riding academies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a livery stable or riding
academy anywhere within the Village.
§ 116-8 DIRT CARTS § 116-10
110:81
Chapter 120
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 287. Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 120-1. Establishments with drive-throughs.
Any drive-through restaurant or other drive-through which is contiguous
to a residential zone must maintain at least a fifty-foot buffer between
the residential zone and any component of the drive-through such as, but
not limited to, menu boards, voice boxes, sound machines, and windows
where food or money is dispensed or collected. The driveway to the drivethrough
may be maintained in the fifty-foot setback, but a least a twentyfive-
foot landscaped buffer must be maintained between the driveway and
the residential zone.
Chapter 122
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless clearly stated otherwise, the following words
and terms shall have the following meanings:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Has the same meaning as defined in § 3302
of the Public Health Law of the State of New York or any successor law.
DRUG-RELATED PARAPHERNALIA — Any machine, instrument, tool,
equipment or device used or intended to be used for the following purpose:
to introduce into the human body any controlled substance under
circumstances in violation of the laws of the State of New York.
DRUG-RELATED PRINTED MATTER — Any book, magazine, pamphlet,
periodical, card or flyer used in conjunction with drug-related paraphernalia
which is primarily intended to disseminate information for one or more of
the following purposes:
To advocate or recommend the use or possession of a controlled
substance when such use or possession is in violation of the laws of the
State of New York.
A.
§ 116-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 122-1
120:82
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
§ 122-2. Unlawful acts.
§ 122-3. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 128
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Plumbing — See Ch. 248.
To advertise, describe, explain, depict or display any method by which a
controlled substance may be obtained or produced when such method
could reasonably be expected to lead to the use and possession of such
controlled substance in violation of the laws of the State of New York.
B.
To advertise, describe, explain, depict or display any drug-related
paraphernalia.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for
sale, promote and/or facilitate the sale, use or purchase of drug-related
paraphernalia.
B. The simultaneous possession of drug-related paraphernalia and drugrelated
printed matter shall constitute a presumption that the person so
possessing such paraphernalia and printed matter intended the
paraphernalia to be used for the purpose listed in the definition of
"drug-related paraphernalia" in § 122-1.
A. The Village of Massapequa Park may revoke the certificate of
occupancy upon a finding pursuant to a hearing held in the Supreme
Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction that such person,
firm or corporation has sold or offered for sale drug-related
paraphernalia or has permitted said sale within the premises for which
such certificate has been granted.
B. The Mayor and/or such village official as he may designate may institute
an action in the Supreme Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin any action prohibited pursuant to § 122-2 of this
chapter.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who has sold or offered for sale any
drug-related paraphernalia shall be subject to a fine and/or civil penalty.
[Amended 11-22-1993 by L.L. No. 18-1993]
§ 122-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 128-1
122:83
§ 128-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, wishing to maintain
reciprocity with the county and surrounding communities, does hereby
adopt the current National Electrical Code in total.
§ 128-2. Additions and addenda. [Amended 12-13-1993 by L.L. No.
21-1993]
The following additions and addenda will be included in the Electrical Code
for the Village of Massapequa Park:
A. All electrical work shall be performed in a workmanlike manner as
prescribed by the Village Code and subject to final inspection by a
certified electrical inspection agency approved by the Board of
Trustees. [Amended 1-11-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. All applications for permits for electrical work within the boundaries of
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park shall be accompanied by a
set of drawings, in duplicate, containing the work to be done, and a
description of materials to be used.
C. The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park further adds the
following conditions to ensure positive protection for its residents:
(1) Number 12 copper wire shall be the minimum size allowed. It may
be Romex (with ground) or BX cable. Any other approved wire in
electrical raceways must also maintain a minimum size of Number
12 copper wire, except control wiring.
(2) All habitable rooms in new constructions in residences with doublehung
windows or casement windows shall have one (1) three-wire
independent circuit within two (2) feet of one (1) window in each
room, to be used for air-conditioning units. [Three-wire circuit shall
be made available one hundred ten (110) volts or two hundred
twenty (220) volts hookup]. A separate circuit is required for each
air-conditioning unit.
(3) All furnaces and electric hot-water heaters shall be wired with BX
cable and feed lines to said furnaces, etc., to be encased in
conduits. Thin wall tubing will be acceptable and suitable.
(4) Aluminum wire, with the exception of service entrance cable, shall
be prohibited in both residential and commercial establishments.
(5) Service entrance requirements shall conform to Long Island
Lighting Company requirements and specifications and shall be
subject to inspection and approval by said utility company.
(6) All receptacles (kitchen, bathroom and outside receptacles) shall
be protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter wired to the
branch circuit supplying these receptacles.
§ 128-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 128-2
122:84
Chapter 136
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 136-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 136-2. Permitted actions.
No decision to carry out or approve an action, other than an exempt action
or an action listed in § 136-3B hereof or Section 617.12 of Title 6 of NYCRR
as a Type II action, shall be made by any department, board, commission,
(7) All swimming pools, hot tubs, whirlpools and similar equipment,
including pump and lighting or circuitry to supply electrical power
to the pools, hot tubs, whirlpools and/or similar equipment, shall be
protected by ground fault interrupters. All outdoor receptacles or
light wiring within a radius of ten (10) feet of the said pools shall be
protected by ground fault interrupters and wired to the branch
circuit supplying these receptacles.
(8) The use of Romex and plastic conduit is prohibited in all
commercial and industrial buildings. BX and conduit shall be used
exclusively.
D. This section shall take effect immediately.
A. Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives used in this chapter shall have the same meaning
as those defined in § 8-0105 of the Environmental Conservation Law
and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations
(NYCRR).
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the village.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the village.
PEAS — The preliminary environment ment statement.
VILLAGE — The Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 128-2 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 136-2
136:85
officer or employee of the village until there has been full compliance with
all requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting:
§ 136-3. Interpretation of state regulations. [Amended 4-23-1979 by
L.L. No. 6-1979]
§ 136-4. Preliminary environmental assessment statement (PEAS).
A. The conducting of contemporaneous environmental, engineering,
economic feasibility or other studies and preliminary planning and
budgetary processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal for
action which do not commit the village to approve, commence or
engage in such action; or
B. The granting of any part of an application which relates only to
technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such partial
approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence the action
until all requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR
have been fulfilled.
A. The actions listed in Section 617.12 of the regulations known as "Title 6
of NYCRR," as amended by the Department of Environmental
Conservation, effective November 1, 1978, as Type I actions are hereby
deemed likely to have a significant effect on the environment.
B. The actions listed in Section 617.13 of the regulations known as "Title 6
of NYCRR," as amended by the Department of Environmental
Conservation, effective November 1, 1978, as Type II actions are
hereby deemed not to have a significant effect on the environment.
A. For the purpose of assisting in the determination of whether an action
may or will not have a significant effect on the environment, applicants
for permits or other approvals shall, upon request, file a PEAS with the
appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee (that
is, the department, board, commission, officer or employee having
jurisdiction over the permit or other approval sought), setting forth the
name of the applicant, the location of the real property affected, if any, a
description of the nature of the proposed action and the effect it may
have on the environment. In addition, applicants may include a detailed
statement of the reasons why, in their view, a proposed action may or
will not have a significant effect on the environment.
B. Where the action involves an application, the PEAS, if requested at or
before the time the applicant attempts to file its application, shall be
filed simultaneously with the application for the action. If the PEAS is
requested after the applicant has filed its application, it shall be filed
within three days of the request.
C. The PEAS provided herein shall be upon a form prescribed by
resolution by the Commission and shall contain such additional relevant
§ 136-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 136-4
136:86
§ 136-5. Review of application.
§ 136-6. Action upon determination of impact.
§ 136-7. Notice of proposed action.
The Commission shall require an applicant to submit a fee to defray the
expense to it of reviewing the PEAS. Such fees shall be determined as set
forth in § 136-23 hereof. Upon the payment of the required fee, the receipt
of the file and receipt of the PEAS, if it was requested and/or prepared
subsequent to the file being forwarded to the Commission, the Commission
shall cause a notice to be posted on a signboard of and maintained by
the village and may also cause such notice to be published in the official
newspaper of the village, if any, or, if none, a newspaper having general
circulation within the village, describing the nature of the proposed action
and stating that written views thereon of any person shall be received by the
information as shall be required in the prescribed form. Such PEAS
shall be accompanied by drawings, sketches and maps, if any, together
with any other relevant explanatory material required by the
Commission.
A. The appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee
shall render a written determination on such application within 15 days
following receipt of a complete application; provided, however, that
such period may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and
the appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee.
The determination shall state whether such proposed action has been
found to be an exempt action as provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6
of NYCRR, an action listed in § 136-3B hereof or an action listed in
Section 617.12 of Title 6 of NYCRR as a Type II action. The appropriate
department, board, commission officer or employee may hold informal
meetings with the applicant and may meet with and consult any other
person for the purpose of aiding it in making a determination on the
application.
B. The time limitations provided in this chapter shall be coordinated with,
to the extent practicable, other time limitations provided by statute or
local law, ordinance or regulation of the village.
A. If the appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee
determines that the proposed action is an exempt action as provided in
Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action listed in § 136-6B
hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 of NYCRR as a
Type II action, the proposed action may be processed without farther
regard to this chapter.
B. If not, the appropriate department, board, commission, officer or
employee shall immediately forward to the Commission its file on the
proposed action and notify the applicant, if any, to immediately file a
PEAS if it has not already done so.
§ 136-4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 136-7
136:87
appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee no later
than a date specified in such notice.
§ 136-8. Review of application by Commission.
The Commission shall thereafter consider the application within 15 days
after the filing of all the required papers and fees, unless such time is
extended with the consent of the applicant, and report to the Board
whether, in its opinion, the proposed action is an exempt action as provided
in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action listed in § 136-3B hereof
or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 of NYCRR as a Type II action
and whether or not such action may or will have a significant effect on the
environment.
§ 136-9. Review of application by Board.
Within 30 days after the filing of all the required papers and fees, unless
such time is extended with the consent of the applicant, the Board shall
render a determination on the application.
§ 136-10. Action upon determination of significant impact.
A. If the Board shall determine that the proposed action is an exempt
action as provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action
listed in § 136-3B hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6
of NYCRR as a Type II action, the proposed action may be processed
without further regard to this chapter.
B. If the Board shall determine that the proposed action is not an exempt
action as provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action
listed in § 136-3B hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6
of NYCRR as a Type II action, but is still such an action as will not have
a significant effect on the environment, it shall prepare, file and
circulate such determination as provided in Section 617.7(b) of Title 6
of NYCRR and thereafter the proposed action may be processed without
further regard to this chapter.
C. If the Board shall determine that the proposed action may have a
significant effect on the environment, the Board shall prepare, file and
circulate such determination as provided in Section 617.7(b) of Title 6
of NYCRR and thereafter the proposed action shall be reviewed and
processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Part
617 of Title 6 of NYCRR.
A. Following a determination that a proposed action may have a significant
effect on the environment, the Board shall, in accordance with the
provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR:
(1) In the case of an action involving an applicant, immediately notify
the applicant of the determination and request the applicant to
prepare either an environmental impact report in the form of a
§ 136-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 136-10
136:88
§ 136-11. Draft environmental impact statement; notice of
completion.
draft environmental impact statement or a draft environmental
impact statement and submit it to the Commission for its review.
If the applicant is requested to prepare an environmental impact
report, the Commission shall, after receipt of such report, prepare
a draft environmental statement. Notwithstanding any use of
outside resources or work, the Board shall make its own
independent judgment of the scope, contents and adequacy of a
draft environmental impact statement.
(2) In the case of an action not involving an applicant, the Commission
shall prepare a draft environmental impact statement.
B. If the applicant decides not to submit the requested environmental
impact report or draft environmental impact statement, the Board shall
give written notice to the applicant that the processing of the
application will cease and that no approval will be issued. The Board
shall require an applicant to submit a fee to defray the expense to it of
reviewing the environmental impact report or the draft environmental
impact statement. Such fees shall be determined as set forth in
§ 136-23 hereof.
A. Upon completion of a draft environmental impact statement prepared
by or at the request of the Board, a notice of completion, containing the
information specified in Section 617.7(d) of Title 6 of NYCRR, shall be
prepared, filed and circulated as provided in Section 617.7(e) and (f) of
Title 6 of NYCRR. In addition, it shall be published in the official
newspaper of the village, if any, or, if none, a newspaper having general
circulation within the village, and a copy thereof shall also be posted on
a signboard of and maintained by the village. Copies of the draft
environmental impact statement and the notice of completion shall be
filed, sent and made available as provided in Section 617.7(e) and (f) of
Title 6 of NYCRR.
B. If the Board determines to hold a public hearing on a draft
environmental impact statement, notice thereof shall be filed,
circulated and sent in the same manner as the notice of completion and
shall be published in the official newspaper of the village, if any, or, if
none, in a newspaper having general circulation within the village, not
less than 10 days prior to such public hearing. Such notice shall also
state the place where substantive written comments on the draft
environmental impact statement may he sent and the date before which
such comments shall be received. The hearing shall commence no less
than 15 calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days after the filing of
the draft environmental impact statement, except as otherwise
provided where the Board determines that additional time is necessary
for the public or other agency review of the draft environmental impact
statement or where a different hearing date is required as appropriate
under other applicable law.
§ 136-10 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 136-11
136:89
§ 136-12. Review of draft environmental impact statement by
Commission.
The Commission shall review the draft environmental impact statement
and, five days prior to the hearing, report to the Board whether or not, in
its opinion, the proposed action may or will have a significant effect on the
environment.
§ 136-13. Review of draft environmental impact statement by
Board.
If, on the basis of a draft environmental impact statement, a Commission
report and a public hearing thereon, if any, the Board determines that
an action will not have a significant effect on the environment, the Board
shall prepare, file and circulate such determination as provided in Section
617.7(b) of Title 6 of NYCRR and thereafter the proposed action may be
processed without further regard to this chapter.
§ 136-14. Final environmental impact statement.
§ 136-15. Notice of completion; availability of copies.
C. When a SEQR hearing is to be held, it shall be incorporated into
existing hearing procedures.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board shall prepare or cause
to be prepared a final environmental impact statement in accordance
with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR; provided, further,
that if the action involves an application, the Board may direct the
applicant to prepare the final environmental impact statement and
submit it to the Commission for its review.
B. Such final environmental impact statement shall be prepared within 45
days after the close of any hearing or within 60 days after the filing of
the draft environmental impact statement, whichever last occurs;
provided, however, that the Board may extend this time as necessary to
complete the statement adequately or where problems identified with
the proposed action require material reconsideration or modification.
C. Where the action involves an application, such final environmental
impact statement shall be accompanied by the fee specified in § 136-23
to defray the expenses of the village in evaluating same.
A. A notice of completion of a final environmental impact statement shall
be prepared, filed and sent in the same manner as provided in § 136-11
herein and shall be sent to all persons to which the notice of completion
of the draft environmental impact statement was sent.
B. Copies of the final environmental impact statement shall be filed and
made available for review in the same manner as the draft
environmental impact statement.
§ 136-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 136-16
136:90
§ 136-16. Review of final environmental impact statement by
Commission.
The Commission shall review the final environmental impact statement and,
within 15 days after the filing of the final environmental impact statement,
report to the Board whether or not, in its opinion, the proposed action may
or will have a significant effect on the environment.
§ 136-17. Review of final environmental impact statement by Board;
time limit for consideration.
No decision to carry out or approve an action which has been the subject
of a final environmental impact statement by the Board or by any other
agency shall be made until after the filing and consideration of the final
environmental impact statement. Where the Board has been the lead
agency for an action, it shall make a decision whether or not to approve
the action within 30 days of the filing of the final environmental impact
statement.
§ 136-18. Findings required upon approval of action with significant
impact.
When the Board decides to carry out or approve an action which may have
a significant effect on the environment, it shall make the following findings
in a written determination:
§ 136-19. Availability of copies of final determination.
For public information purposes, a copy of the determination shall be filed
and made available as provided in Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR.
§ 136-20. Maintenance of files for public inspection.
The Clerk of the village shall maintain files open for public inspection of
all notices of completion, environmental impact reports, draft and final
environmental impact statements and written determinations prepared or
caused to be prepared by the Board.
§ 136-21. Procedures for actions involving more than one agency.
Where more than one agency is involved in an action, the procedures of
Sections 617.4 and 617.8 of Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR shall be followed.
A. That, consistent with social, economic and other essential
considerations, to the maximum extent practicable, from among the
reasonable alternatives thereto, the action to be carried out or
approved is one which minimizes or avoids adverse environmental
effects, including the effects revealed in the relevant environmental
impact statement process; and
B. That all practicable means will be taken in carrying out or approving
the action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental effects.
§ 136-16 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 136-22
136:91
§ 136-22. Exemptions; conditions.
Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law for local agencies shall be exempt
from this chapter and the provisions of Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR; provided, however, that
if after such dates the appropriate department, board, commission, officer
or employee modifies an action undertaken or approved prior to that date
and the appropriate department, board, commission, officer or employee
determines that the modification is not an action which is an exempt action
as provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action listed in
§ 136-3B hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 of NYCRR, as
a Type II action, such modification shall be an action subject to this chapter
and Part 617 of Title 6 of NYCRR.
§ 136-23. Fees and other charges.
A. The fees to be paid by applicants to the village in connection with
applications reviewed under this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) On all applications, except those involving an exempt action as
provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action listed
in § 136-3B hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 of
NYCRR as a Type II action, which are not applications for the
approval of the subdivision of land, the PEAS shall be accompanied
by a sum as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.24
(2) On applications, except those involving an exempt action as
provided in Section 617.13(h) of Title 6 of NYCRR, an action listed
in § 136-3B hereof or an action listed in Section 617.12 of Title 6 of
NYCRR as a Type II action, which are applications for the approval
of the subdivision of land, the PEAS shall be accompanied by a sum
as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.25
(3) On all applications, the requested environmental impact report or
the draft environmental impact statement shall be accompanied by
a sum as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.26
(4) On all applications, the final environmental impact statement shall
be accompanied by a sum as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.27
B. In addition to the fees set forth in Subsection A hereof, the applicant
shall reimburse the village for all of the costs and expenses it incurs in
the publication of the notices set forth in this chapter with regard to its
application, whether the publication of such notices in mandatory or
permissive.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 136-22 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 136-23
136:92
Chapter 142
EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Firearms — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 142-1. Possession, storage and use restricted; permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any firm to have, possess, keep, store or use any
explosives without obtaining a permit from the Clerk of the village, except
such articles as defined by Interstate Commerce Commission regulations
for the transportation of explosives or other dangerous articles and unless
these explosives are stored, used or transported in conformity with the
regulations of the State of New York and the Public Safety Bureau of the
Nassau County Police Department.
§ 142-2. Sale restricted; permit required.
No person shall sell, expose for sale or give away any caps, percussion caps,
fuse or electric blacking caps, dynamite or any other explosive materials
of any description without first obtaining a permit from the Clerk of the
Village.
§ 142-3. Permit application requirements.
All permits under this chapter shall be approved by the Village Board. No
application shall be considered without first obtaining the recommendation
in writing of the Bureau of Public Safety, Nassau County Police Department,
which recommendation shall be attached to the application before being
acted upon by the Village Board.
§ 142-4. Permit fee.28
There shall be a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, for each permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter by the Village Clerk, said fee to
accompany the application therefor.
C. In no event shall the total amount of the fees provided for in
Subsections A and B of this section exceed 1/2 of 1% of the action's total
cost to the applicant.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 136-23 EXPLOSIVES § 142-5
142:93
§ 142-5. Expiration of permits.
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one
year from the date they are issued, unless sooner revoked by the issuing
authority.
§ 142-6. Discharge restricted.
No person shall discharge any firearms, rockets, gunpowder firecrackers,
torpedoes, blasting caps, dynamite or other explosives within the village,
except as provided for under § 1894-a of the Penal Law.29
Chapter 148
FIRE ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
29.Editor's Note: See now §§ 270.00 and 405.00 of the Penal Law.
§ 142-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 142-6
148:94
ARTICLE I
False Alarms and Tampering
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Secs. 8-1 and 8-2 of the 1967 Code]
§ 148-1. False alarms.
No person shall willfully give a false alarm of fire.
§ 148-2. Tampering.
No person shall tamper, meddle or interfere with any station or signal box of
the fire alarm system or willfully break, injure, destroy or disturb any wires,
poles or other supports or appliances connected with or forming part of the
fire alarm telegraph system or any auxiliary fire appliance.
§ 148-1 FIRE ALARMS § 148-2
148:95

ARTICLE II
Fire Detectors
[Adopted 2-22-1982 by L.L. No. 5-1982]
§ 148-3. Detectors required.
It shall be required that all new construction or reconstruction of sleeping
areas provide a minimum of one fire detector adjacent to the sleeping area
(hallway), with the electrical fire detector installed in a permanent electrical
circuit with no switches between the detector and power source.
§ 148-3 FIRE ALARMS § 148-3
148:97
Chapter 150
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Explosives — See Ch. 142.
§ 150-1. Possession and discharge restricted.
No person except a police officer acting in the discharge of his duties shall
have or carry any shotgun or rifle in the open air or discharge any firearm
within the village.
Chapter 154
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Explosives — See Ch. 142.
Fire alarms — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Enclosed garages — See Ch. 170.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Wireless telecommunications towers and
facilities — See Ch. 272.
Signs — See Ch. 286.
Site plan review — See Ch. 287.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Tents — See Ch. 310.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 148-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 150-1
150:98
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 154-1. Title; scope.
This chapter shall constitute and be known as the "Building Code" and may
be cited as such and shall presumptively provide for all matters concerning,
affecting or relating to the construction, equipment, alteration, repair or
removal of buildings or structures erected or to be erected within the
village.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed:
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by three or more families living independently of each
other.[Added 11-20-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — Such person as the Village Board of Trustees
shall designate to perform the duties of said office.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — Single-family dwellings in detached,
semidetached or attached structures constructed with a specific fireresistance
separation, with living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities
arranged for the use of one family.[Added 11-20-1978 by L.L. No.
4-1978]
DWELLING HOUSE — A building used solely as a private residence.
FAMILY[Added 11-20-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978; amended 10-17-2016
by L.L. No. 5-2016] —
One of the following:
A group of people related by blood, marriage or legal adoption,
living together in a dwelling unit, constituting a natural family; or
(1)
No more than three unrelated persons living together in a dwelling
unit; or
(2)
Four or more persons living together in a dwelling unit who are not
related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, who have overcome a
presumption that they do not constitute a family by a determination
that they are the functional equivalent of a natural family.
(3)
A.
In determining whether a group of individuals is living together as the
functional equivalent of a natural family, the following criteria must be
present:
The group is one which, in appearance, structure and function,
resembles a natural family.
(1)
B.
§ 154-1 FIREARMS § 154-2
150:99
FIRE AREA — The floor area of a story of a building within exterior walls,
party walls, fire walls or any combination thereof.[Added 11-20-1978 by
L.L. No. 4-1978]
FIRE WALLS [Added 11-20-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978] —
PUBLIC BUILDING — A church, school or other place of public assembly.
ROOM — Space in a building enclosed or set apart by a partition containing
at least one window.
STORE BUILDING — A building, any part of which is used for business
purposes. 30
The group must share the entire dwelling unit, including the
cooking facilities, as a single housekeeping unit, use all rooms and
housekeeping facilities in common and have access to all parts of
the dwelling unit.
(2)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly resident
in the household who are enrolled in local schools;
(a)
Members of the group have the same address for purposes of
voter registration, driver's license, motor vehicle registration
and filing taxes;
(b)
(c) Members of the group are employed in the area; and
The group has been living together in the current dwelling
unit, or elsewhere, for a continuous period of one year or more.
(d)
(3)
Any other factors which may be determinative of whether or not
the group is the functional equivalent of a natural family.
(4)
A wall constructed of noncombustible material which shall extend
above the roof to form a parapet in conformity with any required fireresistance
rating of building wall in hours. In two-story single-family
dwellings, walls shall be of at least eight inches of brick, concrete
or concrete masonry units, properly reinforced, extending from the
footings through the roof for two feet, providing a two-hour fire rating.
"Fire walls" shall form a continuous fire and smoke barrier between
adjoining buildings, and in the event of removal or collapse of
construction on one side, shall not endanger the support of construction
on the remaining side and shall serve as an exterior wall.
A.
Where combustible members, such as joists and beams, are framed into
fire walls, such combustible members shall not extend through the wall
but shall have at least four inches of solid noncombustible material
below and at sides and ends of such members.
B.
§ 154-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-3
150:100
§ 154-3. Applicability of other standards. [Added 1-7-1991 by L.L.
No. 1-1991]
§ 154-4. (Reserved)
§ 154-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Trustees of the village.
§ 154-6. (Reserved)32
§ 154-7. Compliance required.
No wall, structure, building or part thereof shall hereafter be built,
constructed, moved or altered in the village except in conformity with the
provisions of this code. No building already erected or hereafter to be built
in said village shall be raised, altered, moved or built in any manner that
would be in violation of any of the provisions of this code or the approval
issued thereunder, nor shall any excavations be started before a building
permit is granted.
§ 154-8. Grading of property.
Any buildings in the village shall have the property abutting the house
graded in conformity with the improved property in that block. Whenever
possible, the grade shall run from the rear of the plot to the street. If an
adjoining owner's property will be damaged because of strict conformity
with the proposed grade, the grade in that event shall be made to conform
to the abutting property in order to eliminate any possibility of damage to
the adjoining property owner.
§ 154-9. Alteration of existing buildings.
No building shall hereafter be so altered as to reduce either the size of any
room or the amount of window space to less than that required for buildings
A. The Building Code of the village shall be subject to the following codes:
(1) The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2) The National Electrical Code.
(3) Plumbing and drainage regulations.31
(4) The National Flood Insurance Program.
B. All construction work shall be in conformity with these codes.
30.Editor's Note: Original Section 7-3, Village board constituted building committee;
authority as board of appeals, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Plumbing and Drainage.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 154-6, Right of entry, was repealed 12-9-1996 by L.L. No. 22-1996.
§ 154-3 FIREARMS § 154-9
150:101
hereafter erected or to create any additional room or rooms unless such
additional room is made to conform to the requirements for rooms in
buildings hereafter erected, except that such rooms may be of the same
height as existing rooms in the same story. No building shall hereafter be
enlarged nor shall the lot or plot on which it is located be diminished so that
the dimensions of any court required for light or ventilation, as provided
in this code, shall be less than the dimensions prescribed for buildings
hereafter erected.
§ 154-10. Modifications and variances.
The Board of Trustees of the village shall have the power to hear and act
upon any application to vary and modify any provision or requirement of
this chapter or any rule, regulation or order issued by any officer charged
with the administration thereof. Where compliance with the strict letter of
this chapter causes particular difficulty or undue hardship, the Board of
Trustees shall have power, on satisfactory proof at a public hearing and
provided that the spirit and intent of this chapter are maintained, to vary
and modify any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any rule,
regulation or order pursuant thereto.
§ 154-11. Responsibility for violations.
The owner, general agent or contractor of a building or premises where a
violation of this chapter has been committed or shall exist and the owner,
general agent or contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or
premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist and the
general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any person who commits,
takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which such violation shall exist shall be responsible for such
violation and punishable therefor.
§ 154-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-11
150:102
ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 154-12. Application; contents. [Amended 3-8-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
Before the construction, alteration or removal of any building, wall or
structure or any part thereof and before the construction or alteration of the
plumbing or drainage of any building, structure or premises is commenced,
the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect or builder employed
by such owner or lessee in connection with the proposed construction or
alteration shall submit to the Building Inspector a detailed statement in
triplicate of the specifications, on appropriate blanks to be furnished to
applicants by said officer, and such plans and structural detailed drawings
of the proposed work as said officer may require. Such statement,
constituting an application for a permit to perform such work, shall be
accompanied by a further statement in writing, sworn to before a person
authorized to administer oaths, giving the full name and residence of each
owner of said building or proposed building, structure or proposed
structure and, by a diagram of the lot or plot upon which such work is to
be performed, showing the established grade of the street, if any, and the
exact location of any proposed new construction and all existing buildings
or structures that are to remain. A building permit shall be required for
the construction of handicapped ramps within the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park, but no fee shall be required by the applicant to the
village for said building permit.
§ 154-13. Authorization to perform work.
If construction, alteration or removal of a building or structure or part
thereof, plumbing or drainage installation or alteration is to be made or
executed by any person other than the owner of the land in fee, the person
intending to perform such work shall, either as owner, lessee or in his
representative capacity, accompany the application to perform such work
with a statement in writing, sworn to before a person authorized to
administer oaths, giving the full name and residence of each of the owners
of the land, building or structure or part thereof and reciting that he is duly
authorized to perform said work. Such statement may be made by the agent
or architect of the person required to make the same.
§ 154-14. Signature.
Every permit issued by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this
code shall have his signature affixed thereto, but this shall not prevent the
Board of Trustees of the village from designating a person who may sign
such permit.
§ 154-12 FIREARMS § 154-15
150:103
§ 154-15. Partial construction. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
Nothing in this code shall be constructed to prevent the Building Inspector
from approving and issuing a permit for the construction of part of a
building or structure, when preliminary plans and detailed statements have
been presented for the same, before the entire plans and detailed
statements of said building or structure have been submitted or approved.
§ 154-16. Demolition.
§ 154-17. Expiration for nonuse; cancellation processing fee.
§ 154-18. Cash deposit or bond.
A. Before any existing building or part thereof is demolished, a statement
in writing, on appropriate blanks to be furnished by the Building
Inspector, constituting a permit to demolish, shall be submitted to said
officer by the owner or person authorized by the owner, giving the full
name and residence of each of the owners of the building to be
demolished, the name and business address of the person who is to do
the work and such other information respecting the proposed
demolition as shall be required by said officer.
B. The demolition permit shall provide that all work shall be completed
within three months. Such time limit may be extended by the Building
Inspector for one additional period not exceeding three months. No
further extension of time shall be granted without the approval of the
Board of Trustees. [Added 8-29-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977]
C. Each application for a permit to demolish shall be accompanied by a
surety bond as set forth in § 154-18 and a consent signed by the owner
of the subject property, granting permission to the village to enter upon
the property which is the subject of the application to complete the
demolition and related work if the applicant fails to complete such work
within the time provided. [Added 8-29-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977]
A. Any permit issued under the provisions of this code, but under which no
work is commenced within six months from the time of issuance, shall
expire for nonuse.
B. All building permits issued shall be subject to a processing fee as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees, in the event of cancellation. [Added
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. A surety bond in the amount of a minimum of $500 or a cash deposit in
that amount for one dwelling, or, in the case of a building operation, a
bond not exceeding 10% of the estimated cost of the work shall be
furnished with each application for each main structure covered in a
building permit for new construction. The bond shall be retained by the
village until the proposed structure or structures are completed and
§ 154-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-18
150:104
certificates of occupancy issued. In the event that the structure or
structures are not completed by the applicant, the bond shall be used to
defray the expense of removing the incomplete structure or structures
and filling excavations. The salvaged material shall thereupon become
the property of the village. If any work is done by the village to the
applicant's premises to make them conform to the requirements of
this chapter, no money shall be refunded from said bond. If proposed
construction is abandoned, the village shall refund the deposit or cancel
the bond if the applicant restores the property to its original condition
to the satisfaction of the Village Board of Trustees or its authorized
representative. A structure shall be considered abandoned when a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued and no work has been
done thereon for a period of one year. In all cases, all work shall be
completed under a building permit issued within two years of issuance.
[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
B. A building permit which remains open after the two-year expiration
date must be renewed with the Building Department for a fee of $250
and accompany a renewal application. The $250 fee may be deducted
from the bond held by the Village or paid separately. The renewal of a
building permit will carry a one-time three-month extension. Failure to
comply with this provision will result in a summons. For building
permits issued prior to the effective date of this subsection, a threemonth
grace period will be permitted, at the end of which time a threemonth
extension will be granted provided an application for renewal is
filed with a fee of $250. Failure to comply with this provision will result
in a summons. [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-200733]
C. A surety bond, in form and amount to be determined by the Building
Inspector, shall be filed with each application for a permit to demolish.
The bond shall be in sufficient amount to defray the expense of
completing the demolition to one foot below the grade of surrounding
ground level and the removal of demolished buildings, walls or other
structures and the repairing of possible damage by virtue of such
demolition to streets, curbs and sidewalks. The bond shall also be in
sufficient amount to defray the expense of such filling, grading and
seeding as may be required in the discretion of the Building Inspector
in such demolition permit. No sum shall be deducted from the amount
of such bond for salvage. The bond shall be retained by the village until
the proposed demolition and all related work required by the Building
Inspector is completed. In the event that the demolition and related
work is not completed within the time limit set forth in said permit, as it
may be extended pursuant to § 154-16B, the Board of Trustees may
cause so much of such demolition work to be completed as it deems
necessary and shall use the proceeds from the surety bond posted by
the applicant to defray the expenses thereof. If the proposed demolition
is abandoned and the applicant restores the property and the remaining
buildings, walls and other structures thereon to the satisfaction of the
33.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 154-18 FIREARMS § 154-18
150:105
§ 154-19. Interference with village work.
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall not in any way hinder the village
from backfilling foundations or removing abandoned structures or part of
structures.
§ 154-20. Work to conform to plans covered by permit.
The construction, alteration, demolition or removal of any building or
structure or part thereof and the construction or alteration of any plumbing
or drainage shall be in accordance with the approved detailed statement of
specifications and plans for which the permit was issued or any approved
amendment thereof. The Building Inspector shall require a certified copy of
the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the time of
commencement of the work to the completion thereof.
§ 154-21. Location of structure to conform to diagram covered by
permit.
The location of any new building or structure or of any extension to an
existing building or structure shown on the diagram filed, required by
§ 154-12, or on any approved amendment thereof shall be strictly adhered
to. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of any lot or plot,
a diagram of which has been used as the basis for a permit, unless the
building or structure for which the permit was issued complies in all
respects with the requirements of this code for buildings or structures
located on plots of such diminished area; provided, however, that this shall
not apply to any case in which the lot area is reduced by reason of any street
opening or widening or other public improvement.
§ 154-22. Revocation.
The Building Inspector may revoke any permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this code in case of any false statement or any
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application upon which the
permit or approval was based.
§ 154-23. Refusal to approve plans.
The Building Inspector shall not approve any plans for alteration of an
existing building nor for the erection or construction of any new building
in case the general character or appearance of such building after the
proposed alterations or construction would have the effect of depreciating
real estate values within a radius of 500 feet from the site of any such
building, as determined by the Board of Trustees, or shall be deemed by
the Board of Trustees to be detrimental and injurious to the health, safety,
morals or general welfare of the people of the village and more particularly
of the people residing within the aforementioned radius.
Board of Trustees, the village shall cancel the bond. [Added 8-29-1977
by L.L. No. 8-1977]
§ 154-18 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-24
150:106
§ 154-24. Fees. [Amended 7-9-1979 by L.L. No. 11-1979; 4-11-1983
by L.L. No. 3-1983; 5-11-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987; 4-10-1989 by L.L.
No. 2-1989; 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 154-24.1. Work commenced prior to issuance of permit. [Added
6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995]
Where construction or other work requiring a permit pursuant to the
Massapequa Park Code of Ordinances and Local Laws was commenced
prior to the issuance of a building permit, the building permit fee for
such construction or other work shall be three times the amount otherwise
provided for in § A350-1, Chapter 154 of the Massapequa Park Code of
Ordinances. There shall be an amnesty period commencing with the
enactment date of this section and ending on December 31, 1995, during
which time this section shall not apply to any permit application submitted
A. New homes and buildings. Every application for a new home or new
building shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter A350,
Fees, as indicated on the permit application form.
B. Alterations.
(1) Alterations shall include sheds, excluding any shed less than 10
feet by 10 feet, in-ground pools and plumbing permits associated
with other alterations.
(2) The minimum application fee shall be as provided in Chapter A350,
Fees.
(3) The fee schedule shall be as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
C. Final cost. Final cost verification information shall be presented to the
Building Inspector and the required fees paid prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or other letter of approval indicating
completion from the Building Department.
D. All applications for fences shall be subject to an inspection fee as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
E. The foregoing fees shall be paid to the Treasurer of the village.
F. The fee for demolition permits shall be as provided in Chapter A350,
Fees.
G. All refunds shall be subject to a processing fee as provided in Chapter
A350, Fees.
H. The Building Department application for the construction of
handicapped ramps is to be waived and no application fee shall be due
upon the filing of a building permit for handicapped ramps within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park. [Added 3-8-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
§ 154-24 FIREARMS § 154-24.1
150:107
to the Building Inspector of the Village of Massapequa Park for work
commenced prior to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 154-24.1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-24.1
150:108
ARTICLE III
Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
§ 154-25. New buildings.
No building hereafter erected shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part,
for any purpose whatever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the Building Inspector, certifying that such building conforms to
the approved plans and specifications and the requirements of this code
applying to buildings of its class and kind.
§ 154-26. Alteration of buildings.
No building hereafter altered which was vacant during the progress of the
work of alteration shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose whatever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued
by the Building Inspector, certifying that the work for which the permit
was issued was completed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and the provisions of this code applying to such alteration;
and when the occupancy or use of a building has continued during the work
of alteration, the occupancy or use of the building shall not continue for
more than 30 days after completion of the alteration unless such certificate
shall have been issued.
§ 154-27. Continuation of occupancy in existing buildings.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the continuance of the present
occupancy and use of any existing building, except as may be otherwise
specifically prescribed by this code or as may be necessary for the safety
of life or property. Upon written request from the owner, the Building
Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for an existing building,
certifying, after verification by inspection, the occupancy or use of such
building, provided that at the time of issuing such certificate there are no
notices of violation or other notices or orders pending in the office of said
Building Inspector.
§ 154-28. Change of occupancy.
No change of occupancy or use shall be made in any building or part
thereof hereafter erected or altered that is not consistent with the lastissued
certificate of occupancy for such building. In case of an existing
building, no change of occupancy that would bring it under some special
provision of this code shall be made unless a certificate is issued by the
Building Inspector certifying that such building conforms to the provisions
of this code with respect to buildings hereafter altered for the proposed new
occupancy and use.
§ 154-29. Issuance of certificate of compliance.
A certificate of compliance with the provisions of this Building Code shall be
a prerequisite to the use or occupancy of any building hereafter altered and
§ 154-25 FIREARMS § 154-29
150:109
to the use of any garage, swimming pool or other construction for which a
building permit was issued; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to construction of new buildings.
§ 154-30. Temporary certificates of occupancy.
Upon request of the owner or his authorized representative, the Building
Inspector shall issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for part of a
building, provided that such temporary occupancy or use would not in any
way jeopardize life or property.
§ 154-31. Contents of certificate of occupancy.
In addition to the certification required by this code, as to compliance
with approved plans and specifications and provisions of this code, all
certificates of occupancy shall state the purposes for which the building
may be used in its several parts, the maximum permissible live loads on
the several floors, the number of persons that may be accommodated in
the several stories in case such number is limited by any provisions of this
chapter or the approved specifications and all special stipulations of the
permit, if any.
§ 154-32. Issuance of certificate of occupancy; records.
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the written
application therefor if said building, at the date of such application, shall be
entitled thereto. A record of all such certificates shall be kept in the office
of the Building Inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary interest in the building affected.
§ 154-33. Fees. [Added 5-12-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; amended
1-13-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986; 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The fees for certificates of occupancy shall be as provided in Chapter A350,
Fees.
§ 154-29 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 154-33
150:110
Chapter 158
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 293.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 294.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 154-33 FIREARMS § 154-33
150:111

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 158-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park finds that the
potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Massapequa Park and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 158-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 158-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
§ 158-1 FIREARMS § 158-3
150:113
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 158-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-3
150:114
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 158-4. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base
floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone
V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
§ 158-4 FIREARMS § 158-4
150:115
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones
A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet
the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
A.
§ 158-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-4
150:116
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 158-4 FIREARMS § 158-4
150:117
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of l929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The
inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a
distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
§ 158-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-4
150:118
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 158-13B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
A.
§ 158-4 FIREARMS § 158-4
150:119
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 158-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-4
150:120
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 158-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Massapequa Park, Nassau County.
§ 158-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 158-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 158-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Massapequa Park,
Community Number 360480, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36059C0254G,
36059C0258G, 36059C0262G, 36059C0264G; the effective date of
which is September 11, 2009, and any subsequent revisions to
these map panels that do not affect areas under our community's
jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Nassau County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September 11,
2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Village Hall, 151 Front Street, Massapequa Park, New York 11762.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 158-5 FIREARMS § 158-8
150:121
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of
Massapequa Park from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 158-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Massapequa Park, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 158-8 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-9
150:122
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 158-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector of the Village of Massapequa Park is hereby
appointed local administrator to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
§ 158-11. Floodplain development permit; fees.
§ 158-12. Permit application requirements.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 158-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $500. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Massapequa Park for
any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of
this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more
than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zones V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
§ 158-10 FIREARMS § 158-12
150:123
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 158-15C, Utilities.
E. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 158-18, Nonresidential structures.
F. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 158-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
I. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in a
proposed structure with design strengths in excess of 20 pounds per
square foot.
J. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, for all new and substantial improvements to structures,
floodplain development permit applications shall be accompanied by
design plans and specifications, prepared in sufficient detail to enable
independent review of the foundation support and connection
§ 158-12 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-12
150:124
§ 158-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
components. Said plans and specifications shall be developed or
reviewed by a licensed professional engineer or architect, and shall be
accompanied by a statement, bearing the signature of the architect or
engineer, certifying that the design and methods of construction to be
used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 158-12, Permit application requirements, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction standards, and, in
particular, § 158-14B, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
§ 158-12 FIREARMS § 158-13
150:125
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 158-12G, as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new or
substantially improved structure, the permit holder shall submit to
the local administrator a certificate of elevation, in relation to mean
sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns). The certificate shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. An
elevation certificate must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
§ 158-13 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-13
150:126
(3) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 158-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 158-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 158-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
§ 158-13 FIREARMS § 158-13
150:127
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedure; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 158-13 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-13
150:128
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 158-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 158-6.
A. Coastal high hazard areas. The following requirements apply within
Zones V1-V30, VE and V:
(1) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the reach of
high tide.
(2) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(3) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
C. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Massapequa Park agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
§ 158-14 FIREARMS § 158-14
150:129
§ 158-15. Standards for all structures.
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Massapequa Park for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Massapequa Park for all costs related to the final
map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 158-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Massapequa Park agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Massapequa Park for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Massapequa Park for all costs related
to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas below lowest floor.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
§ 158-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-15
150:130
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either
free from obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system. The
enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used only for parking
vehicles, building access or storage. Use of this space for human
habitation is expressly prohibited. The construction of stairs,
stairwells and elevator shafts are subject to the design
requirements for breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
§ 158-15 FIREARMS § 158-15
150:131
§ 158-16. Residential structures (except coastal high hazard areas).
Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition
to the requirements in § 158-14B, Subdivision proposals, § 158-14C,
Encroachments, and § 158-15, Standards for all structures.
§ 158-17. Residential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 158-14A, Coastal
high hazard areas, § 158-14B, Subdivision proposals, and § 158-15,
Standards for all structures, apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard shown as
Zones V1-V30, VE or V on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 158-6.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 158-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest elevated
floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached to the piles
or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members designed to
§ 158-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-17
150:132
either withstand storm action or break away without imparting
damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above two feet above
base flood elevation so as not to impede the flow of water.
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during the base
flood on all building components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that
would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves, current
drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm debris.
Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if bulkheads, walls, or
other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause wave
runup beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due
to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include
windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof,
internal forces when openings allow wind to enter the house, and
upward force on the underside of the house when it is exposed. In
the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially from
any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the building
code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water pressures acting
simultaneously on all building components. Foundations must be
designed to transfer safely to the underlying soil all loads due to
wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including uplift
due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural
support of a new building or substantial improvement of an existing
structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less
than 8:1 for individual piles (this shall not apply to pile clusters
located below the design grade). The maximum center-to-center
spacing of wood piles shall not be more than 12 feet on center
under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to
resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with typical
§ 158-17 FIREARMS § 158-17
150:133
structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include consideration
of decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion of soil strata
surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum
if the BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if
the BFE is greater than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in
column action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil
elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally
braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of
eight inches for round timber piles and eight inches by eight inches
for square timber piles. All wood piles must be treated in
accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and
damage from fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twentyeight-
day ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000
pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced with a minimum of
four longitudinal steel bars having a combined area of not less than
1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete area. Reinforcing for
precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4
inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for
No. 6 through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field
shall have a concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted or augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both
directions by a wood timber-grade beam or a reinforced concretegrade
beam. These at-grade supports should be securely attached
to the piles to provide support even if scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch-by-eightinch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in
location to below the lowest supporting structural member and
above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the vertical plane
along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline. Galvanized steel
rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable-type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the
beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall be
two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or four-byfour
or larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting shall
§ 158-17 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-17
150:134
consist of two five-eighths-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for
two-by-eight members, or one five-eighths-inch lag bolt (each end)
for square members. Knee braces shall not extend more than three
feet below the elevation of the base flood.
E. Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete
piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads,
and be connected with a movement-resisting connection to a pile cap or
pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors, or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure. Toe
nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All metal
connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be steel, hotdipped
galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in protected interior
locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam-to-pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall
span the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential
floodwater and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or
pilings by bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members shall
be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or, if precast, shall be
securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams, or girders
are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two five-eighthsinch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/16
inch by four inches by 18 inches each bolted with two one-half-inch lag
bolts per beam member shall be used. Notching of pile tops shall be the
minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam members without
unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall not be notched so that
the cross section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-by-four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist
anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders.
These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a minimum.
Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided. Such cross
bridging may be one-by-three-inch members, placed eight feet on
center maximum, or solid bridging of same depth as joist at same
spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide
good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure.
The plywood should not be less than three-fourths-inch total
thickness, and should be exterior grade and fastened to beams or
joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such
fastening shall be supplemented by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be
§ 158-17 FIREARMS § 158-17
150:135
used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to studs in
exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie. Continuous 15/
32-inch or thicker plywood sheathing, overlapping the top wall plate
and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder, may be used to
provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically
continuous, then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all
horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood, galvanized steel rods of onehalf-
inch diameter or galvanized steel straps not less than one inch wide
by 1/16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top wall plate to the
sill, beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum diameter of three inches
shall be used at each end of the one-half-inch round rods. These anchors
shall be installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more
than four feet on center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(1) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner that
the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters. Ceiling joists
and rafters shall be securely fastened at their intersections. A
metal or wood connector shall be used at alternate ceiling joist/
rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(2) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end.
Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet toward the
house interior from each gable end.
K. Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and water
uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two
feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs
and porches will be permitted if designed or reviewed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices for
sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of other
suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six inches
shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial
adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used
in the sheathing of such corner, gable end, or roof overhang.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and other
points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
§ 158-17 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-17
150:136
§ 158-18. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high hazard
areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 158-14B,
Subdivision proposals, § 158-14C, Encroachments, and § 158-15, Standards
for all structures.
M. Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and doors
shall be designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand loads due to
the design wind speed of 75 miles per hour. Connections for these
elements must be designed to transfer safely the design loads to the
supporting structure. Panel widths of multiple panel sliding glass doors
shall not exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 pounds per square foot and not more than 20
pounds per square foot, with the criterion that the safety of the
overall structure at the point of wall failure be confirmed using
established procedures. Grade beams shall be installed in both
directions for all piles considered to carry the breakaway wall load.
Knee braces are required for front row piles that support
breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square
foot shall not be permitted unless a registered professional
engineer or architect has developed or reviewed the structural
design and specifications for the building foundation and
breakaway wall components, and certifies that the breakaway walls
will fail under water loads less than those that would occur during
the base flood; and the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
§ 158-17 FIREARMS § 158-18
150:137
§ 158-19. Nonresidential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
In Zones V1-V30, VE and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available,
new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall have
the bottom of the lowest member of the lowest floor elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of structures is not
an allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor to two feet above the
base flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
§ 158-20. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 158-14, General
standards, and § 158-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood elevation must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 158-15C.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Subsection
A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
§ 158-18 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-20
150:138
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V and VE shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
C. Within Zones A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that
are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of
dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 158-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks
is prohibited.
§ 158-20 FIREARMS § 158-20
150:139

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 158-21. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of
Massapequa Park shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision
to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 158-21 FIREARMS § 158-21
150:141
§ 158-22. Conditions for variances.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood elevation, providing items (one
through 12) in § 158-21D have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 158-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-22
150:142
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 158-22 FIREARMS § 158-22
150:143
Chapter 164
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Vending machines — See Ch. 330.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 158-22 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 158-22
164:144
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. License required.
The following businesses and occupations shall be duly licensed as herein
provided, subject to the provisions of this chapter: hotels, restaurants, ice
cream parlors, stores and mobile vendors selling food and drink and all
other places selling food or beverages for consumption on the premises.
§ 164-2. License application.
Any person who shall desire to conduct or permit to be conducted a hotel,
restaurant or place for the sale of food or beverages of any class or
description to be eaten or drunk on the premises shall apply in writing
to the Board of Trustees for the issuance of a license therefor, which
application shall state in detail:
§ 164-3. Inspection of premises.
Upon receipt of an application provided for in § 164-2, the Village Clerk
shall refer the same to the County Health Officer for investigation and
report as to the sanitary condition of such hotel, restaurant or place for
the sale of food or beverages. The County Health Officer shall thereupon
inspect the premises on which such business is proposed to be operated and
report the results of his investigation to the Board of Trustees.
§ 164-4. Issuance of license; fee.34
If the County Health Officer shall report that his inspection conducted
as provided for in § 164-3 shows that said premises are maintained in a
sanitary condition, the Board of Trustees may authorize the Village Clerk to
issue a license to the applicant therefor upon the payment of a license fee
A. The name of the person owning, leasing, managing or proposing to
conduct or operate such hotel, restaurant or place for the sale of food or
beverage for which a license is desired.
B. The place of residence of such person or the residence of the persons
composing any firm or association applying for such license and the
principal place of business of any corporation applying for such license.
C. The name of the officer, in the case of a corporation, upon whom
process or other legal notice may be served within the village.
D. The location within the village of the building wherein the same is to be
located.
E. The nature of the business which it is desired to conduct or operate.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 164-1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 164-4
164:145
as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, per annum, for each place of business
or vehicle.
§ 164-5. Suspension and revocation of license.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any license in the event that
the County Health Officer shall at any time report that he has inspected
said premises and found the same to be in an unsanitary condition, until the
next meeting of the Board of Trustees, and thereafter said license may be
revoked or continued by the Board of Trustees, at its discretion, after 24
hours' notice and hearing.
§ 164-6. Cleanliness of premises.
Buildings wherein food is handled, including floors, tables, counters and
surroundings, must at all times be kept scrupulously clean.
§ 164-7. Protection of food or drink.
No food or drink shall be sold or exposed for sale unless it is covered in such
a manner that it is protected from insects and dust.
§ 164-8. Dishes.
No food or drink shall be sold, offered for sale or dispensed in dishes which
have been previously used unless said dishes shall have been adequately
cleansed with boiling water or any process acceptable to the County Board
of Health. Dishes cracked or chipped shall not be used.
§ 164-9. Garbage and rubbish.
All garbage accumulating in an establishment regulated herein shall be
kept covered and removed daily. No accumulation of wastepaper or other
rubbish shall be permitted to accumulate in buildings or surroundings. All
empty bottles shall be kept covered until removed.
§ 164-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 164-9
164:146
ARTICLE II
Mobile Restaurants
§ 164-10. Compliance required.
No food or beverage of any kind for retail sale purposes shall be prepared
in or peddled, distributed or sold from any vehicle anyplace within the
village, including private property, except from a mobile restaurant as
herein defined and limited and only upon the conditions herein set forth.
§ 164-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE RESTAURANT — A vehicle duly approved by the Health
Department of the county, from which food is sold, distributed or served to
or provided for the public, with or without charge.
§ 164-12. License required; location.
Each mobile restaurant must be currently and properly licensed pursuant
to § 164-1 and, while open for business, must be located on property other
than public streets, alleys and sidewalks and only after obtaining the
written permission of the owner or the person having the right to the
possession of said real property upon which said business is being carried
on. A mobile restaurant shall not be permitted to operate adjacent to a
permanently established fixed food establishment which retails the same
products without first obtaining the written permission from said
permanent food establishment.
§ 164-13. Vehicle.
The vehicle must be of an approved type, acceptable to the Health
Department based upon its determination as to conformance with
appropriate standards and good public health practice.
§ 164-14. Health and sanitation.
A mobile restaurant must comply with all of the provisions of the health
and sanitation ordinance35 relating to food and restaurants where such
provisions are applicable to the operation of a mobile restaurant. All
employees shall wear clean outer garments, maintain a high degree of
personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic practices and the ordinances
of the village and for county pertaining to restaurant employees while on
duty. Operators of restaurants must at all times keep the premises upon
which said restaurants are located clean and sanitary and free from all litter
and refuse and provide proper receptacles for all refuse, etc.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Health and Sanitation.
§ 164-10 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 164-15
164:147
§ 164-15. Itinerary.
Operators of mobile restaurants shall submit an itinerary of their route to
the village in order to allow a check of their operation.
§ 164-16. Nuisances.
Operators of mobile restaurants shall operate the same and conduct the
business so as not to create any type of nuisance whatsoever.
§ 164-17. Types of food; transport, preservation.
§ 164-18. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
A. Types to be sold. A mobile restaurant shall sell, distribute or serve only:
(1) Prepackaged foods prepared and packaged at a fixed food service
establishment which is currently and validly licensed by the village.
(2) Coffee, tea, doughnuts and soft drinks.
(3) Prepared food products consisting of ingredients or components
previously prepared at a fixed food service establishment currently
and validly licensed by the village, which may be finally assembled
and cooked in the mobile restaurant by approved methods.
B. Transport. During the transportation of food from said food service
establishment, all foods shall be completely wrapped or packaged so as
to be protected from contamination.
C. Preservation. Potentially hazardous foods must be kept at temperatures
below 45º F. or above 140º F., whichever may be applicable, while
transported, stored or on display.
A. Catering services or vehicles which sell or distribute bakery and/or
dairy products and other products delivered in conjunction therewith to
homes and business establishments on regularly established routes.
B. The sale of food and food products from a vehicle located in public
parks or recreational and playground facilities when specifically
permitted to do so by the proper authorities.
C. The sale of food and food products from a vehicle at athletic events,
contests and exhibitions, at special civic exhibitions, demonstrations,
parades or similar activities and any other special events where the sale
of such products is made solely in conjunction with said special event
and only during the duration thereof.
§ 164-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 164-18
164:148
Chapter 170
GARAGES, ENCLOSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 170-1. Application required; procedure.
§ 170-2. Required off-street parking spaces.
§ 170-3. Variance of requirements.
The Building Department may vary, subject to appropriate conditions, such
requirements of the foregoing regulations as in its judgment of the subject
circumstances and conditions relating to a particular piece of property
are not in conformance with the interest of the public health, safety and
general welfare. When making this determination as to the improvement to
be required in the enclosed garage, the Building Department shall take into
A. No application for an enclosed garage on real property within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, whether such application is
for a new house or for an enclosed garage on existing premises, shall be
granted except as provided for in this chapter.
B. Any application by any person, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity for an enclosed garage on residential property within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park must be made to the Building
Department of the Village of Massapequa Park pursuant to its rules and
regulations.
A. Any application for an enclosed garage, whether for a new house or for
an existing premises, must provide for a minimum of two parking
facilities on a permanent surface in conformance with the specifications
as set forth in this Code of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park.
B. Said spaces for off-street parking facilities, which can consist of a
driveway or carport, must be permanent in nature and with a surface
which is in conformance with the specifications of the village
regulations and Building Department, with a minimum of two spaces on
said residential property.
C. No application for an enclosed garage shall be granted unless the
applicant or applicants comply fully with the requirement of providing a
minimum of two off-street parking facilities on said residential property.
§ 164-18 GARAGES, ENCLOSED § 170-3
170:149
consideration the prospective character of the development and the allowed
density of population under the applicable zoning regulations.
§ 170-4. Request for variance.
Where the applicant desires a variance for an enclosed garage, he, she or it
shall include a written request therefor with a statement of reason for such
request with his application to the Building Department for the approval of
said enclosed garage.
§ 170-5. Compliance required.
The application for an enclosed garage and the duplication of existing
facilities for off-street parking on said premises shall be in accordance with
this chapter, as modified, changed or amended by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Massapequa Park or by other applicable local law.
Chapter 174
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Nuisances — See Ch. 222.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 252.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 262.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
§ 170-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 170-5
174:150
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Secs. 10-1 and 10-2 of the 1967 Code]
§ 174-1. Prohibited deposits.
No person shall throw, scatter, deposit or lay, or cause or permit any
servant, agent or employee to throw, scatter, deposit or lay, or cause or
allow to be carried by wind, animals or other means from any premises,
receptacle, vehicle or other place or thing, any rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris,
waste, discarded material or other deleterious or flammable substance or
matter in or upon any public place, private premises, vacant lot or plot
within the village.
§ 174-2. Burial prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to bury any garbage, refuse, dead animals or
other debris within the village.
§ 174-1 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-2
174:151

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)36
§ 174-3. (Reserved)
§ 174-4. (Reserved)
§ 174-5. (Reserved)
§ 174-6. (Reserved)
36.Editor's Note: Former Article II, Leaf Pickup, adopted 9-13-1982 as L.L. No. 13-1982, was
repealed 6-13-1994 by L.L. No. 10-1994.
§ 174-3 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-6
174:153

ARTICLE III
Collection
[Adopted 6-27-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988]
§ 174-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK ITEMS — Household furnishings, appliances and those items which
are larger than two feet by two feet by four feet or weigh more than 50
pounds.
GARBAGE — Food waste (animal and vegetable) and food wrappings
(plastic and cardboard containers).
RECYCLABLES — Newspapers; food and beverage containers made of
brown glass, green glass or clear glass; food and beverage containers
made of aluminum, tin, rigid plastic or any combination thereof, except
that aerosol containers shall not be considered "recyclables." The Town of
Oyster Bay is authorized to add or delete items from this list.[Amended
2-6-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
RUBBISH — Nonfood waste, such as grass, yard clippings, leaves and wood
cut to size.
§ 174-8. Collection schedule and container restrictions. [Amended
2-6-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
A. Frequency of collection.
(1) Garbage will be collected between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. from
residential areas and from business areas on regularly scheduled
days as designated by the Town of Oyster Bay.
(2) There shall be no collections of any type on Sundays and on such
other holidays as may be designated by the Town of Oyster Bay.
(3) Dumpster pickup from business areas within the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park is hereby restricted to the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. [Added
3-8-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
(4) There shall be no dumpster pickups of any type from business areas
on Sundays. [Added 3-8-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
B. Limitation of the number of containers. There is no limitation to the
number of containers of garbage that may be placed for collection in
residential and business areas.
§ 174-7 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-9
174:155
§ 174-9. Garbage containers. [Amended 2-6-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
All garbage and rubbish shall be placed in reusable or single use type
containers which shall be of a type approved by the Town of Oyster Bay
and which shall be kept covered or enclosed at all times. The reusable type
container shall be equipped with handles and tight-fitting covers and shall
be watertight and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at
all times. The design and construction of and the materials used for the
single use type containers and the method of the storage thereof shall be
in accordance with specifications and rules and regulations which shall be
established by the Town of Oyster Bay. Containers shall be placed in the
area between the sidewalk and the curb.
§ 174-10. Regulations for recycling. [Amended 2-6-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
A. Recycling material shall consist of newspapers, food and beverage
containers made of glass, food and beverage containers made of
aluminum, steel or tin and rigid plastic household containers.
B. It shall be the responsibility of each recycling participant to ensure that
all recyclable materials are properly separated from other discarded
materials and are clean or otherwise prepared for collection in
accordance with this article.
C. All recyclable materials, excluding newspapers, shall be placed out for
collection in a special yellow twenty-gallon container provided by the
Town of Oyster Bay.
D. All recyclable material shall be rinsed clean of all food and other
particles.
E. Metal cans are to have their labels removed.
F. Newspapers and advertising mail are to be securely bundled and tied in
packages not to exceed 50 pounds and shall not exceed 12 inches in
height.
G. Recycling participants shall affix their respective house numbers to any
recycling container provided to them.
H. In the event that a recycling participant fails to separate and prepare
recyclable materials for collection in accordance with the provisions of
this article after being given reasonable notice of these requirements,
collection of all solid waste from such dwelling may be suspended until
such time as the owner or occupant can demonstrate compliance with
the provisions of this article. Such compliance can be demonstrated by
placing properly separated and prepared recyclable material at the
curb in one or more designated recycling containers on the next
scheduled collection date for such recyclable material.
§ 174-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 174-11
174:156
§ 174-11. Regulations for rubbish.
§ 174-12. Placement of receptacles.
§ 174-13. Construction debris.
The disposal of contractor construction material is prohibited. It is the
intent of the village to provide for the collection, removal and disposal of
ordinary everyday refuse generated by households.
§ 174-14. Hazardous waste.
Items not to be disposed of as garbage, rubbish or recyclables shall be as
follows:
§ 174-15. Unauthorized collection.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to take, remove, collect
or in any manner interfere with or disturb any materials set outside any
dwelling, business establishment or other premises in the village for the
purpose of collection.
A. Lawn sweepings and leaves must be placed in plastic bags or other
containers, with a limit of six containers or nine plastic bags not to
exceed 50 pounds each or a total of 300 pounds.
B. Articles containing exposed nails or other sharp objects which might
inflict a cut or wound in the handling thereof shall be placed in
containers in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of cutting or
injuring any person.
C. All wood, bush and tree trimmings shall be securely bundled and tied in
a bulk no greater than two feet by two feet by four feet and must not
exceed 50 pounds. (Christmas trees are exceptions.)
A. Materials for collection shall be set out after 6:00 p.m. the evening
before pickup.
B. Receptacles placed for collection shall be retrieved by resident not later
than 8:00 p.m. of the collection day.
C. All garbage cans and containers, when not placed out for collection,
shall be kept on the side of the house or at the back of the house and not
in front of the house line.
A. Used motor oil. Used motor oil shall be disposed of by delivery to a
service station, which is required under state law to accept such
material.
B. Other hazardous wastes, such as herbicide and pesticide containers,
paint product cans, automotive and household product containers.
These shall constitute other hazardous waste and shall be disposed of
during the town's Stop Throwing Out Pollutants Program.
§ 174-11 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-16
174:157
§ 174-16. Hypodermic syringes. [Amended 2-6-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
Hypodermic syringes must be noninfectious, and all parts must be
deposited in a metal or other similarly rigid container so as to prevent the
parts from falling out.
§ 174-17. Places of business. [Amended 6-1-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
§ 174-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
11-1994]
A. All places of business shall only place garbage or rubbish for collection
in metal or molded plastic containers and receptacles expressly
approved by the Village of Massapequa Park and said containers must
be secured with a tight cover. The reusable-type container shall be
equipped with handles and tight-fitting covers and shall be watertight
and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The
containers shall have a capacity not exceeding 32 gallons and, when
filled, shall not exceed a weight unit of 50 pounds per container.
B. Containers and receptacles shall only be placed on the property at the
rear of the place of business.
C. All containers and receptacles shall be completely closed at all times
other than when said containers and receptacles are actually being
filled or emptied.
D. This section shall take effect immediately.
A. In addition to the provisions as stated in § 174-10H any owner or
occupant committing any offense in violation of this article or any
provision or section thereof shall be guilty of a violation. Each day that
such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Except as provided regarding fines in § 174-18C, such offense shall be
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the
following schedule: [Amended 3-8-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(1) Upon conviction for a first offense under this article: a fine of up to
the maximum fine allowed by law or imprisonment for not more
than five days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(2) Upon conviction for a second offense under this article within one
year of a previous conviction for a like offense: a fine of not less
than $50 and up to the maximum fine allowed by law or
imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or both fine and
imprisonment.
(3) Upon conviction for a subsequent offense under this article within
one year of two previous convictions for a like offense: a fine of not
§ 174-16 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 174-18
174:158
less than $100 and up to the maximum fine allowed by law or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
C. Violations of § 174-8A(3) and (4) regarding dumpsters will be
punishable as follows: [Added 3-8-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999;
6-29-2004 by L.L. No. 8-2004]
(1) Any violation of this section will be punishable by a mandatory
minimum fine of $150 upon conviction for a first offense.
(2) Upon conviction for a second offense under this section, there shall
be a mandatory minimum fine of $300.
(3) Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense under this
section, there shall be a mandatory minimum fine of $500.
§ 174-18 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-18
174:159

ARTICLE IV
Oyster Bay Garbage Collection District
[Adopted 7-30-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 174-19. Village included within district.
The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park hereby consents to have its
corporate limits included within the Town of Oyster Bay's garbage collection
district resulting in garbage collection services being performed by the
Town of Oyster Bay as provided for in § 190 of the New York State Town
Law and subject to a permissive referendum.
§ 174-20. When effective.
This article will take effect 30 days after its adoption unless within said
period a proper petition for a referendum upon this article is filed with the
Village Administrator pursuant to the provision of Article 9 of the Village
Law.
§ 174-19 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 174-20
174:161
Chapter 178
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Towing — See Ch. 314.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 178-1. License required.
No plant known as a "filling station," "service station" or "garage" handling
gasoline or any other explosive liquids for retail sale or dispensing the same
shall be permitted to store or dispense the same within the village unless an
application is presented to the Board of Trustees and a license is issued by
said body.
§ 178-2. License fee. [Amended 5-12-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980;
4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-198337]
The annual fee for a license required herein shall be as provided in Chapter
A350, Fees.
§ 178-3. Special permit required.
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any applicant until he
has received a special permit from the Board of Trustees in accordance with
§ 345-40.
§ 178-4. Air compressor. [Added 4-23-1979 by L.L. No. 7-197938]
All gasoline filling stations will provide an air compressor capable of
inflating tires and shall do so at no charge to the user thereof.
Chapter 182
GRAFFITI
§ 182-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
hereby finds and declares that graffiti poses a serious problem for our
residents and merchants. The unabated proliferation of graffiti is a physical
blight upon the landscape of our village and costs taxpayers, merchants
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 174-20 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 182-1
178:162
and homeowners substantial moneys to remove and repair. The Board also
finds that, when unchecked, graffiti presents an image of a deteriorating
community, a community that no longer cares about itself.
§ 182-2. Defacement of property.
§ 182-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall sell or offer to sell an aerosol spray paint can or broadtipped
indelible marker or any tool, instrument, article, substance, solution
or other compound designed or commonly used to etch, paint, cover, draw
upon or otherwise place a mark upon a piece of property to any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
§ 182-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tipped marker or similar
marker containing fluid.
§ 182-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who has been found guilty of any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished by a mandatory minimum fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.) for each violation thereof and/or shall be imprisoned up
to fifteen (15) days in jail, or both. In addition, that person, in the court's
discretion, shall be liable for the cost of removing said graffiti from the
property so defaced as part of his punishment pursuant to the violation of
this chapter or to perform suitable alternate community services pursuant
to the court's discretion.
A. Possession of any aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible
marker or any tool, instrument, article, substance, solution or other
compound designed or commonly used to etch, paint, cover, draw upon
or otherwise place a mark upon any public or private property, by any
person in the proximity of any defacement, without the prior express
written consent of the owner or operator of the property having been
obtained, shall create a rebuttable presumption that such person did
deface public or private property in violation of this chapter.
B. A person is guilty of possession of a graffiti instrument(s) when he
possesses any aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped indelible marker
or tool, instrument, article, substance, solution or other compound
designed or commonly used to etch, paint, cover, draw upon or
otherwise place a mark upon a piece of property which that person has
no permission or authority to etch, paint, cover, draw upon or otherwise
place a mark upon, unless the express prior written permission of the
owner or operator of the property has been obtained.
§ 182-1 GRAFFITI § 182-6
182:163
§ 182-6. Removal of graffiti; costs. [Added 11-22-1993 by L.L. No.
13-1993]
Chapter 184
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Nuisances — Ch. 222.
§ 184-1. Endangerment of life or health.
No person shall knowingly, carelessly or negligently do or contribute to
the doing of any act dangerous to life or detrimental to the health of
human beings or any act prohibited by the County Health Department and/
or Fire Commissioners; provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to a necessary act authorized by law; nor shall any person omit to do any
reasonable and proper act or take reasonable or proper precautions or any
act required by the County Health Department and/or Fire Commissioners
to protect human life and health.
A. Requirement to remove graffiti. The occupant, lessee, sublessee, agent
or landlord of any commercial or residential premises located within
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park which has any form of
graffiti on any building, structure or accessory structure or building
shall be required to either restore the defaced surface by removing the
graffiti or repaint the defaced surface using the same color paint as
existed previously on a defaced surface, within one (1) week after
written notice to the occupant, lessee, sublessee, agent or landlord by
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to remove the same.
B. Remedy of village. If said graffiti condition is not cured or corrected
within one (1) week after written notice by the village, then the village
shall have the right to issue a summons and to enter the premises to
remove the graffiti and/or repaint the premises as set forth above, and
the cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting shall be at the
sole cost and expense of the occupant, lessee, sublessee, agent or
landlord of said building or structure or accessory building or structure.
The actual cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting, plus the
cost of the inspection of said graffiti and/or repainting and other costs
incidental to such removal, shall thereupon become a lien upon the real
property upon which the graffiti was found to be and shall be added to
and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied on such
real property, and the same shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 182-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 184-2
184:164
§ 184-2. Property maintenance.
It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant and occupant of, or person
interested in, any place, vehicle, matter and thing in the village, and of
every person conducting or interested in business therein or thereat and
of every person who has undertaken to clean any place, ground or street
in the village and of every person, officer or department having charge of
any ground, place, building or erection in the village, to keep, place and
preserve the same and the sewerage, drainage and ventilation thereof in
such manner that it shall not be a nuisance or be dangerous or prejudicial
to life or health.
§ 184-3. Offensive water or substances.
No person shall permit or have any offensive water or other liquid or
substance on his premises to the prejudice of life or health, whether for use
in any trade or otherwise.
§ 184-4. Noxious liquids and offensive matter.
No swill, brine, offensive animal matter or any stinking or noxious liquid or
other filthy matter of any kind shall be allowed to run or fall into or upon
any streets or public place or be taken or put therein.
§ 184-5. Deposits creating nuisances; enforcement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, scatter, deposit or collect,
or to cause or permit to flow, collect or remain or to be thrown,
scattered or deposited, any decomposable organic matter which might
create a nuisance or act as a breeding place for flies or as food for rats
or any discarded things capable of holding water which might serve as
a breeding place for mosquitoes, in or upon any vacant lot or land
within the village, except at such place designated or provided by the
Board of Trustees, provided that garbage, manure and other
putrescible matter may be temporarily kept in suitable containers.
B. Notice. It shall be the duty of the persons duly designated to enforce
health regulations of the village to make inspections at reasonable
hours to carry out the provisions of Subsection A, and upon finding a
condition violating the provisions of said subsection, written notice
shall be served upon the owner, lessee, occupant or any person having
care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions
thereof.
C. Noncompliance with notice. If the person upon whom notice is served
fails to comply with the directions of such notice within five days
thereof, or if no person can be found in the village upon whom such
notice can be served, said enforcing officer shall be and he is hereby
empowered to cause such nuisance to be suppressed and rubbish,
garbage or other refuse removed.
§ 184-2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 184-5
184:165
§ 184-6. Accumulations of stagnant water.
Chapter 187
HOURS OF BUSINESS
§ 187-1. Operation within or near residential zone.
Any business or commercial use within the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park which is located in a residential zone or within two
hundred (200) feet of a residential zone shall not conduct its business prior
to 6:00 a.m. nor later than 12:00 midnight on any day.
§ 187-2. Existing businesses.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the right of any business in
existence on the effective date hereto, provided that such business shall
actually operate prior to 6:00 a.m. and/or after 12:00 midnight on such
effective date.
Chapter 189
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Nuisances — See Ch. 222.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 254.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
D. Lien; collection of costs. The costs in connection therewith shall be
certified to the Village Clerk and shall thereafter become a lien upon
the property upon which such nuisance has been created or exists.
Such sums shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
A. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to permit or allow in or upon any vacant
lot or other premises any water to collect and lie stagnant in which
mosquito larvae breed or are likely to breed.
B. Abatement. Whenever the enforcing officer, as prescribed in § 184-5,
shall determine that any accumulation of water wherein mosquito
larvae breed or are likely to breed constitutes a nuisance or a danger or
menace to life or health, he shall proceed to suppress such nuisance or
remove such danger or menace in the manner prescribed in the Public
Health Law of the State of New York.
§ 184-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 187-2
187:166
ARTICLE I
Illegal Occupancies
[Adopted 10-6-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
§ 189-1. Legislative intent; purpose.
The Village Board of Trustees hereby finds that there exist in the Village
of Massapequa Park serious conditions arising from the rental of dwelling
units that are substandard, inadequate in size, overcrowded and/or
dangerous and/or are in violation of local and state law, and that the rental
of such dwelling units poses a significant threat to life, limb and property
of residents of the Village and others, tends to promote and encourage
deterioration of housing within the Village, contributes to excessive
vehicular traffic and parking problems and overburdens and has a
detrimental effect upon municipal services. The Board finds that current
Code provisions are inadequate to adequately deter and/or eliminate the
existence of such dwelling units and that adequate legislation regulating
these occupancies is required to promote and preserve the public health,
safety, welfare and good order and governance of the Village. The
enactment of the regulations set forth in this article, which regulations are
remedial in nature and effect, shall have the effect of enhancing the public
health safety, welfare and good order of the Village.
§ 189-2. Scope.
This article shall apply to all premises and rental dwelling units within
such premises located within the Village of Massapequa Park, whether or
not the use and occupancy thereof shall be permitted under the applicable
use regulations for the zoning district in which such rental dwelling unit is
located.
§ 189-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed to supplement applicable
state and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. Nothing in this
article shall be deemed to abolish, impair, supersede or replace existing
remedies of the Village, county or state or existing requirements of any
other provision of local law or ordinance of the Village or of the county or
state. In situations where there is a conflict between any provisions of this
article and any applicable state or local law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the more restrictive provision or requirement shall prevail.
§ 189-4. Determination of illegal occupancy.
It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit to be occupied or to assist in the
occupancy of a dwelling unit where the number of occupants exceeds the
permitted number of occupants.
A. Presumptions of illegal occupancies in single or one-family dwellings.
§ 189-1 HOURS OF BUSINESS § 189-4
187:167
(1) In all civil and criminal prosecutions brought for the enforcement
of Code provisions with respect to illegal occupancies, there shall
be a rebuttable presumption that a single- or one-family dwelling
unit is occupied by more than one family if any two or more of the
following features are found to exist on the premises by the Code
Enforcement Official authorized to enforce or investigate violations
of the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park or any laws, codes,
rules and regulations of the State of New York:
(a) More than one mailbox, mail slot or post office address or any
combination thereof;
(b) More than one doorbell or doorway on the same side of the
dwelling unit;
(c) More than one gas meter;
(d) More than one electric meter;
(e) More than one water meter;
(f) More than one connecting line for cable television service;
(g) More than one antenna, dish antenna or related receiving
equipment;
(h) More than one telephone line;
(i) Separate entrances for segregated parts of the dwelling unit,
including but not limited to bedrooms;
(j) Partitions or internal doors with "key locks" which may serve to
bar access between segregated portions of the dwelling unit,
including but not limited to bedrooms;
(k) Separate written or oral leases or rental arrangements,
payments or agreements for portions of the dwelling unit
among its owner(s) and occupants;
(l) The inability of any occupant to have lawful access to all parts
of the dwelling unit;
(m) Two or more kitchens, each containing one or more of the
following: a refrigerator, sink and/or range, oven, hotplate,
microwave or other similar device customarily used for
cooking or the preparation of food;
(n) Any entrance(s) which has not been set forth on any plans
approved by and on file with the Building Department;
(o) Two or more motor vehicles parked on the dwelling lot
registered to persons with two or more different surnames; or
§ 189-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 189-4
187:168
(2) There shall also be a rebuttable presumption of an illegal
occupancy if a portion of a one- or single-family dwelling has been
advertised or listed with any newspaper, magazine, local
advertising publication, or real estate broker or agent as being
available for sale or rent, or has been verbally advertised as being
available for rent.
B. Presumptions of illegal occupancies in multiple-family dwellings.
(1) In all civil and criminal prosecutions brought for the enforcement
of Code provisions with respect to illegal occupancies, there shall
also be a rebuttable presumption that a multiple-family dwelling
unit is occupied by more than the permitted number of families if
any two or more of the following are found to exist on the premises
by the Code Enforcement Official authorized to enforce or
investigate violations of the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park
or any laws, codes, rules and regulations of the State of New York:
(a) The number of mailboxes, mail slots or post office addresses
exceeds the number of permitted families;
(b) The number of doorbells or doorways exceeds the number of
permitted families;
(c) The number of gas meters exceeds the number of permitted
families;
(d) The number of electric meters exceeds the number of
permitted families;
(e) The number of connecting lines for cable television service
exceeds the number of permitted families;
(f) The number of antennas, dish antennas or related receiving
equipment exceeds the number of permitted families;
(g) The telephone lines exceed the number of permitted families;
(h) The number of kitchens, each containing one or more of the
following: a refrigerator, sink and/or range, oven, hotplate,
microwave or other similar device customarily used for
cooking or the preparation of food, exceeds the number of
permitted families; and
(i) The number of motor vehicles parked on the dwelling lot
registered to persons with different surnames exceeds the
number of permitted families;
(j) The number of entrances for segregated parts of the dwelling
unit(s), including but not limited to bedrooms, exceeds the
number of permitted families;
§ 189-4 HOURS OF BUSINESS § 189-4
187:169
(k) Partitions or internal doors with "key locks" which may serve to
bar access between segregated portions of the dwelling
unit(s), including but not limited to bedrooms;
(l) Separate written or oral leases or rental arrangements,
payments or agreements for portions of the dwelling unit(s)
among its owner(s) and occupants;
(m) The inability of any occupant to have lawful access to all parts
of the dwelling unit(s);
(n) Entrance(s) which has not been set forth on any plans
approved by and on file with the Building Department.
(2) There shall also be a rebuttable presumption that a multiple-family
dwelling unit is occupied by more than the permitted number of
families if a portion of the multiple-family dwelling has been
advertised or listed with any newspaper, magazine, local
advertising publication, or real estate broker or agent as being
available for sale or rent, or has been verbally advertised as being
available for rent.
C. Verified statement. If any two or more of the features set forth in
Subsections A(1) or B(1) are found to exist on the premises by the Code
Enforcement Official, the Code Enforcement Official may request that
the owner of the building or dwelling provide a verified statement that
the building or dwelling unit(s) is in compliance with all of the
provisions of the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park, the laws and
sanitary and housing regulations of the County of Nassau and the laws
of the State of New York. If the owner fails to submit such verified
statement in writing to the Code Enforcement Official within 10 days of
such request, such shall be deemed a violation of this article.
D. Owner's right to inspection and report upon demand. A person charged
with a violation of this article may demand an inspection by the
Department of Buildings of the subject premises to rebut any of the
presumptions hereunder. Such demand shall be in writing addressed to
the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall prepare a report of
the finding of the inspection together with photographs, if appropriate.
E. Presumptive evidence dwelling unit is rented. The presence or
existence of any of the following shall create a presumption that a
dwelling unit is rented:
(1) The dwelling unit is occupied by someone other than the owner and
the owner of the dwelling unit represents, in writing or otherwise,
to any person, establishment, business, institution or government
agency that he resides at an address other than the dwelling unit in
question.
(2) Persons residing in the dwelling unit represent that they pay rent to
the owner of the premises.
§ 189-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 189-4
187:170
§ 189-5. Penalties for offenses.
§ 189-6. Enforcement.
(3) Utilities, cable, telephone or other services are in place or are
requested to be installed or used at the dwelling unit in the name of
someone other than the owner.
(4) Testimony by a witness that it is common knowledge in the
community that a person other than the owner resides in the
dwelling unit.
F. Presumptions rebuttable by conclusive evidence. Any and all of the
presumptions raised by proof of the existence of any such conditions as
set forth in this article may be rebutted but only by conclusive evidence
that such conditions do not, in fact, exist or that such conditions or the
dwelling unit or the occupancy thereof, in fact, complies with the Code.
A. A violation of this article is a violation as that term is defined in the New
York State Penal Law.
B. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code inconsistent herewith, for
each violation of this article, the owner and any person who is in charge
of the subject property at the time of the violation shall be liable for a
fine of not less than $3,500 for the first violation; for a second and any
subsequent violation, the fine shall be no less than $7,000.
C. Each week that the violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
A. The Building Inspector and/or his or her assistants shall be responsible
for investigating and documenting violations of any case of illegal
occupancy within the Village.
B. Prosecutions for violations of this article may be instituted in the Village
Justice Court, the District Court of the County of Nassau or any other
court of competent jurisdiction.
C. The Village Attorney may, upon direction of the Board of Trustees,
institute an action in the Supreme Court of the State of New York,
County of Nassau, for appropriate relief where it appears under the
circumstances that the imposition of a fine alone would not be
adequate.
§ 189-4 HOURS OF BUSINESS § 189-6
187:171
Chapter 192
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Secondhand dealers — Ch. 274.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Anyone dealing in the purchase or sale of junk, old rope,
old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rubber, paper, rags, bagging or empty
bottles, in large or small quantities, including junk cartmen.
§ 192-2. License fee.39
Every junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee as provided in Chapter
A350, Fees.
§ 192-3. Junk carts.
Any vehicle in the streets of the village used for the purpose of collecting or
selling junk, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rubber, paper, rags,
bagging or empty bottles shall be deemed a "junk cart" and the owner or
owners thereof "junk dealers."
§ 192-4. Identification of junk carts.
Any vehicle used for the purpose of collecting or selling any article or
articles enumerated in § 192-3 shall be furnished by the Village Clerk with
a plate, to be affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of the vehicle.
On said plate shall be clearly set forth the official number of the junk cart
with the words "junk cart" and the date of expiration of the license.
§ 192-5. Dealers to use junk carts.
No person shall do any collecting or selling of junk in any other way or
manner than by use of a junk cart.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 189-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 192-6
192:172
§ 192-6. Sound-making devices.
No junk cart shall use any bell, horn or other soundmaking device upon the
streets of the village.
§ 192-7. Junk shops and yards.
No business known as a "junk shop or yard" used for storage or as a place
for sale of the items designated in § 192-1 shall be permitted within the
village.
Chapter 196
LANDSCAPING
§ 196-1. License required. [Amended 10-2-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
Except as provided herein, all persons, companies or corporations
(collectively referred to as "landscaper") who perform any landscaping
functions in the Village of Massapequa Park shall be licensed in accordance
with this chapter. Landscaping functions may be performed without a
license by the owner or occupant of the property on which the work is
performed.
§ 196-2. Activities regulated. [Amended 8-8-1994 by L.L. No.
23-1994]
For the purpose of this chapter, the landscaping functions shall include
but are not limited to the cultivation, seeding, planting, cutting, trimming,
pruning, maintenance of grass, shrubs, plants, trees or other foliage.
Landscaping functions shall not include the application of pesticides,
insecticides, fungicides or rodenticides.
§ 196-3. Work done without license prohibited; responsibility for
license.
No landscaper shall perform any landscaping functions within the Village
of Massapequa Park without first obtaining a license to do so from the
Village Administrator. All landscaping work by an unlicensed landscaper
is prohibited. No property owner or occupant shall permit any unlicensed
landscaper to perform any landscaping function on his or her property.
Licenses shall be obtained by the proprietor of the landscape business or by
a corporate officer.
§ 196-4. Application procedure.
Any landscaper desiring a license by this chapter shall make application on
forms prescribed by the Village Administrator of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park or his or her designee.
§ 192-6 JUNK DEALERS § 196-5
192:173
§ 196-5. Fees. [Amended 12-8-2003; 3-8-2010]
Each applicant for a license shall pay a fee of $100 as a nonrefundable filing
fee with the application. A fee of $100 shall be paid by the applicant to the
Village Administrator or his or her designee upon issuance of the license.40
§ 196-6. Expiration of license; renewal. [Amended 12-8-2003;
3-8-2010]
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the last day
of December in the year in which they have been issued. Licenses may
be renewed upon payment of an annual fee of $100 before the first day
of February of the next year. If the licensee fails to make proper timely
application for renewal, he or she shall be required to reapply and pay an
additional license fee as set forth in the preceding section in the amount of
$100 as a nonrefundable filing fee with the application, and $100 paid upon
the issuance of the license.41
§ 196-7. Posting of the Village decal.
Each applicant shall fix to and display on the left front bumper of each
vehicle and on the left rear bumper of any trailer regularly used in the
course of its business an identification decal issued by the Village.
§ 196-8. Regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply:
A. (Reserved)42
B. No landscaper shall perform landscaping work on Sunday.
C. Landscaping work may be performed by landscapers only during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. through 7:30 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, 9:00
a.m. through 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
D. No licensee shall scatter, nor in using any mechanical or electrical
blower, cause to be scattered, any garbage, refuse or cuttings, leaves or
other waste materials on any public highway or public property without
removing and/or cleaning the same immediately.
E. No one shall spill or dump oil, gasoline or other petroleum products on
the public highway or right-of-way or on the ground. No equipment
shall be filled or refilled except over a drop cloth or other device
designed to catch and retain any accidental spillage. [Amended
8-8-1994 by L.L. No. 23-1994]
40.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A350, Fees.
41.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A350, Fees.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regulating the application of pesticides and
insecticides, was repealed 8-8-1994 by L.L. No. 23-1994.
§ 196-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 196-9
192:174
§ 196-9. Penalties for offenses.
Each and every violation of any provision of this chapter or of any of
the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be punishable by a
mandatory minimum fine of not less than $100 for each and every separate
offense relating to a violation of this chapter.
§ 196-10. Revocation and suspension of license.
In addition to the penalties set forth in § 196-9 of this chapter, the Village
may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter after
notice to the licensee.
§ 196-11. License to be in possession of person performing work.
The license issued pursuant to this chapter or a photocopy signed by
the licensee shall be at all times in the actual possession of the person
performing the work at the site.
§ 196-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on March 1, 1994.
Chapter 198
LAUNDERETTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 198-1. Attendant required.
Each owner, operator or management of a business maintaining and
operating for hire separate washing machines for personal and individual
use where made available to the public shall provide an attendant who is
familiar with the operation of such washing machines and any other laundry
machines installed therein and who shall be in attendance at all times when
such machines are made available for hire. The attendant referred to in this
section shall be an adult.
§ 198-2. Prohibited hours of operation. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.I.
No. 16-198343]
The establishment referred to in this chapter shall not be in operation
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 196-9 LAUNDERETTES § 198-3
198:175
§ 198-3. Sanitary system.
The sanitary system with respect to this type of establishment must be set
up on a basis of 450 gallons for each machine per day, and said sanitary
system must be laid out by a licensed engineer.
Chapter 202
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 78.
Dirt carts — See Ch. 110.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 178.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 192.
Pawnbrokers — Ch. 234.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 268, Art. II.
Close-out sales — See Ch. 268, Art. III.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 202-1. Activities requiring license. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
In addition to the businesses, trades, occupations and activities required to
be licensed by statute or by local laws and ordinances of the Village, the
following activities shall be licensed as provided in this chapter:
A. Auctions and auctioneers.
B. Barbershops and beauty parlors.
C. Canvassers and solicitors.
D. Christmas tree sales.
E. Closing-out and similar sales.
F. Dirt carts.
G. Filling stations and garages.
H. Hawkers, peddlers and itinerant vendors.
I. Junk dealers.
J. Pawnbrokers.
K. Massage parlors. [Added 3-25-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
L. Nail salons. [Added 3-25-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
§ 198-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 202-1.1
198:176
§ 202-1.1. Working under license of another. [Added 3-25-2013 by
L.L. No. 2-2013]
For each activity for which a license is required by the Village or by any
other municipal entity, no person shall perform such activity unless they
have the required license or where permitted to perform such activity under
the license of another.
§ 202-2. Citizenship of licensees.
No person shall be licensed nor shall any existing license be renewed under
this chapter unless the applicant is a citizen of the United States or one
who has regularly declared his intention to become a citizen. The Board of
Trustees shall refuse to renew or issue a license to any person who, having
declared his intention of becoming a citizen, fails to acquire citizenship
within six months after the right to do so accrues, fails to furnish proof
from the Naturalization Bureau that he filed a petition for naturalization
within six months after his right to do so accrued and who cannot show to
the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees that he is exercising due diligence
toward the consummation of his citizenship.
§ 202-3. Issuance of license; effective date; restrictions.
§ 202-4. Denial of license.
A license may be refused for any trade or occupation specified in
Subdivisions 3 and 4 of § 91 of the Village Law44 which shall, in the
judgment of the Board of Trustees, be carried on or is intended to be carried
on in any building or place which is not provided with a suitable and safe
A. Generally. The Board of Trustees, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, shall authorize all licenses, which shall be signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Village Clerk, who shall keep a record
thereof, including the number and date of the license, the time and
purpose for which it is granted and the amount of the fee to be paid
therefor. Upon presentation of such license to the Clerk of the Village,
so signed and countersigned, and the payment to the Clerk of the fees
therein specified, the Clerk shall endorse thereon his receipt for the
license fee, showing that such fee is paid therefor.
B. Effective date. A license shall not take effect until the receipt of the
Clerk shall have been endorsed thereon, showing that the fee has been
paid therefor.
C. Restrictions upon issuance. A license shall be issued only to such
person as the Board of Trustees, except as herein provided, shall deem
to be a fit and proper person to conduct the trade, occupation or
business for which such license is required.
44.Editor's Note: Section 91 of the former Village Law was repealed by L. 1972, c. 892, which
recodified the Village Law.
§ 202-1.1 LAUNDERETTES § 202-4
198:177
means of ingress and egress in case of panic or fire, or which shall, in the
judgment of the Board of Trustees, be likely to be immoral, improper or
disturb the peace and order of the Village or violate any provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.45
§ 202-5. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Board of Trustees of the Village may suspend any license granted
hereunder until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees and thereupon
such license may be continued or may be revoked by the Board of Trustees
for cause shown, after three days' notice to the licensee and a hearing
thereon.
§ 202-6. Contents of license.
Every license hereunder shall specify the object and length of time for
which it is granted and when it shall expire.
§ 202-7. Term of license.
All licenses granted as provided in this chapter shall commence on June 1
and shall expire on May 31 the following year.
§ 202-8. License fees.46
Licenses required by this chapter may be granted, in the discretion of the
Board of Trustees, for any period less than one year upon the payment of a
pro rata amount of the license fee prescribed, provided that such pro rata
amount shall be not less than 1/2 the annual fee, and provided, further, that
the provisions of this section shall apply only to those licenses customarily
issued upon an annual basis.
§ 202-9. Designation of licensed vehicles.
Chapter 203
A. Use of words, letters and numbers. All words, letters and numbers
prescribed for licensed vehicles shall be shown permanently and
conspicuously on the outside thereof in colors contrasting with the
background and not less than two inches high, as directed or approved
by the Board of Trustees, and shall be kept legible and plainly visible at
all times during the term of the license and shall be obliterated or
erased upon change of ownership or expiration of the license.
B. Misuse of words, letters or numbers. No person shall have or use any
vehicle with words, letters or numbers thereon like those prescribed for
licensed vehicles without being duly licensed therefor.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. A350, Fees.
§ 202-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 202-9
203:178
LIGHTER DEVICES, SALE OF
§ 203-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
hereby finds and declares that lighters, matches, and similar devices
("lighter devices") pose a serious health and safety risk to our children
and property when these devices are used by minors. The unregulated sale
and dispensing of lighter devices may cause serious injury to our Village
residents.
§ 203-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall sell or offer to sell in any way or dispense or provide a
lighter device to any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 203-3. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a violation and not a crime,
punishable by a fine to be set by the court not to exceed $1,000 for first
offense; $2,000 for a second offense; and $3,000 for the third or for a
subsequent offense.
Chapter 204
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 252.
§ 204-1. Dangerous materials.
No person shall throw or deposit upon any public highway, public street,
public parking area or public park any glass bottle, can, container, glass,
nail, tacks, wire or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal
or vehicle upon such public highway, public street, sidewalk, public parking
area or public park.
§ 204-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a mandatory minimum fine of $100 for each violation thereof or
imprisoned up to 15 days in jail, or both.
Chapter 210
§ 202-9 LITTERING § 204-2
204:179
METERS, GAS, ELECTRIC AND WATER
§ 210-1. Findings and purpose.
The Village of Massapequa Park finds that unlawful multiple-family
occupancies of dwellings in the Village of Massapequa Park has been
facilitated by the installation of separate electric, gas or water meters for
the additional families. The Board of Trustees wants to limit the number of
electric, gas or water meters in single-family dwellings to one (1).
§ 210-2. Number of meters.
A. No dwelling which may be lawfully occupied by only one (1) family in
accordance with § 345-16 of the Massapequa Park Code shall have
more than one (1) electric, gas or water meter located therein or
elsewhere on the property so as to service such dwelling. The
occupancy of any dwelling shall presumptively be limited to one (1)
family unless a conditional use permit has been granted by the Village
of Massapequa Park. A dwelling for which a conditional use permit has
been granted for use as a mother-daughter residence shall be treated
as a one-family dwelling.
B. Any person that configures or reconfigures the electric wiring, gas
piping or water hookup to facilitate the installation of a second or third
or additional meter at any dwelling and any public utility that installs a
second or third or additional meter shall provide written notification to
the Building Department of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park of such configuration or reconfiguration or installation within
fifteen (15) days of such work, including in such notification information
as to the type of meter, the name of the applicant for the meter and the
address of the dwelling at which the work has been performed.
C. Requests for additional meters.
(1) Any person making request for more than one (1) electric, gas or
water meter shall, at the time of his or her request, submit an
affidavit signed by all the owners of the property with their
signatures duly notarized before a notary public, permitting the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to make physical
inspection or inspections of the interior and exterior portions of the
real property as to the compliance with this chapter and other
applicable local laws of the village as to the occupancy of persons
residing in said premises. The owners of the property agree that
the right of inspection shall be binding on each and every owner of
the property and any assigns or successors in interest, including
administrators and executors.
(2) At the time of the request by the owners of the property to the
village, the last recorded original deed or a certified copy of said
deed in reference to the subject real property in question shall be
furnished by the owners of said real property, together with the
§ 204-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 210-2
210:180
Chapter 214
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Newspaper recycling — See Ch. 174, Art. III.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 214-1. Application required.
Any individual, party, partnership or other entity desirous of installing or
placing a newspaper vending machine on any village street, sidewalk or
other area either owned or under the supervision or control of the Village
of Massapequa Park shall first make written application to the Village
Administrator of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 214-2. Contents of application.
Said applicant shall set forth, in writing, the exact number of newspaper
vending machines desired to be installed on village property, together with
the exact and precise location of each machine desired to be installed
and the manner and mode that each newspaper vending machine is to be
installed on said village property.
request to the village. The request shall be signed by all the owners
of the real property, together with a sworn statement that no
subsequent transfer of the real property has been made from the
date of the original deed or certified copy of the deed being
furnished to the village.
(3) Color photographs of all of the owners of the real property in
question shall be submitted by the owner or owners of the real
property, together with the request to the village.
D. The owner of any dwelling at which an electric, gas or water meter is
installed subsequent to the effective date of this chapter in violation of
any section of this chapter shall be liable for the penalties for violation
of the terms and provisions hereof for each week that the
nonconforming meter remains in use after the Building Department has
sent to the owner a notice of violation of this chapter.
E. Any person subject to this chapter may seek exemption for good cause
from the requirements of this chapter by making request to the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals. If the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that
compliance with this section would cause undue hardship or undue
expense even with the dwelling in question being occupied in
accordance with the requirements of § 345-16 of the Massapequa Park
Code, it may grant an exemption.
§ 210-2 NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES § 214-3
214:181
§ 214-3. Number and type restricted.
Under no circumstances shall more than five newspaper vending machines
be permitted to be installed or placed on property owned or supervised
or under the control of the Village of Massapequa Park, which newspaper
vending machines sell one or more newspapers, magazines or periodicals.
§ 214-4. Administrative fee.47
There shall be an annual administrative fee as provided in Chapter A350,
Fees, per machine to be installed on village property, and said fee shall be
due and payable to the Village of Massapequa Park before the installation
or placement of any newspaper vending machine commences, and the fee
shall be paid annually thereafter.
Chapter 218
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Boating — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 192.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
Vending vehicles — See Ch. 330.
§ 218-1. General prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise
which annoys, disturbs or injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others. The restrictions enumerated in this chapter are
specific enactments to curb and prevent disturbing and unnecessary noises
in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive.
§ 218-2. Building operations. [Amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No.
13-1997]
A. Operation or use of any pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic
hammers, derricks, steam or electric hoists, chain saws, leaf blowers,
lawn blowers, power washers, electrical generators, outboard blowers
or other similar apparatus or to engage in any other building operation
which is attended with loud or unusual noises anywhere in the Village
of Massapequa Park is allowed only during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 214-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 218-2
214:182
§ 218-3. Loudspeakers and other sound-amplifying devices.
[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
No person shall maintain or operate or permit to be maintained or operated
any loudspeaker attachment connected with a radio or television apparatus
or talking machine or other primary source of sound in such manner that
the loudspeaker will project sound outside of any building so that the sound
is audible for a distance of more than 30 feet from the point of its origin.
§ 218-4. Sound trucks.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle for any purpose
in the village having sound-amplifying equipment in operation without first
obtaining the written consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 218-5. Horns and signaling devices.
No person shall sound or cause to be sounded any horn or signaling device
on any motorcar, motorcycle, motorboat or other vehicle on any street,
waterway or public place of the village except as a danger signal or traffic
warning, nor shall any person create or cause to be created by the use of
such devices any unreasonably loud, harsh or prolonged sound.
§ 218-6. Mufflers.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorcar, motorboat
or other mechanism propelled by gasoline, fuel oil or other combustible
substance unless the same is properly equipped with a muffler, so designed
and in such condition as to prevent unnecessary noise in its operation.
through 7:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m.
on Saturdays. [Amended 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
B. The terms and provisions as set forth in Subsection A above are
separate and not applicable to the terms and provisions of the
Landscaping Law, §§ 196-1 through 196-12 inclusive, of the
Massapequa Park Code.48
C. This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools when
said operation is limited to work that does not require a building
permit. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Landscaping.
§ 218-2 NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES § 218-6
214:183
Chapter 222
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
§ 222-1. Complaints; investigation.
In case any resident of the village shall make a complaint to the Village
Clerk alleging that there exists on the property of another or through the
act or neglect of another conditions which constitute a public nuisance or
which endanger or tend to endanger the property, safety or health of any
inhabitant of the village or the peace and good order or public health of the
village, the Village Clerk shall cause such complaint to be investigated and
shall submit the same, together with a written report of his findings, to the
Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting called
for the purpose.
§ 222-2. Notice to appear; service of notice.
§ 222-3. Hearing.
At the time and place designated, the Board of Trustees shall meet and hear
the persons interested and may make such investigations and inquiries as
said Board may determine. The Board of Trustees may by resolution make
such orders and directions as may seem necessary or proper under the
circumstances.
§ 222-4. Failure to appear.
The failure of the person to whom notice has been sent to appear shall be
deemed an admission of the truth of the allegations and a consent to such
action by the Board of Trustees.
A. The Board of Trustees may direct the person owning or occupying the
premises upon which such conditions exist or the person believed to be
responsible for the alleged conditions to appear before the Board of
Trustees at the time and place designated and show cause why such
conditions should not be abated or corrected.
B. Such notice may be served either personally or by registered mail or in
the same manner as a precept in summary dispossess proceedings.
§ 218-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 222-5
222:184
§ 222-5. Failure to comply.
The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of such orders and
directions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 226
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
§ 226-1. Parades and assemblages restricted.
It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble in any street or on any sidewalk
or other public place in the village or to suffer or to cause such assemblage
or to take part in, conduct, suffer or cause any parade or demonstration in
any village street, sidewalk or other public place except as herein provided.
§ 226-2. Regulation of events.
The Board of Trustees may limit or regulate the time and place at which
parades or public assemblages shall be permitted to be held and make any
reasonable regulations with respect thereto.
§ 226-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to Police and Fire Department personnel or the
United States military or naval forces.
§ 226-4. Permit required.
No parade, procession, rally or open-air meeting in any street, sidewalk
or public place shall be held or conducted in the village unless a permit
therefor shall have been granted by the Board of Trustees of the village.
§ 226-5. Permit application; contents.
Any person wishing to use any streets or public places in the village for
a procession, parade, rally or open-air meeting shall make application
therefor to the Board of Trustees at least seven days before the proposed
event is to occur. Such application shall state the route to be followed,
the nature of the event and the number of participants therein so that
opportunity may be had by the Board of Trustees to determine whether by
granting a permit there would be interference with traffic circulation or
danger to the public safety.
§ 222-5 PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES § 226-6
226:185
§ 226-6. Conditions for permit issuance.
If it appears that there would be no unreasonable interference with traffic
circulation or public safety, the Board of Trustees shall issue a permit for
the time and along the route requested in the application provided for in
§ 226-5 or may make such modification in time and route as to provide
for reasonable traffic circulation and public safety as nearly as possible
conforming to the time and route requested.
§ 226-7. Contents of permit.49
Each permit hereunder shall designate specifically the route through which
the procession or parade will move and will be subject to rules and
regulations as may be determined by the Board of Trustees through the
issuance of a special use permit.
§ 226-8. Denial of permit.
The Board of Trustees, in its discretion, may refuse to grant a permit for a
parade for a commercial purpose.
§ 226-9. Responsibility for compliance with permit restrictions.
The chief officer of any procession, parade or assemblage for which a
permit may be granted by the Board of Trustees shall be responsible for the
observance of all rules and regulations included in said permit.
§ 226-10. Lawful assemblages and orderly picketing.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit lawful assemblages
with the permission of and regulation by the Board of Trustees, nor
reasonable or orderly picketing lawfully conducted.
§ 226-11. Display of American flag. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No.
17-1983]
No permit for a parade shall be granted nor shall the streets, sidewalks or
highways of the village be used for such purposes unless the American flag
shall at all times be prominently displayed.
§ 226-12. Disorderly or disturbing events.
No permit hereunder shall be granted where there is good reason to believe
that the proposed procession, parade or assemblage will be disorderly in
character or tend to disturb the public peace.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 226-13
226:186
§ 226-13. Peddlers and solicitors causing assemblages.
No peddler, hawker, vendor of merchandise or beggar shall place himself
upon any street, highway or sidewalk in the village for the purpose of selling
merchandise or otherwise in such manner as to cause an assemblage of
persons thereon.
§ 226-14. Stores or shops causing assemblages.
No store or shop shall, by means of a loudspeaking device, mechanical
device, show or play or any form of window display, conduct same in such
manner or suffer the same to be so conducted that an unreasonable number
of persons shall be caused to assemble on any sidewalk, street, highway
or alley in the village, nor shall any window-tapping devices be installed or
used.
Chapter 230
PARKING, HANDICAPPED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMANENTLY DISABLED DRIVER — A person with so seriously impaired
mobility as to prevent that person from walking without the assistance of an
artificial device.
§ 230-2. Authorization of Board of Trustees to consider application
for exemption.
In the event that any disabled or handicapped resident of the Village of
Massapequa Park makes application to the Board of Trustees for exemption
from the terms and provisions of Local Law No. 15 of 197550 on the grounds
of undue hardship, the Board of Trustees is authorized to review written
medical or other written documentation on an annual or earlier basis, as
the Board of Trustees shall decide, proving to the satisfaction of the Board
of Trustees that the operation and enforcement of Local Law No. 15 of
1975 would result in an undue hardship and burden to said disabled or
handicapped resident.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 226-13 PARKING, HANDICAPPED § 230-3
230:187
§ 230-3. Issuance and validity of permits.
The Board of Trustees shall have the discretion to grant such annual
exemptions (on January 1) to Local Law No. 15 of 1975 after reviewing all of
said written evidence annually and to issue a special permit acknowledging
such exemption to a disabled or handicapped resident, which special permit
shall only be valid in a residential area and only in front of the disabled or
handicapped resident's real property or residence.
§ 230-4. Display of permit.
A special permit shall be permanently attached to the visor of said motor
vehicle being exempted from the operation of Local Law No. 15 of 1975
owned and/or operated by the disabled or handicapped resident, and such
permit shall be clearly visible at all times to any authorized person
inspecting said motor vehicle while said motor vehicle is parked on the
village street in front of the applicable real property or residence.
§ 230-5. Signs.
A sign shall be posted and affixed by the village in front of said real property
or residence of the disabled or handicapped resident indicating that there
is a special permit relating to parking on the village street for such disabled
or handicapped resident.
§ 230-6. Revocation or suspension of permit.
The Board of Trustees shall have the authority at any time, upon sufficient
evidence to the satisfaction of the Board, to revoke or suspend said special
permit for any disabled or handicapped resident.
§ 230-7. Reservation of spaces.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time by resolution set aside
public places, municipal parking fields, streets or portions of streets within
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park as parking spaces for motor
vehicles for the sole and exclusive use by holders of valid physically disabled
drivers' parking permits issued by the Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 230-8. Exclusive authority of Board.
The Board of Trustees shall have the sole and exclusive discretion to
determine if a person is entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 230-9. Renewal of permits.
The Board of Trustees shall have the discretion to renew all applications
from time to time after a review of the written evidence pertaining thereto.
Chapter 232
§ 230-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 230-9
232:188
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 64.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 70.
Bicycles and motorcycles — See Ch. 84.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Parades and public assemblages — See Ch.
226.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Tents — See Ch. 310.
§ 232-1. Compliance with signs required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard any rules, regulations or
instructions posted on appropriate signs located in any park or playground
placed thereon by order of the village.
§ 232-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK or PARKS — Includes all parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, canals,
bays, lagoons or inlets, village-owned lands, land under water owned by
the village and other recreational areas under the jurisdiction of the village
and such other rights and appurtenances as the Village Board may utilize,
whether the same are now or hereafter owned or acquired by the village in
fee or otherwise, including all land under and space above the surface of
the ground.
RESIDENT — A person who currently resides in the village and has so
resided for a continuous period of 30 days.
§ 232-3. Use restricted.
The use of the village parks shall be restricted to residents of the village
only, who are residents of the village or organizations with permits issued
by the village. Upon request of a village official or employee, all persons
or organizations shall identify themselves as village residents or as
organizations participating in an approved organization activity.
§ 232-4. Vehicles.
No cars, trucks or buses shall be admitted to any village park except by
written permission from the village or except in designated parking areas.
§ 230-9 PARKS § 232-5
232:189
§ 232-5. Minors.
No person under 12 years of age shall be admitted to any park unless
accompanied by an adult who shall assume full responsibility for his safety
and conduct.
§ 232-6. Conduct.
Every person in a village park shall conduct himself or herself in an orderly
manner and shall endeavor to cause no discomfort or inconvenience to any
other person or patron.
§ 232-7. Hours of operation.
Village parks shall be opened and closed at the times and hours designated
and posted by signing by the village. No person shall enter the park after
closing.
§ 232-8. Camping and shelters.
No person shall tent or camp or erect or maintain a tent, lean-to, shelter or
camp in any park except by special permit or written authorization of the
village.
§ 232-9. Permits.
A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may
be performed in strict accordance with the terms and conditions of said
permit. Any violation by its holder of any terms or conditions shall constitute
grounds for revocation by the village or its authorized representative.
Applications for all permits shall be made to the village in the Village Hall
or in such other manner or place as the village shall direct.
§ 232-10. Payment of charges or fees.
No person shall make use of or gain admittance to or attempt to use or gain
admittance to the facilities of any park for the use of which a charge or fee
is fixed by the village unless he shall pay the charge or fee fixed.
§ 232-11. Responsibility for loss, damage or theft.
The village shall not be responsible for loss, damage or theft to cars, trucks
or buses or their contents or to personal property. Such loss, whether inside
buildings or on the grounds of any park, shall be the patron's responsibility.
§ 232-12. Bathing and swimming.
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any waters of any park. Anyone
swimming or bathing in any waters of any park does so at his own risk.
§ 232-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 232-13
232:190
§ 232-13. Taking fish and shellfish.
No person shall take fish from any of the parks or land under water except
persons with permits, which permit must be conspicuously attached to the
person so doing. No person shall be allowed to take any shellfish from any
of the parks or from any land under water.
§ 232-14. Picnics and outings. [Amended 10-6-1997 by L.L. No.
14-1997]
The village shall designate areas to be occupied for picnics and outings and
shall regulate the use of recreational facilities. All organized picnics and
outings shall first obtain a special permit from the village and pay a fee as
provided in Chapter 350, Fees. This permit shall be properly displayed when
requested by a village employee. Applications shall be considered on a firstcome,
first-served basis pursuant to the rules and regulations of the village.
§ 232-15. Structures and public assemblies.
No person shall erect any structure, stand or platform, hold any meeting,
perform any ceremony, make a speech or address, exhibit any performance
or form any parade or procession in any park except by special permit from
the village.
§ 232-16. Fires.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire within any park, except
charcoal, sterno or propane, in designated areas allowed by the village or
under a special permit. Every fire shall be continuously under the care and
direction of a competent person over 21 years of age from the time it is
kindled until it is extinguished, and no fire shall be built within 10 feet of
any tree or building or beneath the branches of any tree or underbrush.
§ 232-17. Games, kites and models.
No person shall throw or use any type of ball, beanbag or other object, or
play any ball game or any other game except in such places designated for
such use by the village, and no person shall engage in flying model planes,
flying kites or model boating, except in areas designated by the village.
§ 232-18. Solicitation of alms.
No person in any park shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose,
except by written permission of the village.
§ 232-19. Advertising material.
No person in any park shall post, distribute, cast or leave about any bills,
placards, tickets, handbills, circulars or advertisements or any other matter
for advertising purposes.
§ 232-13 PARKS § 232-20
232:191
§ 232-20. Littering.
No person shall leave, throw, lay, drop or discharge into or on any park, any
bottles, refuse, garbage, rubbish or waste. Papers, cartons or any other type
of litter must be placed in receptacles for that purpose.
§ 232-21. Alcoholic beverages.
No person or organization shall bring into any park any beer, ale or other
alcoholic beverage without the express written permission of the village.
Any person lawfully conducting a picnic within any village park must have
a permit from the village which states that alcoholic beverages will be
permitted as part of said picnic, in order to bring any alcoholic beverage
into any village park.
§ 232-22. Destruction of property.
No person in any park shall deface, injure, displace, remove, fill in, raise,
destroy or tamper with any drive, path or walk; take up, remove or carry
away trees, shrubs, turf or any material or substance; remove or destroy any
structure, building or any appurtenances connected with any park under
the jurisdiction and control of the village.
§ 232-23. Traffic control.
All laws and regulations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law regarding traffic
and motor vehicles shall form or constitute a part of this chapter, and such
additional directions for traffic and motor vehicles as may be posted on
signs shall be regarded as part of this chapter for traffic control. In parking
areas, all persons shall comply with the directions of parking attendants.
The speed limit through the park area shall not exceed five miles per hour.
§ 232-24. Animals. [Amended 4-26-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
No person or organization owning or maintaining or caring for or having
custody of any animal shall cause or permit such animal (excluding guide
dogs) to enter into any village park except by written permission of the
village.
§ 232-25. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
12-1994; 12-9-1996 by L.L. No. 23-1996]
A. Any person, entity or organization violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation punishable with a
mandatory minimum fine of $100 for the first offense and/or by
imprisonment for 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any person, entity or organization violating any of the provisions of this
chapter for a second offense shall be deemed guilty of a violation
punishable with a mandatory minimum fine of $250 and/or by
imprisonment for 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 232-20 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 232-25
232:192
Chapter 234
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 274.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 234-1. Condition for grant of license.
A pawnbroker's license shall not be granted unless the Board of Trustees
is satisfied that the person applying therefor is a proper person to conduct
such business.
§ 234-2. License fee.51
The license fee for conducting a pawnbroker's or similar business shall be
as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, per annum, payable upon issuance of
the license.52
§ 234-3. Rules and regulations.53
The license issued shall be subject to approval and such rules and
regulations as may be determined by the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 236
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 70, Art. I.
Clothing requirements — See Ch. 74, Part 2.
Firearms — See Ch. 150.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Nuisances — See Ch. 222.
Parades and public assemblages — See Ch.
226.
Parks — See Ch. 232.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Found property — See Ch. 252, Art. II.
Recreational use of streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 298, Art. IV.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: Original sections 12-131, Records to be kept, and 12-132, Employment of
minors, both of which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 232-25 PAWNBROKERS § 234-3
234:193
§ 236-1. Disturbing the peace.
No person shall indulge in disorderly or noisy or disturbing conduct within
the village. Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be
deemed in violation of this section:
A. Offensive language, conduct or behavior. Uses or indulges in offensive,
disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language, conduct or
behavior.
B. Annoys or disturbs others. Acts in such manner as to annoy, disturb,
interfere with, obstruct or be offensive to others.
C. Unlawful assembly. Congregates with others on a public street,
sidewalk, park or place for other than a lawfully permitted purpose and
refuses to move on when ordered by the police.
D. Causes crowds. By his actions causes a crowd to collect, except when
lawfully addressing such a crowd.
E. Shouts or makes noise. Shouts or makes any other noise either outside
or inside a building during the nighttime to the annoyance or
disturbance of any considerable number of persons.
F. Interferes with others. Interferes with any person in any place by
jostling against such person or unnecessarily crowding him or by
placing a hand in the proximity of such person's pocket, pocketbook or
handbag.
G. Solicits alms. Stations himself on the public streets or follows or
approaches pedestrians for the purpose of soliciting alms or solicits
alms on the public streets unlawfully.
H. Solicits lewd acts. Frequents or loiters about any public place soliciting
any person for the purpose of committing a crime against nature or
other lewdness.
I. Tampers with municipal property, notices, etc. Damages, destroys or
makes improper or unauthorized use of any municipal property,
including parks, parking fields or stadiums, or conducts himself in a
manner contrary to any notices, rules or regulations of the village or
refuses to obey orders of any person in authority with respect to the use
of or conduct in or with respect to such property.
J. Disturbs peace and quiet. Destroys the peace and quiet of the village or
any lawful meeting or assembly therein.
K. Loiters.
(1) Loiters or congregates with others on the street, sidewalks,
doorways or stairways or areas adjacent thereto, or on stairways,
§ 234-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 236-1
236:194
§ 236-2. Obscene acts and materials.
§ 236-3. Public intoxication.
No person shall appear or be upon any street, sidewalk, highway or in
any public hall, park or other public place in the village in a condition of
intoxication.
§ 236-4. Destruction of property.
platforms, waiting rooms and escalators of railroad or bus stops so
as to impede traffic, or to the annoyance of passersby or others.
(2) Loiters or congregates with others on village-owned or -controlled
properties, including any and all park and memorial areas, without
the express written consent of the Board of Trustees, or remains
upon said premises without any legitimate reason for being there
and not having written permission from the Board of Trustees
authorizing the congregating within said premises, or wanders in
and about said premises without apparent reason and under
circumstances which justify suspicion that he or they may be
engaged or about to engage upon criminal activity, and upon
inquiry by a peace officer refuses to identify himself or fails to give
a reasonably credible account of his conduct and purposes. [Added
1-24-1972]
A. Lewd acts and gestures. No person shall commit or indulge in any lewd,
wanton, indecent, immodest, obscene or filthy act or gesture.
B. Lewd signs and billboards. No person shall expose, display, post,
exhibit, paint, print or mark upon any wall or object or place any
placard, bill, painting or sign, either as an advertisement or otherwise,
upon any building, billboard, wall, fence, tree or other surface, so as to
be visible from any street or public place, which shall be of a lewd,
indecent, immodest, immoral or vulgar character, such as may be
calculated to shock the sense of decency or propriety.
A. Generally. No person shall willfully or maliciously break, tear, mar,
injure, remove or deface any building, fence, awning, signboard,
bulletin board, telegraph pole, telephone pole, light pole, fountain,
shrubbery or other ornamental thing, or tear down, destroy or mutilate
any notice or handbill or sign lawfully posted.
B. Public property. No person shall, without previously procuring and
holding unrevoked a permit therefor, as provided by local law or
ordinance of the village, paint, deface, damage or destroy any
pavement, curb, sidewalk, tree, shrubbery or grass within or upon any
streets, parks or other public property in the village.
§ 236-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 236-5
236:195
§ 236-5. Obstruction of officers.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct any officer executing his proper
orders.
§ 236-6. Projectiles.
No person shall propel, throw or shoot any missile or solid objects such
as stones, snowballs, sticks, metal or similar materials upon or across or
toward any street, sidewalk, highway or other public place in the village
where such act would injure or threaten injury to any person or property.
§ 236-7. Trespassing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter without authority or to trespass
upon any private property or any property owned by or under the control of
the village.
§ 236-8. Dressing or undressing in public.
No person shall use an automobile or other vehicle on any public highway or
any place exposed to public view for the purpose of dressing or undressing
therein, nor shall any person dress or undress in any public place within the
village.
Chapter 240
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 64.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 78.
Mobile restaurants — See Ch. 164.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 192.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Parades and public assemblages — See Ch.
226.
Soliciting in parks — See Ch. 232.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 236.
Special sales — See Ch. 268.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 274.
Solicitation of taxicab business — See Ch.
306.
Solicitation of towing work — See Ch. 314.
Vending vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 236-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 236-8
240:196
ARTICLE I
Public Sale of Goods
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Secs. 12-12 and 12-17 of the 1967 Code]
§ 240-1. Sales from vehicles and in the open. [Amended 7-11-1994
by L.L. No. 22-1994]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other entity
to sell merchandise to the public from the rear of trucks, from tables or
in any other manner on Village property unless the Board of Trustees has
given its prior written permission to authorize said sale.
§ 240-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANDISE MART — Includes but shall not be limited to any retail
selling of goods, wares or merchandise when such merchandise is
segregated by type and such different types are sold by several different
persons acting independently, or where miscellaneous merchandise is sold
by each of several persons who assemble together at one place or general
area for the purpose of selling their respective goods to the public.
§ 240-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 240-2
240:197

ARTICLE II
Canvassers and Solicitors
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. II of Ch. 12 of the 1967 Code]
§ 240-3. Registration and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or
solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant
for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any
kind or seeking information or donations, without first having registered in
the office of the Village Clerk and receiving a license as hereinbefore set
forth.54
§ 240-4. Contents of application for registration and license.
§ 240-5. Certificate of registration.
§ 240-6. Revocation of registration and license.
Any registration and/or license hereunder may be revoked by the Mayor,
by any member of the Board of Trustees or person designated by the
A. An applicant for registration and license hereunder shall give his
complete identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the
nature of the services in which he is interested, the names of the
manufacturers of the products or of the organization which he
represents and the proposed method of operation in the Village.
B. If an applicant is under the age of 18, proof of working papers must be
provided along with the application.55 [Added 4-24-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
A. Issuance. Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and
who pays the fee provided for herein shall be furnished a certificate
along with a picture ID card which must be prominently displayed on
the person while in the Village, indicating that he has registered and
showing the dates covered by such registration. [Amended 4-24-2006
by L.L. No. 3-2006]
B. Exhibit. Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in
the Village carry upon his person the registration certificate, and the
same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required to
do so by any police officer or by any person solicited.
C. No applicant will be permitted to solicit after 8:00 p.m. or dusk,
whichever is earlier, on any evening. [Added 4-24-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Licensed Occupations, for licensing provisions.
55.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 12-30, Fee for license and registration, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 14-1983.
§ 240-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 240-6
240:199
Board of Trustees or by the Police Department because of any violation
by the registrant of this article or of any ordinance of the Village, town,
state or federal law or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess
the qualifications and character required in this article for the original
registration.
§ 240-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article pertaining to the licensing of the activity shall
not apply to officers or employees of the Village, town, county, state or
federal government or any subdivision thereof when on official business, or
to any recognized charitable or religious organization.
§ 240-7.1. Nonsolicitation list. [Added 4-24-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
The Village of Massapequa Park shall maintain a list of the names and
addresses of Village residents who have expressed a desire not to receive
any solicitation or canvassing at their residence. The list shall be provided
to anyone receiving a license to solicit or canvass. If a license holder solicits
or canvasses at a residence that is on the non solicitation list, the Board of
Trustees may revoke the license from such holder.
§ 240-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 240-7.1
240:200
ARTICLE III
Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. VI of Ch. 12 of the 1967 Code]
§ 240-8. License required. [Amended 7-11-1994 by L.L. No.
22-1994]
No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall hawk, peddle, sell
or dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise of any description from
any vehicle of any kind whatsoever or stand in any street or public place
in the Village of Massapequa Park without first having obtained a license
as provided in § 202-1 of the Village Code. Such license shall be required
for each individual, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in
such sale of goods, whether operating in his own behalf or as the agent or
employee of another.
§ 240-9. Condition for grant of license.
The Board of Trustees shall not grant a license hereunder unless it is
satisfied that the person applying is a proper person to conduct such
business.
§ 240-10. License fee. [Amended 5-12-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980;
4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The fee for peddling or hawking goods, wares or merchandise shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
§ 240-11. (Reserved)56
56.Editor's Note: Former § 240-11, Conduct, was repealed 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 22-1994.
§ 240-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 240-11
240:201

ARTICLE IV
Commercial and Advertising Materials
[Adopted 7-12-1993 as L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 240-12. Distribution prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, society, association,
company or corporation or other agents or representatives to
distribute, throw, cast or place or cause or permit to be distributed,
thrown, cast or placed any newspaper, periodical or commercial or
advertising material of any nature whatsoever upon the premises of any
Village resident who has stated opposition to such distribution and
whose address has been listed with the Village pursuant to Subsection
C of this section. [Amended 10-25-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993]
B. Any newspaper, periodical or commercial or advertising material
whatsoever which has not been ordered by the occupant of the property
which is delivered upon the premises of any Village resident who has
not stated opposition to such distribution as set forth in Subsection A
above shall be delivered on the front porch or side porch and/or the
stoop of said premises and at or on no other place or location of said
premises. [Amended 10-25-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993]
C. The Village of Massapequa Park shall maintain a list, in writing, of the
names and addresses of Village residents who have expressed a desire
not to receive any commercial or advertising matter whatsoever. That
list shall be available from the Village Administrator on request at no
fee to the requester.
D. Any violation of this article shall result in a mandatory minimum fine of
$100.
E. This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 240-12 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 240-12
240:203
Chapter 248
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch 1, Art. I.
Cesspools and septic tanks — See Ch. 100.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 240-12 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 240-12
248:204
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 248-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Plumbing Code of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park."
§ 248-2. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any plumbing work in the village
otherwise than in compliance with the terms and provisions of this code.
§ 248-1 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-2
248:205

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)57
§ 248-3. (Reserved)
§ 248-4. (Reserved)
§ 248-5. (Reserved)
§ 248-6. (Reserved)
§ 248-7. (Reserved)
§ 248-8. (Reserved)
§ 248-9. (Reserved)
57.Editor's Note: Former Article II, Board of Plumbing Examiners, was repealed 2-5-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996.
§ 248-3 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-9
248:207

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 248-10. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them:
APPROVED — Acceptable or accepted by the Building Inspector as
conforming to the provisions of this code or approved by the Plumbing
Board.[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Chief Building Inspector, as shall be
determined by the Board of Trustees.[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
DEAD END — A branch leading from a soil, waste, vent, house drain or
house sewer which is terminated at a developed distance of two feet or
more by means of a cap, plug or other fitting not used for admitting water
to the pipe.
HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a house
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of any building and conveys the same to the
house sewer beginning at the end of the existing cast-iron pipe or two feet
outside the outer face of the building wall. Where the house trap is located
outside of the building wall, it shall be considered as part of the "house
drain."
HOUSE SEWER — That part of the horizontal piping of a house drainage
system extending from the house drain at the end of the existing castiron
pipe or two feet outside of the outer face of the building wall to its
connection with the public sewer or private disposal plant and conveying
the drainage of but one building site.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — A person in the employ of or working under
the supervision of a master plumber, as defined in this Article, who does the
actual work of installing, setting up or putting together plumbing fixtures,
pipes or appurtenances which are connected or are to be connected with
the sewerage system of a building or structure, or who does the actual
work of connecting such plumbing fixtures, pipes or appurtenances with
a sewerage system. It shall not include apprentices or helpers who work
in the presence of and under the direct supervision of a "journeyman
plumber."
MAIN — That part of any system of horizontal, vertical or continuous piping
which receives the waste vent from fixture outlets or traps, directly or
through branch pipes.
MASTER PLUMBER — A person established in the plumbing business as
an individual, member of a partnership or officer of a corporation, engaged
by a contract or otherwise in the work of installing, setting up or putting
together any plumbing fixtures, pipes or appurtenances of any kind which
are connected or are to be connected with the water, gas or sewerage
§ 248-10 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-10
248:209
system of a building or in the work of connecting such plumbing fixtures,
pipes or appurtenances.
SOIL PIPE — Any pipe which conveys the discharge of water closets, with
or without the discharges from other fixtures, to the house drain.
STACK — A general term for any vertical line of soil, waste or vent piping.
TRAP — A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of air
or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of sewage or
wastewater through it.
TRAP SEAL — The vertical distance between the crown weir and the dip of
the trap.
VENT PIPE — Any pipe provided to ventilate the plumbing system and to
prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
WASTE PIPE — Any pipe which receives the discharge of any fixture, except
water closets and urinals, and conveys the same to the house drain, soil or
waste stacks.
WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPES — Those which convey water from the
service pipe to the plumbing fixtures.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — That pipe from the water main to the building
served.
§ 248-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-10
248:210
ARTICLE IV
Licenses
§ 248-11. License required to engage in plumbing business.
[Amended 2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
A person desirous to conduct a trade, business or calling of a plumber or
of plumbing in the Village of Massapequa Park, as employing or master
plumber, shall obtain a master plumber's license issued by the Village of
Massapequa Park.
§ 248-12. Power of Board of Trustees. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L.
No. 1-1991]
The Board of Trustees or its designated representative shall have the power
to issue, revoke or suspend plumbing licenses as provided for under this
chapter.
§ 248-13. Only registered plumbers to perform work. [Amended
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
No person shall install, alter or repair, or cause to be installed, altered or
repaired, any plumbing installation within the scope of this chapter except
a person holding a plumber's license as a registered plumber of the village
or a person employed by the holder of such a license or a person under the
supervision of a holder of such license, except that this chapter shall not
apply to any employee of the State of New York or any political subdivision
thereof when employed on the business of the State of New York or any
political subdivision thereof.
§ 248-14. License requirements.
A. All applicants for a master plumbing license shall be citizens of the
United States and must have attained at least 21 years of age and must
be a duly licensed master or employing plumber of either Nassau or
Suffolk County municipalities.
B. All applications for plumbing licenses shall be made to the Village
Clerk. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
C. Identity of applicant. Each application for a license shall set forth the
full name and place of residence of such applicant, each member of the
partnership or each officer of the corporation and shall be verified
under oath.
D. Name of licensee. An application for a license may be made in the name
of an individual, partnership or corporation, but the name of the
licensee must, in each case, be that of the applicant.
E. Photograph. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a photograph of the applicant, in duplicate,
approximately 1 1/2 inches by two inches in size, taken within 30 days
§ 248-11 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-14
248:211
§ 248-15. Investigation of applicant. [Amended 2-5-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996]
Before issuing a certificate to engage in the business of master or employing
plumber, the Village of Massapequa Park shall inquire into the applicant's
fitness and qualifications for conducting such business and may require the
applicant to submit, under oath, such evidence as shall satisfy the village
that he or she is a person of good repute, character and responsibility and
otherwise qualified to engage in business as a master or employing plumber.
§ 248-16. Examination fee. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The applicant for a certificate of competency shall pay the fee provided in
Chapter A350, Fees, which shall accompany the application to cover the
cost of his examination, and no part of said fee shall be returned to the
applicant if the certificate is not granted.
§ 248-17. Issuance; registration of licensee. [Amended 2-5-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
The Village of Massapequa Park shall, upon application therefor, issue a
master plumber's license to the person entitled thereto in accordance with
the preceding sections of this Article, and any person to whom the master
plumber's license is issued shall register his or her name and address at the
office of the Village Clerk.
prior to the date of filing, such photograph to be affixed to the
application and the duplicate to the renewal record card.
F. Certificate of registration. Where an applicant for a license intends to
conduct business under an assumed or trade name or partnership,
there shall be filed, together with the application, a certified copy of the
certificate of registration of such name, as required by § 440 of the
Penal Law of the State of New York.58
G. Certificate of incorporation. Where an applicant is a corporation, there
shall be submitted, together with an application, a certified copy of the
certificate of incorporation and a statement giving the names and
addresses of all the officers and stockholders of the corporation.
Immediate notice, in writing, shall be given to the Village of
Massapequa Park of any change of the identity of such officers and
stockholders or any change in their addresses. [Amended 2-5-1996
by L.L. No. 2-1996]
H. Certificate as to workmen's compensation. All applicants for plumbers'
licenses who have employees shall submit with their applications for
master plumbers' licenses a certificate of workmen's compensation
insurance as required by § 57 of the New York State Workers'
Compensation Law.
58.Editor's Note: See now § 130 of the General Business Law.
§ 248-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-18
248:212
§ 248-18. Renewal.
§ 248-19. Fees. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, shall be charged for the issuance
of a master plumber's license, and a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees,
shall be charged for the renewal thereof per year.
§ 248-20. Corporations. [Amended 2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business
or calling of a plumber or of plumbing in the village, as employing or master
plumber, may do so, provided that one or more officers of such corporation
separately or aggregately hold and own at least 51% of the issued and
outstanding voting stock of said corporation, and provided that each of
such officers holding such percentage of the stock is the holder of a master
plumber's license issued by the village as provided in § 248-17 of this code.
Each and every officer and employee of said corporation shall comply with
all rules and regulations applicable to master or employing plumbers in the
village. Such corporation shall register at the office of the Village Clerk as
provided in § 248-17 of this code and file a copy of registered partnership or
corporation papers.
§ 248-21. Unsupervised work.
A. All master plumbers' licenses issued under the provisions of the
preceding sections of this Article shall expire on the 31st day of
December of the year in which they are issued and may be renewed for
one year from the first day of January in each year upon application
made within 30 days preceding expiration. The master plumber's
license of any person failing to renew within the time above specified
shall become absolutely void.
B. Duty of Village Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk on or
before the 30th day of October in each year to mail renewal notice and
bill to each plumber licensed in the village.
C. Failure to receive notice or bill. Failure to receive notice of renewal or
bill shall not relieve the licensee from the application of this chapter
and shall not constitute a waiver by the village of any of its rights or
powers hereunder.
D. Renewals of licenses of plumbers entering the Armed Forces or
Merchant Marine of the United States shall be extended without
charge, to include the year of discharge from such service.
E. Any licensed plumber not securing his renewal by the first of January of
each year shall be required to make a new application and pay the same
fee as for issuance of a master plumber's license.
A. No person, corporation or copartnership licensed as a master plumber
pursuant to this Article shall apply for, receive or make use of any
§ 248-18 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-21
248:213
§ 248-22. Bond. [Amended 1-7-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974; 1-7-1991 by
L.L. No. 1-1991]
permit granted by reason of such license so as to permit the
performance of any plumbing work not done by him or under his
immediate supervision.
B. Any licensed master plumber shall submit, on request of the Building
Inspector, evidence reasonably satisfactory to such Building Inspector
that he has not permitted any such work to be done in his name other
than by a licensed plumber, and that, in general, he has fully complied
with the requirements of this section. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L.
No. 1-1991]
A. Every master plumber shall file with the village, before beginning
operations under his license and upon each renewal of said license, a
surety company bond by a reputable and creditable surety company
duly licensed by the State of New York and approved by said village in
the minimum sum of $5,000 for a maximum of 10 permits, subject to
Subsection B below, indemnifying and saving harmless the village from
all damages or claims for damage to a public sewer, water service mains
or pipes to highway or the surface thereof, to public or private property
or to any person arising from unlawful or negligent acts of omissions of
certain master plumbers, their agents or employees or anyone
operating under the authority of the license in making connections of
any work with a public sewer, in opening a public sewer or in making an
opening or excavation in a public highway, public square or public park,
or in maintaining, guarding, refilling or working on or about such
openings or excavations, or in maintaining or guarding objects or
material taken from such openings or excavations or used in connection
therewith. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of
two years from the last permit issued against it unless sooner canceled
by the village, and said bond shall be and remain security for indemnity
for damages as aforesaid during the time it is in force. [Amended
2-5-196 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
B. Further, said surety bond shall be issued in the sums indicated below
for cumulative connections in excess of the first 10 permitted under the
basic bond:
Permit Hookups Amount of Additional Surety Bond Required
11 through 20 $4,000.00
21 through 40 4,000.00
41 through 80 $4,000.00
81 through 160 $ 4,000.00
§ 248-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-23
248:214
§ 248-23. Liability insurance.
Before any permit is issued, a certificate of public liability insurance of
not less than $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident for personal
injury and $50,000 for property damage for each accident and $100,000
aggregate shall be filed with the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
to cover the village, as a named insured, in the event of any injury to
persons or property. Said policy or a renewal thereof must be kept in effect
until the completion of all work under the above-mentioned permit and
the issuance of the certificate of compliance. In the event that such policy
shall expire or be canceled and no replacement is furnished prior to such
expiration or cancellation, the permit issued will immediately be revoked.
There must be an endorsement on the policy stating that cancellation or
material modification to such policy shall not be made unless at least 15
days' prior written notice thereof shall be given by registered or certified
mail to the Village Clerk of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 248-24. Workers' compensation. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
Before any permit is issued, a certificate of the plumber's current
workmen's compensation insurance policy must be filed with the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, New York, as required by § 57
of the Workers' Compensation Law, as amended. Said policy or renewal
thereof must be kept in effect until the completion of all work under the
above-mentioned permit and the issuance of the certificate of compliance.
In the event that such policy shall expire or be canceled and no replacement
thereof is furnished prior to such expiration or cancellation, the permit
issued will be revoked immediately.
§ 248-25. Requirements for work done prior to issuance. [Amended
2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
Any plumber or his agent wishing to solicit work before his application is
received by the village and prior to receiving his village license is required
to obtain a solicitor's permit from the Village Clerk in accordance with
§§ 240-3 and 240-7 of the Code of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park. (Pertinent information on this permit shall include plumber's name,
address and his solicitor's/plumber's license number. A card would then be
issued by the Village Clerk, which shall then be produced by said plumber
or his agent at the request of the resident.)
§ 248-23 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-25
248:215

ARTICLE V
Building Inspector
§ 248-26. Appointment; powers and duties.
§ 248-27. Inspections. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The Building Inspector shall, as soon as possible after being notified (on
form provided), make the necessary inspections as required by this code.
§ 248-28. Assistant Building Inspector. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L.
No. 1-1991]
During the absence from duty of the Building Inspector, an Assistant
Building Inspector holding temporary appointment shall be named by the
Board of Trustees or its designated representative to act during the absence
of the Building Inspector.
§ 248-29. Inspection of own work; ethical standards. [Amended
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
In no case shall a Building Inspector or an Assistant Building Inspector
inspect work done by himself or under his management. Every village
employee shall be subject to the Village Code of Ethics.59
§ 248-30. (Reserved)60
A. There shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees a Building Inspector.
The duties of the Building Inspector, in addition to those prescribed by
law and those which may be assigned or required by the Board of
Trustees, shall be to inspect the construction and alteration of all
plumbing work performed in the village for the sole purpose of
ascertaining whether such work complies with the provisions of this
code and to keep a report in writing of the results of such inspections.
[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
B. He shall issue all permits and other certificates required in connection
with the plumbing work and shall file regular reports with the Board of
Trustees and the Plumbing Board of all permits, certificates and other
authorizations that he may issue. Such reports shall be filed at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Ethics, Code of.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 248-30, Right of entry, as amended, was repealed 9-30-1996 by
L.L. No. 13-1996.
§ 248-26 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-30
248:217

ARTICLE VI
Applications, Plans and Permits
§ 248-31. Work for which permit is required; application procedure.
[Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
Before any plumbing work is started in a building, any additions or
alterations are made to old work, a house sewer connection is made or
new water distribution pipes are installed, an application on regular printed
forms, properly filled out in ink and signed by a licensed master plumber,
shall be filed in the office of the Village Administrator. Inspection fees
as described herein, together with plans and a description in duplicate
showing and describing the proposed work, shall accompany the
application. Where only stoppages are removed or leaks repaired or where
plumbing fixtures are replaced without altering or disturbing any drain,
soil, waste or vent pipe, no application or permit will be required. New
fixtures replacing old fixtures must be vented in accordance with this code,
regardless of the venting of the existing fixtures.
§ 248-32. Fees. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 248-33. House sewer permits; fee.
A. A fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, will be charged for a plumbing
inspection which does not include more than five fixtures. When the
inspection includes six or more fixtures, the above sum shall be
increased at a rate as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, per fixture. It is
understood that the fee covers all new work, overhauling or additions to
plumbing work in any one building within the village.
B. A fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, will be charged for the
replacement of water distribution pipes only. Where more than one
inspection is required, a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, will be
charged in advance for each additional inspection.
C. A fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, will be charged for the
cleaning of an existing cesspool.
A. All regulations adopted by the County of Nassau governing discharge
into a connection to the county sewer facilities are hereby made a part
of these regulations and must be complied with by the applicant or
owner of the premises involved.
B. A separate application must be filed for each sewer connection to a
building. These applications shall be signed by the fee owner of the
premises and his plumber, who must be specifically authorized by such
fee owner to make such application. No village permit will be issued
unless a permit from the County of Nassau to connect with the county
sewer facilities has previously been obtained and is presented with the
above-mentioned application for a village permit. This application does
§ 248-31 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-33
248:219
§ 248-34. Plans.
not include any change or alteration to plumbing inside of the building,
for which a separate application must be made as provided for herein.
C. The fee for each sewer connection permit shall be as provided in
Chapter A350, Fees, and shall accompany the application. No fee shall
be returned after a permit has been issued.61
D. Certificates of compliance. Immediately upon approval by the Building
Inspector of the installation of a sewer connection to a building, a
certificate of compliance shall be issued to the plumber and a copy sent
to the owner. The Building Inspector shall at this time place the date
and time he inspected the work and note it on both the plumber's and
homeowner's copy. In the event that the installation of a sewer to a
building has not been completed and approved within three months
after the date of issuance of the permit, the deposit referred to in this
Article shall be forfeited. [Amended 8-12-1974 by L.L. No. 7-197462]
E. The application for final inspection shall be accompanied by a
maintenance bond in the sum of $1,000 minimum if requested by the
property owner prior to the filing of the application. [Amended
8-12-1974 by L.L. No. 7-1974]
A. The plumbing plans shall consist of such floor plans and sections as may
be necessary to show clearly all the work to be done, including but not
limited to all sewers, drains, dry wells, soil, waste and vent pipe lines,
the location of fixtures and their traps and connections. All plans shall
be drawn in ink or may be reproducible prints of pencil drawings.
B. All applications for sewer connections need not be accompanied by
plans unless so required by the Building Inspector.
C. Approval of plans required. No work shall proceed until the plumbing
plans and specifications referred to in this Article shall have been
approved in writing by the Building Inspector.63
D. Modification of approved plans. Modification of approved plans or of
the work described therein shall not be permitted unless such changes
have been previously allowed by the Building Inspector upon written
application signed by the owner or architect.64
E. Expiration of approval. Plans are approved upon the condition that such
approval expires by its own limitation six months from date of permit
unless work under it is then in progress. If it is not begun under
approved plans within that time, such plans shall again be presented to
the Building Inspector for reconsideration.65
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-33 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-34
248:220
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-34 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-34
248:221

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 248-35. Notice of violation; service; action by Building
Inspector.66
§ 248-36. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-12-1974 by L.L. No.
7-1974]
Violation of any section of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code of the Village of Massapequa
Park. If such person is a master plumber, he shall, in addition, forfeit any
certificate of competency or registration which he may hold under the
provisions of this code.
§ 248-37. Oversight or dereliction of duty by Building Inspector.
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector
shall legalize the erecting, construction, alteration, removal or use or
occupancy of a building or structure that does not conform to the provisions
of the Plumbing Code.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever a person violates any rules and
regulations for plumbing and drainage or deviates from the approved
plan or specification for plumbing and drainage filed with the Building
Inspector, the Building Inspector shall first serve notice of violation
thereof upon the master plumber doing the work.
B. Service of notice. Such notice may be served personally or by mail, and
if by mail, it may be addressed to such master plumber at the address
registered by him with the Building Inspector of the village or Village
Administrator.
C. Removal of violations. Unless the violation is removed within three days
after the day of serving or mailing of such notice, exclusive of the day of
serving or mailing, the Building Inspector shall have authority to take
such action as provided in this code.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-35 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-37
248:223

ARTICLE VIII
Discharges
§ 248-38. Regulation by county.67
The sewer regulations of Nassau County shall govern the discharge of all
wastes into the public sewer system.68
§ 248-39. Explosive or flammable matter.
A. No explosive or flammable matters shall be discharged into any sewer.
B. Cleaning establishments, buildings used for housing or repairing
automobiles, gasoline and oil service stations and other buildings or
establishments where gasoline, oils, calcium carbide or other
explosives or flammable materials are stored, sold or handled, the
drains from which are connected to the public sewer, must be provided
with an approved intercepting pit or tank so constructed, located and
maintained as to prevent the entrance into the sewer of such explosive
or flammable matter, subject to the approval of Nassau County.69
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
68.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 7A-7-2, Harmful wastes in plumbing system, which immediately
followed this section was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
In addition, former Secs. 7A-7-4, Piping; 7A-7-5, Workmanship; 7A-7-6, Installation of
Plumbing by Owner and former Articles 8, Quality and Weight of Materials; 9, Joints and
Connections; and 10, Traps and Cleanouts; all of which immediately followed this section,
were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-38 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-39
248:225

ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)
§ 248-40. (Reserved)
§ 248-41. (Reserved)
§ 248-42. (Reserved)
§ 248-43. (Reserved)
§ 248-44. (Reserved)
§ 248-40 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-44
248:227

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
§ 248-45. (Reserved)
§ 248-46. (Reserved)
§ 248-47. (Reserved)
§ 248-48. (Reserved)
§ 248-49. (Reserved)
§ 248-50. (Reserved)
§ 248-51. (Reserved)
§ 248-52. (Reserved)
§ 248-53. (Reserved)
§ 248-54. (Reserved)
§ 248-55. (Reserved)
§ 248-56. (Reserved)
§ 248-57. (Reserved)
§ 248-45 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-57
248:229

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)
§ 248-58. (Reserved)
§ 248-59. (Reserved)
§ 248-60. (Reserved)
§ 248-61. (Reserved)
§ 248-62. (Reserved)
§ 248-63. (Reserved)
§ 248-64. (Reserved)
§ 248-65. (Reserved)
§ 248-66. (Reserved)
§ 248-67. (Reserved)
§ 248-58 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-67
248:231

ARTICLE XII
Sewer Connections
§ 248-68. Independent system required; exception.
§ 248-69. Use of old drains.
Old drains may be used in connection with new buildings or new plumbing
only when they are found, on examination and test, to conform in all
respects to the requirements governing new drains, as prescribed in this
code. If the old work is found defective, the proper administrative authority
shall notify the owner to make the necessary changes to conform with this
code.
§ 248-70. Location.70
Every new building must have its sewer connection directly in front of the
building unless permission is otherwise granted by the Building Inspector.
§ 248-71. Discontinuance of cesspools.
A. The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new
work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and
independent of that of any other building, except as provided below,
and every building shall have an independent connection with a public
or private sewer when available.
B. When one building stands in the rear of another building on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the house
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building, and
the whole will be considered as one house sewer.
A. After an owner has been notified that the lateral sewer line available to
his building has been completed and is ready for use, he may apply for a
permit from the county and village to connect thereto. After such notice
has been given, permits for the cleaning of existing cesspools will be
granted. When a building is connected to the county sewer system, all
cesspools on said property shall be cleaned out, disinfected and
properly and completely backfilled with clean fill.
B. When a septic tank and/or cesspool is being discontinued, the house
sewer may be connected at the inlet of the septic tank and/or cesspool.
C. Where a house sewer is connected at the point of entry to a septic tank
and/or cesspool, connection must be made by bridging with one length
of extra-heavy ductile iron pipe. Pipe must be properly supported at
wall with open space above same to prevent damage to joints in the
event that the septic tank and/or cesspool settles.71
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-68 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-72
248:233
§ 248-72. Type and size of pipe. [Amended 8-12-1974 by L.L. No.
7-197472]
The sewer connection to a building shall comply with all the regulations of
the County of Nassau, Department of Public Works, Division of Sanitation
and Water Supply.73
§ 248-73. Laying of pipe.
No pipe shall be laid in any trench unless the sewer connection to the
building and the connection to the sewer at the curb are exposed. All
pipe shall be laid with a uniform fall and in as direct and straight a line
as possible from two feet outside the outer face of the building wall or
point where existing cast-iron pipe extends through the wall to the existing
connection to the sewer at the curb. The minimum fall per foot of pipe laid
shall be 1/8 inch per foot. Sewer piping shall be supported throughout its
entire length.
§ 248-74. Tunneling.
Tunneling may be done in yards, courts or driveways of any building site,
provided that cast-iron pipe is used. However, the diameter of the tunnel
may not be over twice the diameter of the pipe, and it shall be of such length
as will permit inspection of all joints outside the tunnel. All tunnels shall be
backfilled by the use of water.
§ 248-75. Backfilling. [Amended 8-12-1974 by L.L. No. 7-1974]
Adequate precaution shall be taken to ensure proper compaction of backfill
around pipe without damage to piping. Trenches shall be backfilled in thin
layers to 12 inches above the top of the pipe with clean earth, which shall
not contain stones, boulders, cinderfill or other materials which will damage
or break the pipe or cause corrosive action. Mechanical devices may then
be used to finish backfilling to grade. All trenches shall be compacted with
water, using the jetting method.74
§ 248-76. Minimum separations.75
The sewer connection to a building shall have a horizontal or lateral
separation of at least seven feet or a vertical separation of at least two
feet and shall be located below the water service. In the event that any
of the above minimum separations are not possible, permission must be
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 7A-11-6, Fittings, connections and cleanouts, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 7A-11-10, Joints and Connections, which immediately followed
this section was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-72 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-76
248:234
obtained from the Building Inspector to vary the above requirements, and
his decision as to location and type of pipe to be used shall be followed.
§ 248-77. Damage to village property.
The plumber making the sewer connection to a building shall be responsible
for any damage to village property, including but not limited to sidewalks,
aprons, trees, grass area and curbs. He shall take all precautions necessary
to protect village property.
§ 248-78. Protection of trenches and obstructions.76
Any open trench or other obstruction in, on or abutting the sidewalk, street
or other village property shall be surrounded by suitable barriers or guards
for protection of persons using the streets or property in the daytime
and, in addition thereto, by lights or flares from twilight continuously until
daylight. Such barriers and lights shall conform, in kind and number, to the
requirements of the Building Inspector.
§ 248-79. Filling of trench settlement.
Immediately upon the approved inspection of the sewer connection to a
building, the plumber shall see that all trench settlement is properly filled
to the grade of the original ground.
§ 248-80. Shoring. [Added 8-12-1974 by L.L. No. 7-1974]
All excavations for a sewer connection exceeding the depth of five feet shall
be properly shored with plywood or sheathing material so as not to cause
wholesale cave-in of the trench and surrounding area.
§ 248-81. Inspections.77
The Building Inspector shall be notified 24 hours in advance of the starting
of work under any permit issued hereunder and shall be further notified
before 10:00 a.m. of the day an inspection is required. The following
inspections are required under this article and may be performed
simultaneously.
A. First inspection. The first inspection shall be made when the pipe is laid
and joints are made but before any backfill is placed on the pipe.
B. Second inspection. The second inspection shall be made when the
cesspool or cesspools are cleaned but prior to backfilling.
C. Third inspection. The third inspection shall be the final inspection and
shall be made when the sewer connections to a building are complete.78
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-76 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-81
248:235
78.Editor's Note: Former Sections 7A-12-1, Material; 7A-12-2, Fixture Unit; and 7A-12-3, Soil
and Waste Stacks, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-81 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-81
248:236
ARTICLE XIII
Soil, Waste and Vent Piping
§ 248-82. (Reserved)
§ 248-83. (Reserved)
§ 248-84. (Reserved)
§ 248-85. Soil and waste stack fixture connections.
All soil and waste stacks and branches shall be provided with correctly
faced inlets for fixture connections.
§ 248-86. Changing soil and vent pipes.
In existing buildings where the soil or waste vent pipe is not extended
undiminished through or above the roof or where there is a sheet metal
soil or waste vent pipe and the fixture is changed in style or location or is
replaced, a soil or waste vent pipe of the size and material prescribed for
new work shall be installed.
§ 248-87. Prohibited connections.
No fixture connection shall be made to a lead bend or branch of a water
closet or similar fixture. No soil or waste vent, circuit or loop vent above the
highest installed fixture on the branch or main shall hereafter be used as a
soil or waste pipe.
§ 248-88. Protection from frost.
No soil or waste stack shall be installed or permitted outside of the building
unless adequate provision is made to protect it from frost.
§ 248-89. Roof extensions.
§ 248-90. Roof terminals.
The roof terminal of any stack or vent, if within 12 feet of any door, window,
scuttle or air shaft, shall extend at least three feet above the same.
A. All roof extensions of soil and waste stacks shall be run full size at least
one foot above the roof, and when the roof is used for other purposes
than weather protection, such extension shall be not less than seven
feet above the roof.
B. When there is danger of frost closure, no roof extension shall be less
than four inches in diameter. Change in diameter shall be made by use
of a long increaser at least one foot below the roof, and where access to
the roof is difficult, a test opening shall be provided at this point.
§ 248-82 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-91
248:237
§ 248-91. Branch soil and waste extension.
Any vertical branch rising more than 10 feet or any lateral branch running
more than 25 feet from the main soil line shall be continued full size to a
point above the roof in the same manner as required for main soil pipes or
may be returned to the main vent pipe full size.
§ 248-92. Protection of traps; vents.
Every fixture trap shall be protected against siphonage and back pressure
and air circulation assured by means of a soil or waste stack vent and
continuous waste or soil vent or a loop or circuit vent. No crown vent shall
be installed.
§ 248-93. Location of trap seal vent.
No trap shall be placed more than five feet, horizontal developed length,
from its vent, except that the distance between the vent and trap may be
15 feet or less on the waste from a surgical operating table, dental cuspidor
or other similar fixture. The distance shall be measured along the central
lines of the waste or soil pipe, from the vertical inlet of the trap to the vent
opening. The vent opening from the soil or waste pipe, except for water
closets and similar fixtures, shall not be below the dip of the trap.
§ 248-94. Connection of main vent.
All main vents or vent stacks shall connect full size at their base to the main
soil or waste pipe at or below the lowest fixture branch and shall extend
undiminished in size above the roof or shall be reconnected with the main
soil or waste vent at least three feet above the highest fixture branch.79
§ 248-95. (Reserved)
§ 248-96. (Reserved)
§ 248-97. Vent pipe grades and connections.
All vent and branch vent pipes shall be free from drops or sags and be so
graded and connected as to drip back to the soil or waste pipe by gravity.
Where vent pipes connect to a horizontal soil or waste pipe, the vent branch
shall be taken off above the center line of the pipe, and the vent must rise
vertically or at an angle of 45º to the vertical to a point six inches above
the fixture it is venting before offsetting horizontally or connecting to the
branch, main waste or soil vent.80
79.Editor's Note: Former Sections 7A-12-14, Vents Required Sizes; and 7A-12-15, Branch and
Individual Vents, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
80.Editor's Note: Former Section 7A-12-17, Circuit and Loop Vents, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-91 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-98
248:238
§ 248-98. (Reserved)
§ 248-99. Common vents
Where bathrooms or waterclosets or other fixtures are located on opposite
sides of a wall or partition or directly adjacent to each other within the
prescribed distance, such fixtures may have a common soil or waste pipe
and common vent.81
§ 248-100. (Reserved)
81.Editor's Note: Former Section 7A-12-19, regarding venting for water closets, added
12-19-1977 by L.L. No. 15-1977, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-98 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-100
248:239

ARTICLE XIV
House Sewers, House Drains and Leader Drains
§ 248-101. Sewer diameter.
The house sewer shall be at least four inches in diameter for all types
permitted in § 248-72.82
§ 248-102. (Reserved)
§ 248-103. Drains or sewers under buildings.
Every house drain or private sewer which passes under a house or building
or within three feet of the cellar wall of any house or building shall be castiron
pipe.
§ 248-104. House traps.
A cast-iron running trap, in no case less than four inches with two cleanout
hubs, shall be placed in the house drain either inside or outside the
foundation on the sewer side of all connections, except a Y-fitting, to receive
the discharge of an automatic sewage ejector, oil separator or boiler blowoff
where they are used. If placed below the cellar floor or in a driveway, the
trap shall be made accessible, in a suitable masonry manhole with iron
cover.
§ 248-105. Fresh-air inlet.83
A fresh-air inlet pipe shall be connected with the house drain just inside the
house trap, with a separate fitting in the drain, and extended to the outer
air, terminating with a return bend with open end one foot above the surface
of the ground, or through foundation wall with quarter bend looking down
in a location approved by the Building Inspector and shown on plans.
§ 248-106. Leader drains.
A. For a four-inch house drain, the fresh-air inlet shall be four inches.
B. For five-inch and six-inch house drains, the fresh-air inlet shall be not
less than four inches.
C. For seven-inch and eight-inch house drains, the fresh-air inlet shall be
not less than six inches.
D. For ten-inch and twelve-inch house drains, the fresh-air inlet shall be
not less than eight inches.
82.Editor's Note: Former Section 7A-13-2, House Drains, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-101 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-106
248:241
§ 248-107. Underground piping for water closets.
A. Every building shall be kept provided with proper metallic gutters and
rain leaders for conducting water from all roofs in such manner as shall
protect the walls and foundation from injury. In no case shall the water
from any rain leader be allowed to flow upon the adjoining property.
B. Outside leaders may be made of sheet metal.
A. Where there are more than two water closets on a line, all underground
piping shall be a minimum of four-inch standard cast iron to the first
water closet, then stepped down to three-inch standard cast iron below
ground or three-inch PVC if above ground to the other water closets.
B. Where there are two or less water closets on a line, all underground
piping to both shall be a minimum of three-inch cast iron.
§ 248-106 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-107
248:242
ARTICLE XV
Refrigerator and Special Waste Lines
§ 248-108. Refrigerator waste pipes.
§ 248-109. Drinking fountains.
§ 248-110. Expansion tanks.
Expansion tank overflow or discharge from vacuum machines shall be
exhausted openly on the roof system.
§ 248-111. Gas machine waste.
A gas machine waste may be connected directly with a drain, soil or waste
pipe connecting with the sewer, provided that the same is properly trapped
and vented.
A. Refrigerator waste pipes shall be of galvanized iron and be not less than
1 1/2 inches in diameter, with branches not less than 1 1/4 inches with
strainers over each inlet. Refrigerator waste pipes shall not be trapped,
but shall discharge over a water-supplied, properly trapped and vented
sink, the top of which sink shall not be over four feet above the floor.
B. The indirect waste line, if over 20 feet in length, shall continue to and
through the roof, and in no case shall it be open within six feet of an
open soil or vent pipe. The size of pipe, where passing through the roof,
shall be the size of the waste line carried through the building.
C. Cleanouts shall be provided as required in § 248-65 of this code.
A. No plumbing fixtures, except drinking fountains, soda fountains or bar
sinks, shall be installed with an indirect waste to the plumbing system.
The waste of drinking fountains, soda fountains and bar sinks may be
connected directly to the plumbing system when installed in the same
manner as required for other plumbing fixtures, or they may be
installed with an indirect waste with discharge open-end over a
properly water-supplied, trapped and vented sink. In either case the
branch waste to each such fixture shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in
diameter with a one-and-one-half-inch trap.
B. The waste line in either case shall extend through the roof. Branches on
indirect waste lines 15 feet or more in length shall be continued to the
roof.
C. When one or two such fixtures are discharged into waste line, said line
shall be at least 1 1/2 inches' internal diameter, and when more than
two fountains, such line shall be two inches.
§ 248-108 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-112
248:243
§ 248-112. Sediment pipes.
No sediment pipe from house boilers shall be connected directly into any
part of the plumbing drainage system.
§ 248-113. Exhaust pipes.
No steam exhaust, boiler blowoff or drip pipe shall be connected with the
house drain on the inside of any building. Such pipes shall first discharge
into a proper condensing tank, and from this a proper outlet to the house
sewer outside of the building shall be provided. In low-pressure steam
system, the condensing tank may be omitted but the waste connection shall
be otherwise as above mentioned.
§ 248-114. Dental cuspidors.
The waste pipe for dental cuspidors shall be 1 1/2 inches for not more
than three connections. When more than three cuspidors are connected
on separate waste line, such line shall be increased to two inches. Each
cuspidor shall be separately trapped by a trap at least 1 1/2 inches in
diameter, properly vented and placed as close to the fixture as possible.
Waste from dental cuspidors may discharge over sink.
§ 248-115. Garage drains and catch basins. [Amended 8-12-1974 by
L.L. No. 7-1974]
A. A garage or other structure for the housing, sale or repair of
automobiles which is provided with a water supply of either a
temporary or permanent character or in which automobiles are
washed, cleaned or repaired shall be provided with proper means for
draining the floors and repair pits in such manner that no drainage
therefrom shall flow over any street, alley or paved approach. Such
drains shall be so arranged as to intercept all oil, gasoline or other
flammable fluids as well as sand, silt and other solids for the purpose of
excluding same from the sewer system.
B. They shall be provided with a sealed inlet opening not less than three
inches in diameter and a ventilating pipe of not less than three inches in
diameter and carried up above as the highest part of the roof and
subject to the same conditions as required for roof outlets of soil or
waste pipes.
C. The material for vent pipe must be the same as required for house
drains when below ground and for soil and waste vents when above
ground.
D. Such drains shall have the accumulated oils and other flammable fluids
pumped or otherwise removed therefrom at regular intervals and shall
be so maintained as to ensure the exclusion of the same from the sewer
system.
§ 248-112 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-115
248:244
§ 248-116. Air conditioner condensate water.
All air conditioner condensate water shall not be directly discharged into
the sanitary sewer system unless approved by county authorities.
E. They shall also be kept free of sand, silt and other solids and shall be
subject to a periodical inspection.
F. Every building hereafter constructed or converted into a place of
business where gasoline, benzine, naphtha or other flammable oils or
compounds are used and existing buildings where such business is
carried on shall be provided with a special drain the same as that
required above for garages. A washbasin in a garage may discharge
into the catch basin vent pipe. Such catch basins shall be substantially
constructed as tight cesspools and may be of cast iron, concrete,
concrete block or brick or steel-tank type.
G. Definition. "Tight cesspools" are defined as a closed block catch basin
which is constructed to be nonporous.
§ 248-115 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-116
248:245

ARTICLE XVI
Plumbing Fixtures
§ 248-117. Materials.
All receptacles used as water closets or urinals or otherwise for the disposal
of human exereta shall be vitrified earthenware or other approved
nonabsorptive watertight material.
§ 248-118. Installation.
All plumbing fixtures shall be installed free and open in a manner to afford
access for cleaning. When practical, all pipes from fixtures shall be run to
the wall, and no lead trap or pipe shall extend nearer to the floor than 12
inches unless protected by casing.
§ 248-119. Water closet bowls and traps.
Water closet bowls and traps shall be made in one piece and of such form
as to hold sufficient quantity of water, when filled to the trap overflow, to
prevent fouling of surfaces, and shall be provided with integral flushing
rinse constructed so as to flush the entire interior of the bowl.84
§ 248-120. (Reserved)
§ 248-121. (Reserved)
§ 248-122. Closet floor connections.85
Earthenware traps or water closets or other fixtures with connection
through the floor shall be set on an approved slab of tile or marble the
full size of the base of the trap except where the floor compartment has a
smooth, even surface and is impervious to moisture, in which case the floor
slab or template will not be required.
§ 248-123. Urinals.86
The floor and walls of urinal stalls shall be lined with nonabsorbent and
noncorrosive material.
84.Editor's Note: Former Sections 7A-15-4, Number of Water Closets, as amended 8-12-1974
by L.L. No. 7-1974 and 7A-15-5, Flushing Tanks, which immediately followed this section
were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-117 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-123
248:247

ARTICLE XVII
Ventilation of Rooms and Fixtures
§ 248-124. Location of fixtures; ventilation required.
No trapped plumbing fixture shall be located in any room or apartment
which does not contain a window placed in an external wall of the building
or is not provided with a system of ventilation.
§ 248-125. Windows and skylights.
Every toilet room and every water closet or urinal compartment, unless
provided with a suitable system of exhaust ventilation, shall be ventilated
directly to the outer air by movable windows or by skylights with fixed
or pivoted louvers. Every such toilet room or compartment shall have a
window or glass skylight not less than one foot wide and an area of not
less than six square feet for one water closet or urinal, and the area of the
window or skylight shall be increased by at least one square foot for every
additional water closet or urinal.
§ 248-126. Mechanical ventilation.
If a mechanical system of ventilation is used, such system shall consist of
metal or smooth masonry ducts extending from the individual toilet rooms
or compartments to a fan or fans of sufficient capacity to exhaust a volume
of not less than 30 cubic feet of air per minute for each water closet or
urinal, and in no case shall fewer than six changes of air in the toilet room
or compartment be allowed per hour. The exhaust ducts shall discharge
into the outside air above the room and in such a manner as not to create
objectionable odors or a nuisance on the premises or adjacent premises.
§ 248-127. Separate ventilation.
Ventilation from toilet room shall be separate and distinct and have no
connection whatever with the other ventilating ducts in the building.
§ 248-124 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-127
248:249

ARTICLE XVIII
Water Supply and Distribution
§ 248-128. Distribution.
The domestic and drinking water supply shall be distributed through a
piping system entirely independent of any pipe system conveying another
water supply.
§ 248-129. Installation of water service pipes.
The water service pipe of any building shall be installed in accordance with
the ordinances of the Village of Massapequa Park for water supply.
§ 248-130. Water supply to fixtures; interconnection with other
systems.
§ 248-131. (Reserved)
§ 248-132. Water supply control.
Water supply control shall be installed in accordance with the ordinance of
the Village of Massapequa Park for water supply.
A. All plumbing fixtures shall be provided with a supply of water sufficient
for flushing to keep them in a sanitary condition. They may be flushed
through an approved flushometer valve and shall be adjusted to prevent
the waste of water. Where flushometer valves are used, they shall be
supplied with water under sufficient pressure and volume at all times to
properly flush the water closets. Where this is impossible to accomplish
with the supply direct from the street water main, flushometer valves
are prohibited unless they are supplied from a house tank of approved
capacity.87
B. No plumbing fixture or device shall be supplied directly from a water
supply system through a flushometer or other valve unless such valve is
installed in a manner such as to prevent any possibility of polluting the
water supply.
C. No plumbing fixture, device or construction shall be installed which will
provide an interconnection between a distribution system of water for
drinking and domestic purposes and a drainage soil or waste pipe so as
to permit or make possible the backflow of sewage or waste into the
water supply system.88
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
88.Editor's Note: Former Section 7A-17-4, Size of Water Supply Pipes, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-128 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-133
248:251
§ 248-133. Water supply pipes and fittings.89
All water supply pipes for a plumbing system shall be of Type K or L copper
tubing. Water supply pipes and fittings of materials or combinations of
materials of an equal or better class, from a corrosive or health viewpoint,
may be used after approval in writing by the Building Inspector. No pipe or
fittings that have been used for other purposes shall be used for distributing
water.
§ 248-134. Protection from freezing.
All concealed water pipes, storage tanks, flushing cisterns and all exposed
pipes or tanks subject to freezing temperatures shall be efficiently
protected.
§ 248-135. Relief valves.
Wherever a check valve is installed on the cold-water supply pipe between
the street main and the hot-water tank, there shall be installed on the hotwater
distributing system a suitable relief valve.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-133 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-135
248:252
ARTICLE XIX
Tests, Inspections and Certificates
[Amended 8-12-1974 by L.L. No. 7-197490]
§ 248-136. Tests; inspections; compliance required.
Every new plumbing system or addition to an old system for which a permit
is required shall be tested by the plumber in the presence of the Building
Inspector in accordance with the following subsections of this section:
§ 248-137. Certificate of inspection.
When the plumbing in a building is completed for which a permit is
required, the master plumber shall secure for himself and the owners
of such building, from the Building Inspector, a certificate of inspection
duly signed by him, certifying that the plumbing work has been properly
inspected and tested as required by the provisions of this code.
A. The entire new plumbing and drainage system within the building,
when roughed in, shall be tested by the plumber in the presence of the
Building Inspector and as directed by him under either a water test or a
smoke test.
(1) The water test shall be applied by securely closing all openings and
filling pipes to the highest opening above the floor with the water,
except that part of the system may be tested separately, provided
that there shall be a head of water of at least 10 feet above all parts
of the work so tested. Special provision shall be made to include all
joints and connections to the finished line or face of floors or side
walls so that all vents and back vents, including lead work, may be
tested with the main stacks. All pipes shall remain uncovered in
every part until they have satisfactorily passed the test; or
(2) After the completion of the work and when the fixtures are
installed, a smoke test under a pressure of one-inch water column
will be required of the system, including all vent and back vent
pipes, in the presence of the Building Inspector and as directed by
him.
B. All defective pipes and fittings or fixtures shall be removed, and all
defective work shall be made good so as to conform to the provisions of
this code.
C. Where, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, it is impractical to
apply tests mentioned in this section only on alterations and additions
to old work, such work shall be thoroughly inspected if not tested.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-136 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-137
248:253

ARTICLE XX
Gas Piping and Fixtures
§ 248-138. Compliance with regulations required.
The gas piping and fixtures in all new buildings and all alterations and
extensions made to the gas piping and fixtures in old buildings must be done
in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code and the Rules and
Regulations of the Public Service Commission and LILCO.
§ 248-139. Permit required.91
Before the installation or alteration of any gas piping in any building or part
of any building, a permit must be obtained as hereinbefore outlined in this
code for all plumbing work. This permit will be issued only to a registered
master plumber. Small alterations may be made by notifying the Building
Inspector, using the same blank forms provided for alterations and repairs
to plumbing.
§ 248-140. Pipe standards.
A. All gas pipe shall be of the best quality steel and of the kind classed as
standard weight pipe, Schedule 40.
B. No pipe shall be allowed of less than three-eighths-inch diameter.
C. Connections between fixed gas piping and fixture may be made with
flexible pipe as approved by LILCO or PSC.
D. Pipe size. All buildings shall be piped according to the following scale:
Size of Pipe
(inches)
Length of Pipe
(feet) Number of Burners
3/8 26 3
1/2 36 6
3/4 60 20
1 80 35
1 1/4 110 60
1 1/2 150 100
2 200 200
2 1/2 300 300
3 450 450
3 1/2 500 600
4 600 750
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-138 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-141
248:255
§ 248-141. Pipe laying.
§ 248-142. Fittings.
§ 248-143. Drops and outlets.
A. No pipe shall be laid so as to support any weight except fixtures or be
subjected to any strain whatsoever. All pipe shall be properly laid and
fastened to prevent becoming trapped and shall be laid, when
practicable, above timbers or beams instead of beneath them. Where
running lines or branches cross beams, they must do so within 36
inches of the ends of the beams, and in no case shall said pipes be let
into the beams more than two inches in depth. Any pipe laid in a cold or
damp place shall be properly dripped, protected and painted with two
coats of red lead and boiled oil or tarred.
B. Where it is not impractical to do so, all risers shall be left not more than
five feet from wall.
C. No gas pipe shall be laid in cement or concrete unless the pipe or
channel in which it is placed is well covered with tar.
D. When brass piping is used on the outside of plastering or woodwork, it
shall be classed as fixtures.
A. All fittings, except stopcocks or valves, shall be of malleable iron.
B. There shall be a heavy brass straightway cock or valve on the service
pipe immediately inside the front foundation wall. Iron cocks or valves
are not permitted.
C. No unions or running threads shall be permitted. Where necessary to
cut out to repair leaks or make extensions, pipe shall be put together
with right and left couplings.
D. All cast fittings, such as cock, swing joints, double centers, nozzles, etc.,
shall be extra-heavy brass. The plugs of all cocks must be ground to a
smooth and true surface for their entire length, be free from sand holes,
have not less than 3/4 of an inch bearing, except in cases of special
design, have two flat sides on the end of washer and have two nuts
instead of a tail screw. All stop pins to keys or cocks shall be screwed
into place.
A. All drops must be set plumb and securely fastened, each one having at
least one solid strap. Drops and outlets less than 3/4 of an inch in
diameter shall not be left more than one inch below plastering,
centerpieces or woodwork.
B. All outlets and risers shall be left capped until covered by fixtures.
C. Gas outlets for burners shall not be placed under tanks, back of doors or
within four feet of any meter.
§ 248-141 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-143
248:256
§ 248-144. (Reserved)
§ 248-145. Tests; approval.93
§ 248-146. Meter setting contingent on certificate of compliance.
No meter will be set by any gas company until a certificate is filed with it
from the Village Clerk certifying that the gas pipes and fixtures comply with
the foregoing rules.
D. Outlets for gas ranges shall have a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch,
and all gas ranges and heaters shall have a straightway cock on the
service pipe.92
A. After all piping is fitted and fastened and all outlets are capped up,
there must be applied by the plumber, in the presence of the Building
Inspector, a test with air to a pressure equal to a column of mercury six
inches in height, and the same to stand for five minutes. Only mercury
gauge shall be used.
B. No piping shall be covered up nor shall any fixture, gas heater or range
be connected thereto until a card showing the approval of this test has
been issued by the Building Inspector.
92.Editor's Note: Former Section 7A-19-8, Brackets and Fixtures, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-143 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-146
248:257

ARTICLE XXI
Modification of Provisions
[Amended at time of adoption of Code94]
§ 248-147. Power of Building Inspector.
When for any reason it may be impractical to comply strictly with the
foregoing rules, the Building Inspector shall have power to modify their
provisions so that the spirit and substance thereof shall be complied with.
Such modification shall be endorsed on the permit over the signature of the
Building Inspector.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 248-147 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-147
248:259

ARTICLE XXII
Contract Work
[Added at time of adoption of Code95]
§ 248-148. Escrow account for advance payment.
Whenever a contractor requires a portion of the cost of a sewer connection
in advance of the actual sewer hookup, these funds must be placed in an
escrow account until completion of the contracted work.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 248-148 PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE § 248-148
248:261
Chapter 252
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 262.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 282.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
§ 248-148 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 248-148
252:262
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. III of Ch. 14 of the 1967 Code]
§ 252-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
§ 252-2. Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee to leave or
to suffer or permit to be left any vehicle, cart, wagon, box, barrel, bale
of merchandise or other movable property either owned by him or in
his possession, custody or control upon any street, sidewalk or municipal
parking field, or to erect or cause to be erected thereon any shed, building
or other obstruction, except, however, that this section shall not apply to
materials lawfully placed at the curbs or sides of streets for collection.
§ 252-3. Motor vehicles.
It shall be deemed a violation of this article if a motor vehicle remains
parked for a period in excess of 24 hours.
§ 252-4. Removal by village.
The Village Clerk shall have removed or cause to be removed any vehicle,
cart, wagon, box, barrel, bale of merchandise or other movable property
found upon any street, sidewalk or municipal parking field and shall take
the same or cause the same to be taken to the premises of the village where
it shall be held until redeemed or sold as hereinafter provided.96
§ 252-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be liable
for the penalties prescribed in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
in addition to any fees for redemption of impounded property or costs of
sale chargeable to an owner or person entitled to possession of impounded
property as hereinafter provided.
§ 252-6. Notice of impoundment.
Whenever the Village Clerk shall receive any property containing
identification of ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent
96.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 14-43, Removal of motor vehicle, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 7-27-1983 by L.L. No. 9-1983.
§ 252-1 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 252-6
252:263
by ordinary mail to such person advising that such property is held by the
Village Clerk and advising the amount necessary to redeem.
§ 252-7. Redemption of impounded property.
§ 252-8. Sale of unredeemed property.
§ 252-9. Disposal of unsold property.
In the event that impounded property shall remain unsold at public auction,
the Village Clerk may reoffer said property for sale at a subsequent public
auction held pursuant to this Article, or he may dismantle, destroy or
otherwise sell or dispose of such property. Any such sale or other disposition
of such property pursuant to this article shall be without liability on the part
of the village to the owner of such property or other person lawfully entitled
thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 252-10. Disposition of proceeds of redemption or sale.
A. Charges. Property impounded as provided herein may be redeemed by
the owner thereof at any time prior to the sale, dismantling, destruction
or disposal thereof, and he shall be entitled to receive such property
upon tendering, in the case of a vehicle, the sum of $50, plus $20 per
day, and for all other property, the sum of $10. In addition, the person
seeking to redeem shall be required to pay the cost of advertising the
sale thereof, if any. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 30-1983]
B. Restrictions. No property shall be delivered to a person seeking to
redeem unless proof establishing to the satisfaction of the Village Clerk
such person's ownership or right to possession is submitted. Any
delivery to a person apparently entitled thereto shall be a good defense
to the village against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto,
but if the person to whom delivery is made is in fact not entitled thereto,
the person to whom the same ought to have been made may recover the
same with interest and costs from the person to whom the same shall
have been delivered.
A. Notice. Where property, except motor vehicles, impounded as provided
herein remains in the custody of the Village Clerk for a period of 15
days after removal with respect to which no person has presented to the
Village Clerk proof establishing to his satisfaction such person's
ownership or right to possession, the Village Clerk shall give public
notice in the official newspaper of the village advising that at a specified
place and time, not less than five days after such notice is published,
such property will be sold at public auction for the best price he can
obtain. A general description in such notice of the property to be sold
shall be sufficient. [Amended 6-27-1983 by L.L. No. 9-1983]
B. Conduct of sale. Said sale shall be conducted by the Village Clerk or by
any employee of his department designated by him or by an auctioneer
designated by the Village Clerk.
§ 252-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 252-10
252:264
§ 252-11. Property in custody of Police Department.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property which may
come into the possession or custody of the Police Department pursuant to
any ordinance, law or regulation.
A. Duty of Village Clerk. Immediately after impounded property is
redeemed, the Village Clerk shall pay over to the Treasurer of the
village the amount received for redemption, costs and expenses of the
article redeemed, together with an itemized statement thereof.
Immediately after a sale or other disposition of such property, the
Village Clerk shall pay over to the Treasurer the proceeds of sale or
other disposition of such property, with an itemized statement of the
article sold, the price received and the costs and expenses of sale.
B. Duty of Village Treasurer. The Treasurer shall retain and credit the
general fund with so much of the proceeds as equals the costs and
expenses of such sale, plus the sum of $35 for each motor vehicle sold
and $10 for each other article sold, to cover the cost of removing and
storing the property. The remainder of the moneys realized from such
sales shall be paid without interest to the lawful owner thereof.
§ 252-10 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 252-11
252:265

ARTICLE II
Found Property
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Sec. 14-6 of the 1967 Code]
§ 252-12. Duty of finder.97
Any person who finds any lost money or property of or exceeding the value
of $20 shall report such finding to the Village Clerk's office within 10 days
after the finding thereof.
§ 252-13. Deposit.
Such money or property must be deposited in the records of the Village
Clerk's office, together with the name and address of the finder thereof.
§ 252-14. Public notice.
The Village Clerk shall cause to be published semiannually in January and
July of each year in the official village newspaper a description of all the
money or property deposited with it pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
§ 252-15. Disposition of unclaimed property.
Any such money or property as shall remain in the custody of the Village
Clerk for a period of seven months without a lawful claimant entitled
thereto asserting his claim thereto shall be turned over to the person who
found and deposited the same. If the person who so found and deposited
such money or property shall not appear and claim the same within 30
days after notice by registered mail of the expiration of said seven-month
period, such money shall be paid to the Village Treasurer, to be used for
general village purposes, and in the case of property the same shall be sold
at public auction after having been advertised once in the official village
newspaper, and the proceeds of the sale thereof shall be paid to the Village
Treasurer, to be used for general village purposes. Any claimant for lost
property who shall fail to assert his claim thereto prior to the sale thereof
at public auction as herein provided shall be entitled only to the money
received from such sale less lawful service charges.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-12 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 252-15
252:267
Chapter 254
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 94.
Cesspools and septic tanks — See Ch. 100.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Enclosed garages — See Ch. 170.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
Graffiti — See Ch. 182.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Landscaping — See Ch. 196.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 262.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 294.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 328.
§ 254-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Property Maintenance Code
of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park."
§ 254-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for and ensure the
proper use of property and to prevent the unsafe, hazardous or dangerous
conditions upon property within the Village of Massapequa Park; to provide
basic and uniform standards governing the maintenance, appearance and
condition of all properties, whether improved or unimproved, residential,
commercial or otherwise. The Village finds that the presence of blight upon
properties, caused by factors, including, but not limited to, foreclosures
throughout the Village, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the Village. It is the intent, therefore, of the Village that blight be identified,
abated and eliminated and that any and all conditions which pose a threat
to the health and safety of the public or to property within the Village of
Massapequa Park be eliminated. The Board of Trustees finds that upon
the failure to eliminate such conditions, the Village may cause to have
said conditions eliminated and assess the cost thereof against the owners,
occupants or other persons as set forth in this chapter.
§ 254-3. Maintenance of property required.
A. General requirements.
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be drained to prevent damage
to buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant
waters. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, storm water
sewers and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems
§ 252-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-3
252:268
shall be provided and utilized. In no case shall the water from
any rain leader be allowed to flow over the sidewalk of adjoining
property.
(2) All property shall be well maintained so that lawns, hedges, bushes,
trees and weeds shall be trimmed so as to prevent overgrown and
unsightly conditions. In no event shall any plant growth overhang
or extend beyond the property line. No weeds or plant growth shall
be permitted to exceed 10 inches in height.
(3) All fences shall be maintained in a safe and attractive state and be
maintained in good repair. Such maintenance shall include, but not
be limited to, the replacement and/or repair of fences which may
become in disrepair.
(4) No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing, and said baskets, carts or wagons shall be regularly
collected and removed to the interior of the building or buildings
from which they were taken by the person responsible for said
building or buildings.
B. Buildings and structures.
(1) All exterior exposed surfaces shall be repaired, coated, treated or
sealed to protect them from deterioration or weathering.
(2) Floors, walls, ceilings, stairs, furnishing and fixtures of buildings
shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Every
floor, exterior wall, roof and porch, or appurtenance thereto, shall
be maintained in a manner so as to prevent collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
(3) Foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and be structurally sound.
(4) Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building
shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the building.
Materials which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or
other deterioration or damage shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a good workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and
other parts of the building shall be free from loose and unsecured
objects and materials. Such objects or materials shall be removed,
repaired or replaced.
(5) Each and every part of the property, including but not limited to
stairs, steps, walks, walkways, driveways, parking areas and
spaces and other paved surfaces shall be kept in good repair, and in
a clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from any litter, debris,
paper, dirt, garbage or junk. All stairs, steps, walks, walkways,
driveways, parking areas and spaces and other paved surfaces and
areas shall be maintained in a manner which permits for safe
§ 254-3 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 254-3
252:269
passage. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be filled,
or necessary repairs or replacement carried out. All driveways and
parking spaces shall be covered with a dustless surface, and such
driveways and parking spaces shall be regularly cleaned to avoid
accumulation of dirt, paper or any debris. Any and all sidewalks
shall be kept free from snow and ice. In removing such snow or ice,
no person shall put the same in the gutter or drain of the street or
in any manner fill up or obstruct any such gutter or drain.
(6) Vacant buildings shall be maintained in a condition that does not
present a hazard to adjoining properties, buildings, structures or to
the public.
(7) All property, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
insects, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Insects,
rodents or other pests shall be exterminated or caused to be
exterminated and methods used for such extermination shall
conform with generally accepted practices and comply with all
applicable law.
(8) No building or structure shall be permitted to exist with graffiti.
Graffiti shall be removed and the building or structure restored.
For purposes of this subsection, "graffiti" is defined as any writing,
painting, drawing, staining, carving, etching or other marking,
made by use of chalk, paint, ink, aerosol spray can, knife, pencil or
any other marking device and/or material, of any word, name,
lettering, inscription, figure, design, or other representation, made
upon a portion of a building or structure without the consent of the
owner. Signs with proper sign permits or approval are expressly
not included in the definition of graffiti.
(9) Blighted property is prohibited. In determining whether a property
shall be designated as blighted, the following factors shall be
considered by the Building Inspector:
(a) Boarded windows, doors, entryways or exits;
(b) Broken or unsecured windows;
(c) Excessive litter or debris;
(d) Overgrown grass at least 10 inches or higher or other
overgrown vegetation or shrubbery;
(e) More than one unregistered motor vehicle;
(f) Roofs, gutters, siding/shingles, chimney, shutters, and/or
accessory structures, including, but not limited to, decks,
sheds, porches, pools, pool houses or cabanas, garages,
carports, storage units, front and rear porches, outside
statuary, and/or fish ponds which are broken, unsecured, or in
disrepair;
§ 254-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-3
252:270
§ 254-4. Parties responsible.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, owner or occupant to
create, cause, maintain or cause to, or permit to, continue or to fail to abate,
correct or remove any condition that is prohibited by this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, "any person" shall include the owner, occupant,
tenant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, mortgagee when the owner or
occupant has caused or allowed the property to deteriorate or otherwise
(g) Junk vehicles, salvage, or scrap property;
(h) Damaged, unsightly, unsecured or unpermitted signage or
awnings;
(i) Graffiti;
(j) Fencing which is broken, unsecured or in disrepair;
(k) Outdoor lighting fixtures which are broken, unsecured or in
disrepair;
(l) Electrical wires, electrical equipment or extension cords which
are broken, exposed or hazardously utilized;
(m) Unfinished or abandoned construction;
(n) Damaged, dead or fallen trees or limbs;
(o) Fire damage to property which has not been repaired or
restored;
(p) Peeling or deteriorated paint;
(q) Stagnant water;
(r) Open or unsecured wells, cesspools or cisterns;
(s) Vermin, rodent harborage or infestation;
(t) Any other factors deemed by the Building Inspector to pose
significant threat to the safety, health and/or general welfare of
the Village; and
(u) Presence within/upon an outdoor area or the improper storage
of:
[1] Refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, boiler,
tank, other household appliances, boxes or indoor
furniture for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours;
and/or
[2] Lumber, construction materials, dirt, debris, trash,
garbage or uncovered refuse cans, accumulated refuse or
garbage in covered refuse cans which is not timely or
properly disposed of.
§ 254-3 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 254-4
252:271
fall into a state of disrepair or blight, a mortgagee who has commenced
the foreclosure process, the operator, assignee of rents, receiver, executor,
trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm, or corporation directly or
indirectly in control of property or part thereof.
§ 254-5. Additional responsibilities of owners.
§ 254-6. Additional responsibilities of mortgage holders.
§ 254-7. Inspection authorization.
A. Owners of property shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible therefor
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place responsibilities
on operators, occupants and others and regardless of any agreements
between owners, operators, occupants or others as to which party shall
assume such responsibility.
B. Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care or control of any property within the Village of
Massapequa Park as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian,
operator or agent, such person shall be deemed and taken to be the
owner or owners of said property within the true intent and meaning of
this chapter and shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
chapter to the same extent as the record owner, and notice to any such
person or any order or decision of the Building Inspector shall be
deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice, as if such person
or persons were actually the record owner or owners of such property.
In instances where an occupant is responsible or shares responsibility
with the owner for the existence of one of more violations of this
chapter, said occupant shall be deemed and taken to be an owner within
the true intent and meaning of this chapter.
A. The mortgage holder shall immediately notify the Village, in writing, of
its notice to the owner of the owner's failure to maintain the property.
Upon the commencement of foreclosure proceedings the mortgage
holder shall also immediately notify the Village, in writing, of such
action. Commencement of a foreclosure proceeding shall be defined in
this chapter as the service of a notice of foreclosure upon a property
owner.
B. Upon either of the contingencies set forth in § 254-6A, the mortgage
holder shall also deposit with the Village a sum determined by the
Building Inspector to be sufficient for the maintenance and repair of the
property. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to reduce or
waive the deposit.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make all
inspections necessary to determine whether compliance with the
provisions of this chapter exists. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enter,
§ 254-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-7
252:272
§ 254-8. Notice to remedy prohibited conditions and enforcement.
examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units
and premises. The owner or occupants of every dwelling or dwelling
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Inspector
free access to such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the
owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for
the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful
rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. In the event that permission to enter any such dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse for the purpose of
inspection is denied, the Building Inspector may apply to the
appropriate authority for a search warrant.
C. A warrant shall not be required:
(1) When entry is by permission or at the request of the owner or
occupant.
(2) Where an imminent danger to health and safety exists.
(3) Following an accident or inherent condition where immediate
inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health
or safety exists.
A. The Building Inspector or any other enforcement officer appointed by
the Building Inspector of the Village of Massapequa Park shall be
charged with the duty of administering and enforcing this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or any other duly
appointed enforcement officer of the Village of Massapequa Park to
issue a notice of violation to order in writing the correction of all
conditions found to exist in or on any premises which violate the
provisions of this chapter. Alternatively, the Building Inspector may, in
his sole discretion, issue an appearance ticket pursuant to Article 150
of the Criminal Procedure Law.
C. If a notice of violation is issued it shall be served either personally or by
posting. If a notice of violation is served by posting, it shall be posted in
a conspicuous place upon the premises of the person(s) charged with
the violation, and a copy thereof shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the person(s) charged. If the person so charged is
not the owner, the notice shall also be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner.
§ 254-7 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 254-8
252:273
§ 254-9. Action for noncompliance.
D. A notice of violation shall state that, unless, within 10 calendar days
from service of the notice of violation, five calendar days for violations
relating to grass, vegetation or shrubbery, a written request is made for
a hearing before the Building Inspector, the notice of violation shall, at
the expiration of such ten-day period, or five calendar days, as the case
may be, be deemed an order to cease and desist from and to abate,
correct or remove the offending conditions; such notice shall prescribe
a reasonable time within which such person shall be required to cease
and desist from and abate, correct or remove such violative condition.
E. Within five calendar days of receipt of a request for a hearing, the
Building Inspector in his sole discretion shall advise in writing whether
the hearing will be conducted upon written submissions or will require
personal appearance(s). If personal appearance is required, the hearing
shall be commenced no later than 15 calendar days after the request for
hearing is made, provided that, for good cause, the Building Inspector
may postpone such hearing for a reasonable time. If, after the hearing,
the enforcement officer finds that no violation exists, or that unusual,
extraordinary or undue hardship exists, he shall withdraw the notice of
violation. If the Building Inspector finds that a violation exists, he shall
issue a decision ordering the abatement, correction or removal of same
within a prescribed reasonable time. The decision of the Building
Inspector shall be issued within seven calendar days of the hearing. In
the event that the hearing is conducted upon written submissions, the
decision shall be issued within seven days of the date the written
submissions were submitted.
F. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may,
within five calendar days of the Building Inspector's decision, appeal
the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
A. If the violative condition is not abated, corrected or removed within 20
calendar days, five calendar days for violations relating to grass,
vegetation or shrubbery, after the cease and desist order or decision, as
the case may be, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the abatement, correction or removal of the
conditions in violation of this chapter, or to have the condition(s)
abated, corrected or abated.
B. In the event that the Village of Massapequa Park has abated, corrected
or removed the offending conditions or has paid for such abatement,
correction or removal, the actual cost thereof, plus the accrued legal
rate of interest per annum from the date of the completion of the work
shall be charged to the parties responsible, as set forth in § 254-4, or
the owner of the offending property, building or structure, as the case
may be, and such charge shall become due and payable at the time of
the present amount of such bill. A copy of the invoice shall be mailed to
the persons charged with the violation by certified mail, return receipt
§ 254-8 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-9
252:274
§ 254-10. Supplemental regulations for blighted properties.
requested. The owner, or other parties responsible, may, within 10
calendar days of receipt of the invoice, request a hearing before the
Building Inspector to challenge the reasonableness of the fees.
C. In the event no hearing is requested to challenge the reasonableness of
the fees, and the full amount due the Village of Massapequa Park
specified in Subsection B remains unpaid 20 calendar days following
the mailing of the invoice for the cost associated with the abatement,
correction or removal, then in that case, the Building Inspector shall
cause to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work
was completed and the location of the property by section, lot and block
on which said work was done and the name of the reputed owner
thereof. The filing of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and
privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus cost of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses
shall be a lien on the property and shall be collected in the manner fixed
by law for the collection of taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a
delinquent penalty at the rate of interest in the event that the same is
not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge
appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements filed in accordance
with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and the work has been properly
and successfully done and shall be full notice to every person concerned
that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a statement
that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
A. Where the Building Inspector designates that a property is blighted in
accordance with § 254-3B(9), notice of such violative condition shall be
served in accordance with § 254-8.
B. In the event that the property remains in a blighted condition, the
Village shall have the right to seek the remedies set forth in § 254-9. If
the blighted conditions have not been abated, corrected or removed to
the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, within 20 days of the cease
and desist order or decision, as the case may be, as set forth in § 254-9,
the Building Inspector shall have the right, in addition to the remedies
and penalties set forth in §§ 254-9 and 254-11, to place the blighted
property on the "Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park Blighted
Property Registry."
C. Upon the placement of blighted property upon the "Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park Blighted Property Registry," notice shall be
served upon the owner and other responsible parties, as the case may
be, that the property has been placed upon the registry and that a
registration fee as set forth herein shall be assessed to the property
within 15 days of the notice. The parties responsible may request a
hearing before the Building Inspector to challenge the reasonableness
§ 254-9 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 254-10
252:275
§ 254-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable as follows:
of the registration fee. A registration fee shall be assessed as follows:
$5,000 for each commercial blighted property; $2,500 for each
residential blighted property.
D. In the event no hearing is requested to challenge the reasonableness of
the registration fee, and the full amount of the registration remains
unpaid 20 calendar days following the mailing of the notice, the
Building Inspector shall cause to be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk a sworn statement showing the amount unpaid. The filing of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property
and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal
and interest, plus cost of court, if any, for collection, until final payment
has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be a lien on the property
and shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of
taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the rate of
interest in the event that the same is not paid in full on or before the
date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent.
Sworn statements filed in accordance with the provisions hereof shall
be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount
of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a statement that the same is
due and collectible as provided by law.
E. The Building Inspector may reduce or waive the registration fee,
provided the responsible parties enter into a restoration agreement and
the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The existence of a valid certificate of occupancy or application
therefor;
(2) There are no other outstanding violations; and
(3) The restoration agreement must contain an acknowledgment from
the parties responsible that the property is blighted and specify a
detailed plan designed to abate, correct or remove all blighted
conditions.
F. A party's failure to adhere to the restoration agreement shall subject
such party to immediate assessment of the registration fee.
A. For conviction of a first offense, by a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding five days, or by
both.
B. For conviction of the second of two offenses, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, by a fine of not less than $1,000
§ 254-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-11
252:276
§ 254-12. Supplemental remedies.
In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, the Village of
Massapequa Park reserves the right to pursue any and all remedies
available, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Articles 13 and
19-A of the Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law, and the Building
Inspector is hereby authorized to take any and all action specified
thereunder.
§ 254-13. Emergency.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, he may issue an order, in writing, to the owner, agent or occupant
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action
be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding
the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any party to whom such order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately. If such party does not respond within a reasonable
time to address the emergency, then the Building Inspector shall have
the power to abate, correct or remove the emergency, and any expenses,
including any legal expenses, incurred by the Village of Massapequa Park
shall be borne by the owner, occupant, or other parties responsible as
defined in § 254-4.
§ 254-14. State standards controlling.
The requirements and standards set forth in the Property Maintenance
Code of the State of New York, 2012, and all revisions and amendments
thereto shall be controlling in the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
Where permitted by the Property Maintenance Code of the State of New
York, it is the intent of the Board of Trustees to implement greater minimum
standards within the Village of Massapequa Park.
and not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 10 days,
or by both.
C. For conviction of a third or subsequent offense of a series of offenses, all
of which were committed within a period of five years, by a fine of not
less than $2,500 and not more than $10,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both.
D. Each week in which the violation continues shall constitute a separate
and additional violation and shall be punishable as such pursuant to this
section.
E. The Building Inspector is authorized and directed to institute any and
all actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The
Village Attorney is also authorized to seek damages and any civil
penalties in any civil action, and such penalties shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution or other penalties.
§ 254-11 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 254-15
252:277
§ 254-15. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than
the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 254-16. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 260
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 254-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 254-16
260:278
ARTICLE I
Records and Requests
[Adopted 9-9-1974]
§ 260-1. Adoption of rules and procedure.
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts rules and procedure regarding public
access to records in accordance with Freedom of Information Act as follows.
§ 260-2. Payroll information. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
The fiscal officer of the village regarding payroll information is the Village
Treasurer, and payroll information is available at the office at the Village
Hall, 151 Front Street, Massapequa Park, New York.
§ 260-3. Records access officer. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
The records access officer is the Village Clerk.
§ 260-4. Availability of records. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
Records shall be available at the office of the Village Clerk between the
hours of 9:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. during business hours.
§ 260-5. List of records categories.
A list of records categories shall be available in the office of the Village
Administrator.
§ 260-6. Requests. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
All requests shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Village Clerk.
§ 260-7. Copies of records. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
Copies of records will be made upon request in accordance with the fee
schedule set by law or, in those cases not covered, at the rate provided in
Chapter A350, Fees.98
98.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Real Property Records, adopted 7-10-2000 by L.L. No.
15-2000, which consisted of § § 260-8 through 260-10, was repealed 4-28-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003.
§ 260-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 260-7
260:279
Chapter 262
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 174.
§ 262-1. Manner of disposal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building in
a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded
icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight
door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of said
container, without first removing the snaplock or doors therefrom.
Chapter 268
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 64.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 78.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 202.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 260-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 262-1
262:280
ARTICLE I
Sales on Memorial Day
[Adopted 5-22-1967 by Secs. 12-10 and 12-11 of the 1967 Code;
amended in its entirety 6-11-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
§ 268-1. Business activity restricted.
All trades, manufactures or mechanical employments on the day Memorial
Day is celebrated are hereby prohibited, except that when the same are
works of necessity, they may be performed on that day in their usual and
ordinary manner so as not to interfere with the observance of said day.
§ 268-2. Sales restricted.
All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property on the day
celebrated as Memorial Day is prohibited, except as follows:
A. Articles of food may be sold, served, supplied and delivered at any time
before 10:00 am.
B. Meals may be sold to be eaten on the premises where sold at any time of
the day.
C. Caterers may serve meals to their patrons at any time of the day.
D. Prepared tobacco, bread, milk, eggs, ice, soda water, fruit, flowers,
confectionery, souvenirs, newspapers, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs,
medicine and surgical instruments may be sold and may be delivered at
any time of the day.
E. Groceries, delicatessen dealers and bakeries may sell, supply, serve and
deliver cooked and prepared foods, and roadside stands selling fresh
vegetables and other farm produce and fishing tackle and bait stores
may sell, supply, serve and deliver merchandise usually sold by them at
any time of the day.
F. This section shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages by
persons holding licenses or permits issued under the provision of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
§ 268-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 268-2
268:281

ARTICLE II
Christmas Tree Sales
[Adopted 5-22-1967 by Art. III of Ch. 12 of the 1967 Code]
§ 268-3. License required; duration; suspension or revocation.
A license to conduct the activity regulated by this article shall be of not
more than 90 days' duration; provided, however, that the same may be
sooner suspended or revoked, as provided in § 202-5.
§ 268-4. License fee. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 15-1983;
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The fee for a license required as provided in this article shall be as provided
in Chapter A350, Fees.
§ 268-5. License deposit.
In addition to the license fee prescribed in § 268-4, an applicant for a license
hereunder shall pay a deposit of $50, conditioned upon faithful performance
in cleaning up the premises used for the Christmas tree business.
§ 268-6. Cleaning of premises.
When the premises have been cleaned to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector, as provided in § 268-5, the deposit provided for therein shall
be returned; in the event that said premises are not cleaned within five
days after Christmas, the village will have the work done and the expense
incurred will be deducted from the amount deposited and the balance, if
any, returned to the applicant upon request.
§ 268-7. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person who maintains a regular
established place of business in the village and sells Christmas trees
incidental to his regular business during the Christmas season.
§ 268-3 SALES, SPECIAL § 268-7
268:283

ARTICLE III
Close-Out Sales
[Adopted 5-22-1967 by Art. IV of Ch. 12 of the 1967 Code]
§ 268-8. Definitions.
The following words and terms as used in this article shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed:
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to this article.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to
this article.
PUBLISHED, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT or ADVERTISING — Any
and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention
to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement,
by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed
notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio
announcement and any and all means, including oral, written or printed.
SALE — A sale of or an offer to sell to the public goods, wares and
merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock
in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising on the
part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing,
liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment
of the business in connection with such sale. It shall also include any sale
advertised to be a "fire sale," "adjustment sale," "creditor's sale," "trustee's
sale," "liquidation sale," "reorganization sale," "alteration sale," "executor's
sale," "administrator's sale," "insolvent sale," "insurance salvage sale,"
"mortgage sale," "assignee's sale," "adjustor's sale," "receiver's sale," "lossof-
lease sale," "wholesaler's closeout sale," "creditors' committee sale,"
"forced-out-of-business sale," "removal sale," and any and all sales
advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon
the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued.
§ 268-9. Authorization of Clerk.
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to supervise and
regulate sales or special sales defined herein and to issue the appropriate
license or licenses therefor.
§ 268-10. Condition for license.
No license hereunder shall be issued to any applicant for a sale that is
advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon
the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and
be discontinued unless such applicant, for one year prior to the date of
such application, has conducted a bona fide business at the place where
application for such sale is being made.
§ 268-8 SALES, SPECIAL § 268-11
268:285
§ 268-11. License application.
§ 268-12. Duration of license.
A license issued as provided for in this article shall be for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 268-13. Renewal of license.
Licenses issued as provided for in this article may be renewed upon
application to the village therefor; provided, however, that any such license
so renewed shall be of not more than 30 days' duration; provided, further,
that any such license may not be renewed more than two times.
§ 268-14. License fee. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The fee for a license or renewal required by the terms of this article shall
be as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
§ 268-15. Display of license; availability of application and stock
list.
Upon commencement of any sale regulated herein, the license issued by
the Village Clerk shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the
premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list, pursuant to
which such license was issued, shall at all times be available to the Village
Clerk.
A. Contents. The license or licenses required as provided in this article
shall be issued in the discretion of the Village Clerk upon the written
application in a form approved by the Village Clerk and verified by the
person who, or by an officer of the corporation which, intends to
conduct such sale. Such application shall contain a description of the
place where such sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy,
whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of
such occupancy, the means to be employed in publishing such sale,
together with the proposed language content of any advertisements.
Such application shall further contain, as part thereof, an itemized list
of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale, the place
where such stock was purchased or acquired and, if not purchased, the
manner of such acquisition. Such application shall contain any
additional information as the Village Clerk shall require.
B. Action upon application. If the Village Clerk is satisfied as to the truth of
the statements contained in such application and as to the form and
content of the advertising to be used in connection with such sale, he
may then issue a license permitting the publication and conduct of such
sale.
§ 268-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 268-16
268:286
§ 268-16. Advertising.
All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein shall
be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application
pursuant to a license was issued, and the wording of such advertisements
shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the application. Such
advertising shall in no manner or form whatsoever, either directly or
indirectly, indicate that such sale is held with the approval of the Village
Clerk. Such advertising shall contain a statement to the effect that the sale
is held pursuant to Permit No. ________ of the Village of Massapequa Park,
granted the ________ day of _________, and in such blank spaces shall be
indicated the permit number and the requisite dates.
§ 268-17. Rules and regulations.
The Village Clerk shall be empowered to make such rules and regulations
for the conduct and advertisement of a sale regulated hereunder as in his
opinion will serve to prevent deception and to protect the public.
§ 268-18. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as sheriffs and marshals.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
§ 268-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 268-18
268:287

ARTICLE IV
Garage Sales
[Adopted 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983]
§ 268-19. Conduct restricted to residential property owners;
compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for anyone except owners of residential property within
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to hold and conduct garage
sales within the village, and lawful garage sales shall be subject to the
following rules and regulations.
§ 268-20. Frequency; duration.
Within a calendar year, only three garage sales shall be allowed and
permitted to be conducted and held, and each particular garage sale can
last for a maximum of three consecutive days, but no more than two garage
sales in any three-month period shall be permitted.
§ 268-21. Permit required; display of permit.
Before a garage sale can be held or conducted by an owner of residential
property within the Village of Massapequa Park, a permit shall first be
obtained from the village, and the sale permit must be conspicuously and
publicly displayed on the house during the entire garage sale.
§ 268-22. Location.
Only garage sales on residential property held or conducted by the lawful
owner of same shall be permitted or allowed by the village.
§ 268-23. Rules and regulations.
The Village of Massapequa Park, through its Village Administrator, shall
prescribe those rules and regulations for the holding of the said garage sale
which shall protect and ensure the rights of the public attending said sale
and those rights of the adjacent and adjoining property owners as it affects
their quiet enjoyment and safety.
§ 268-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
13-1994]
In the event that there is a violation of this Article and in the event that the
property owner or his designated or lawful agent or representative is found
guilty of the violation of this particular Article, they shall be fined for said
violation up to the maximum fine allowed by law.
§ 268-19 SALES, SPECIAL § 268-24
268:289
Chapter 272
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND
FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fee — See Ch. A350.
§ 272-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Regulation of Wireless
Telecommunications Towers and Facilities."
§ 272-2. Purpose and intent.
A. On February 8, 1996, the United States Congress enacted the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act").
The purpose of the Act is to provide a more competitive environment for
wired and wireless communication services in the United States by
deregulating the telecommunications industry. The Act preserves the
authority of local government to regulate the placement, construction,
and modification of personal wireless services antennas, towers and
accessory structures in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish predictable and balanced
regulations for the siting and screening of personal wireless services
antennas, towers, and accessory structures. The establishment of such
regulations is to accommodate the growth of such systems within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park (hereinafter referred to as the
"Village"). Such regulations will further serve to protect the public
against any adverse impacts on aesthetic resources. Additionally, the
regulations will eliminate potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements.
Finally, the regulations set forth in this chapter will reduce the number
of towers needed to service the community by maximizing the use of
existing towers and structures.
C. This chapter is intended to regulate the placement, construction, and
modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public while at the sane
time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the
competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the Village.
Specifically, this chapter is intended to:
(1) Regulate the location of the towers and telecommunications
facilities in the Village;
§ 268-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-2
272:290
§ 272-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES — Accessory buildings and structures,
including base stations designed and used to shelter equipment and/or
to support personal wireless services. The term "accessory structures"
does not include offices, long-term storage of vehicles or other equipment
storage, or broadcast studios.
ANTENNA — The actual device which transmits and/or receives radio or
electromagnetic waves.
(2) Protect residential areas and land uses within and adjacent to the
Village from potential adverse impacts of towers and
telecommunications facilities;
(3) Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and telecommunications
facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(4) Promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and
antenna support structures as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single-use towers;
(5) Promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that
will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower
structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities;
(6) Avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and
telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are
soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained,
and removed when no longer used or determined to be structurally
unsound; and
(7) Ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are
compatible with surrounding land uses.
D. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Act, grants the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
(1) The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF)
emission from telecommunications facilities; and
(2) The regulations of radio signal interference among users of the RF
spectrum.
E. The Village's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities in
the Village will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from
providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act.
§ 272-2 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-3
272:291
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure other than
a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
APPLICANT — Any person that applies for a tower development permit.
APPLICATION — The process by which the owner of a parcel of land
within the Village submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify
or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form
or forum, made by an applicant to the Village concerning such a request.
ENGINEER — Any engineer licensed by the State of New York.
OWNER — Any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding 10 years)
leasehold to any parcel of land within the Village who desires to develop, or
construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon such parcel of land.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not
for profit.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access
services as defined by Section 704 of the Federal Telecommunications Act.
STEALTH — Any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to
enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including but not limited to
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower
such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not
necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice or monopole tower
designs.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with
the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to
locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.
However, telecommunications facilities shall not include:
TOWER — A self-supporting lattice or monopole structure constructed from
grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term "tower" shall
not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
§ 272-4. Review authority.
Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which
is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or
A.
Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter,
regardless of zoning category.
B.
A. No antenna or tower shall hereafter be used, erected, changed or
altered except after obtaining a special use permit in conformity with
this chapter.
§ 272-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-4
272:292
§ 272-5. Procedural requirements.
The Board of Trustees shall conduct a public hearing within 60 days from
the day an application is received. The Board of Trustees shall issue a
decision within 40 days after the hearing. Any denial for a permit under this
chapter shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence.
Notice of any public hearing shall be made in writing to adjacent owners
within 500 feet of the proposed tower or antenna. The costs of such service
shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 272-6. Development of towers.
No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land
within any zoning district within the Village unless a special use permit shall
have been issued by the Board of Trustees after approval by the Board of
Trustees.
B. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to review and approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove special use permits pursuant
to this chapter. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed antenna, tower and accessory
structures.
C. A special use permit issued by the Board of Trustees shall be effective
for a period of two years which shall be renewable thereafter upon
reapplication by the applicant and the payment of the fee referenced
herein in § 272-30.
D. Other than under Subsection B of the definition of "telecommunications
facilities" in § 272-3, no special permit shall be granted in a residential
zone.
A. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the
districts where located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150
feet above the ground upon which the antenna is placed. Towers may be
permitted in excess of 150 feet in accordance with § 272-21, Criteria for
Site Plan Development Modifications.
B. No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the Village
unless the tower is capable of supporting another person's operating
telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface
area to the telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant on
the tower within six months of the completion of the tower
construction.
C. An application to develop a tower shall include:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is to be situated. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
§ 272-4 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-6
272:293
tower is to be situated, the written consent of the owner shall be
evidenced in the application.
(2) The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon which
the tower is to be situated.
(3) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within a onehalf-
mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including Villageowned
property. Information on other towers shall include location,
height and design of such tower.
(4) A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the
Village. Applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent
technological design, including microcell design, as part of the
design plan. The applicant must demonstrate the need for towers
and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be
utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's
telecommunications services.
(5) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate
the applicant's telecommunications facilities on Village-owned
towers or usable antenna support structures located within a onehalf-
mile radius of the proposed tower site.
(6) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support
structures owned by other persons located within a one-half-mile
radius of the proposed tower site.
(7) Written technical evidence, including possible alternate sites, from
an engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications
facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's
tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other
persons located within a one-half-mile radius of the proposed tower
site and that there is a significant gap in the telecommunications
service available to remote users.
(8) A written statement from an engineer that the construction and
placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety
communications and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television, or other communications services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties.
(9) Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
structure meets the standards set forth in § 272-9, Structural
requirements, of this chapter.
(10)Written technical evidence from a qualified engineer acceptable to
the Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector that the proposed site
§ 272-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-6
272:294
of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk
of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or property due to its
proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials
such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or
other dangerous chemicals.
(11) In order to assist Village staff and the Board of Trustees in
evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo
simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photorealistic
representation of the proposed tower as it would appear
viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent
roadways.
(12) The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of
RF emissions and does not allow the Village to condition or deny on
the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications
facilities (whether mounted on towers or antenna support
structures) which meet FCC standards. Antennas and towers shall
be subject to state and federal regulations pertaining to nonionizing
radiation and other health hazards related to such
facilities. In order to provide information to its citizens, the Village
shall make available, upon request, copies of ongoing FCC
information and RF emission standards for telecommunications
facilities transmitting from towers and antenna support structures.
Applicants shall be required to submit information on the proposed
power density of their proposed telecommunications facilities and
demonstrate how it meets FCC standards. Applicants shall submit
evidence of compliance with FCC standards on a quarterly basis to
the Village. If new more restrictive standards are adopted, the
antennas shall be made to comply or continued operations may be
restricted by the Board of Trustees. The cost of verification of
compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the tower.
(13) A long form environmental assessment form.
(14) Insurance with appropriate endorsements demonstrating that the
Village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees are named as principal or additional insureds:
(a) Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
[1] Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person.
[2] Five million dollars for property damage resulting from
any one accident.
[3] Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
§ 272-6 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-6
272:295
§ 272-7. Collocation requirements.
All towers erected, or located within the Village, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(b) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles
with a limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for
each accident.
(c) Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
(d) Comprehensive for premises, operations, explosions and
collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed
hazard, with limits of not less than $3,000,000.
(e) The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the applicant throughout the terms of the use
and removal of the telecommunications device. Unless
otherwise agreed by the Village, each such insurance policy
shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after
receipt by the Village, by registered or certified mail, of a
written notice addressed to the Village of such intent to cancel
or not to renew."
(f) In the event the Village receives notice of such cancellation or
intention not to renew, within 20 days after receipt of said
notice and in no event later than 10 days prior to said
cancellation, the applicant shall obtain and furnish to the
Village documentation of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
D. The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be self-supporting
without the use of wires, cables, beams or other means. The design
should utilize an open framework or monopole configuration.
Permanent platforms or structures exclusive of antennas that serve to
increase off-site visibility are prohibited.
E. The base of the tower shall occupy not more than 500 square feet, and
the top of the tower shall be no longer than the base.
F. Minimum spacing between tower locations is 1/4 of a mile.
G. The Board of Trustees may require an applicant to supplement any
information that the Board of Trustees considers inadequate or that the
applicant has failed to supply. The Board of Trustees may deny an
application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily
supplied the information required in this subsection.
§ 272-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-7
272:296
A. A proposal for a tower shall not be approved unless the Board of
Trustees finds that the antenna planned for the proposed tower cannot
be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a
one-mile search radius (one-half-mile search radius for towers under
120 feet in height, one-quarter-mile search radius for towers under 80
feet in height) of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following
reasons:
(1) The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or
approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot
be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned
or equivalent antenna at a reasonable cost.
(2) The antenna would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned antenna at the tower or
building, as documented by a qualified professional engineer, and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the antenna at a height necessary to function
reasonably, as documented by a qualified professional engineer.
(4) Other foreseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
antenna upon an existing or approved tower or building.
B. Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in
all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is
over 100 feet in height or for at least one additional user if the tower is
over 60 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights. The applicant shall submit to the Board of
Trustees a letter of intent committing the applicant, and his/her
successors in interest, to negotiate in good faith for shared use of the
proposed tower by other personal wireless service providers in the
future. The issuance of a special use permit (assuming the tower is
approved according to this section), shall commit the new tower owner
and his/her successors in interest to:
(1) Respond in a timely comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential shared-use applicant.
(2) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use
of the new tower by other personal wireless service providers.
(3) Allow shared use of the new tower if another personal wireless
service provider agrees in writing to pay charges.
(4) Make no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on
generally accepted accounting principles. The charge may include,
but is not limited to, a prorata share of the cost of site selection,
§ 272-7 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-7
272:297
§ 272-8. Setbacks.
Towers and all accessory structures shall conform with each of the following
minimum setback requirements:
planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, and
depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or
equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
C. In order to keep neighboring municipalities informed, and to facilitate
the possibility of directing that an existing tall structure or existing
tower in a neighboring municipality be considered for shared use, the
Board of Trustees shall require that:
(1) An applicant who proposes a new tower shall notify in writing the
legislative body of each municipality that borders the Village and
the County Planning Commission. Notification shall include the
exact location of the proposed tower and a general description of
the project including, but not limited to the height of the tower and
its capacity for future shared use.
(2) Documentation of this modification shall be submitted to the Board
of Trustees at the time of application.
A. All towers up to 100 feet in height shall be set back on all sides a
distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable
zoning district. Towers in excess of 100 feet in height shall be set back
one additional foot per each foot of tower height in excess of 100 feet.
B. Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is
located.
C. Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in § 272-21B(1),
when placement of a tower in a location which will reduce the visual
impact can be accomplished. For example, adjacent to trees which may
visually hide the tower.
D. The minimum setbacks of the underlying zoning district shall be met,
with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers and
accessory structures may encroach into the rear setback area, provided
that the real property line abuts another industrially zoned property
and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
E. Towers and accessory structures shall be set back from the planned
public rights-of-way, as shown on the most recently adopted plan or
map of the Village showing such rights of way, by a minimum distance
equal to 1/2 of the height of the tower including all antennas and
attachments.
§ 272-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-8
272:298
§ 272-9. Structural requirements.
All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally
sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the Village Code, and any
other standards outlined in this chapter. All towers in operation shall be
affixed to land.
§ 272-10. Separation or buffer requirements.
For the purpose of this chapter, the separation distances between towers
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the
base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant
to a site plan, of the proposed tower. Tower separation distances from
residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a tower to the
closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum tower separation
distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be
calculated and applied irrespective of Village jurisdictional boundaries.
§ 272-11. Method of determining tower height.
Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance
with all requirements of this chapter shall include the tower structure itself,
the base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto
which extend more than 20 feet over the top of the tower structure itself.
Tower height shall be measured from grade.
§ 272-12. Illumination.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular
tower. Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where
there are residential uses located within a distance which is 300% of the
F. A tower's setback may be reduced in the sole discretion of the Board of
Trustees to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed
structure such as a church steeple, light pole, power line, or similar
structure.
A. Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a
minimum of 200 feet or 200% of the height of the proposed tower,
whichever is greater.
B. Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation
requirements from existing towers or towers which have a special use
permit but are not yet constructed at the time a special use permit is
granted pursuant to this chapter:
(1) Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other
towers, whether monopole or self-supporting lattice by a minimum
of 1/4 mile.
§ 272-8 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-12
272:299
height of the tower from the tower and when required by federal law, dual
mode lighting shall be requested from the Federal Aviation Administration.
§ 272-13. Design of antennas, towers and accessory structures.
Antennas, towers and accessory structure shall be designed to blend into
the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is indicated
by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
Every antenna, tower and accessory structure shall be of neutral colors that
are harmonious with, and that blend with, the natural features, buildings
and structures surrounding such antenna and structure; provided however,
that directional or panel antenna and omnidirectional or whip antennas
located on the exterior of a building that will also serve as an antenna
tower shall be of colors that match, and cause the antenna to blend with,
the exterior of the building. Accessory structures will be designed to be
architecturally compatible with principal structures on the site.
§ 272-14. Landscaping and security of structures.
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support
structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower,
antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located.
The Village may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in the
Village Code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses.
Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. Existing onsite
vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. The
base of the tower and any accessory structure shall be landscaped. Towers
and accessory structures shall be provided with security fencing to prevent
unauthorized entry.
§ 272-15. Access.
A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at
least one paved vehicular parking space on site. A road and parking will be
provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use
of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
§ 272-16. Stealth design.
All towers shall be of stealth design.
§ 272-17. Telecommunications facilities on antenna support
structures.
Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be
permitted on any antenna support structure at least 50 feet tall, regardless
of the commercial zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where
the structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all
other structures. The owner of such structure shall, by written certification
§ 272-12 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-17
272:300
to the Board of Trustees, establish the following at the time plans are
submitted for a special use permit:
§ 272-18. Modification of towers.
A. That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall
not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure by
more than 20 feet; and
B. That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are set
back one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in
height above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This
setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities
and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna
support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from
view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening
techniques approved by the Village. Setback requirements shall not
apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of antenna
support structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude
more than 18 inches from the side of such an antenna support
structure.
A. A tower existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, which was in
compliance with the Village's Code immediately prior to the effective
date of this chapter, may continue in existence as a nonconforming
structure. Such nonconforming structure may be modified or
demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional
requirements of this chapter, except for §§ 272-10, Separation or buffer
requirements, 272-19, Certification and inspections, and 272-20,
Maintenance, provided:
(1) The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole
purpose of accommodating, within six months of the completion of
the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications
facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the
discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person
currently installed on the tower.
(2) An application for a special use permit is made to the Board of
Trustees which shall have the authority to issue a special use
permit without further approval. The grant of a special use permit
pursuant to this section allowing the modification or demolition and
rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be considered
a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower
is conforming.
(3) The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications
facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height
allowed under this chapter.
§ 272-17 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-18
272:301
§ 272-19. Certifications and inspections.
§ 272-20. Maintenance.
B. Except as provided in this chapter, a nonconforming structure or use
may not be enlarged, increased in size, or discontinued in use for a
period of more than 180 days. This chapter shall not be interpreted to
legalize any structure or use existing at the time this chapter is adopted
which structure or use is in violation of the Village Code prior to
enactment of this chapter.
A. All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and
in conformance with the requirements of the Building Code and all
other construction standards set forth by the Village's Code and federal
and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be
submitted with an application pursuant to § 272-6 of this chapter and
every five years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification
shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter
and then every two years thereafter. The tower owner may be required
by the Village to submit more frequent certifications should there be
reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower
is jeopardized.
B. The Village or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property
upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and
certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of
determining whether it complies with the Village Code and all other
construction standards provided by the Village Code and federal and
state law.
C. The Village reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such
inspections by the Village shall be borne by the tower owner.
D. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter 272, the Village shall be
reimbursed by the applicant for the work of professionals relating to the
review and study of each application to the Board of Trustees. The
applicant shall not be responsible for non-overtime work of employees
of the Village. The Village may obtain an expert to evaluate the data
submitted by each applicant in support of a special permit.
A. Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
B. Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code
and all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will
not interfere with the use of other property.
§ 272-18 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-20
272:302
§ 272-21. Criteria for site plan development modifications.
C. All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life
or property of any person.
D. All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications
facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
E. All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission
standards of the FCC.
F. In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner,
the tower owner shall provide written notice to the Village of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
A. Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this chapter, a
modification to the requirements may be approved by the Board of
Trustees as a conditional use in accordance with the following:
(1) In addition to the requirement for a tower application, the
application for modification shall include the following:
(a) Description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that
might occur as a result of approving the modification.
(b) A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any
adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the
modification.
(c) A technical study that documents and supports the criteria
submitted by the applicant upon which the request for
modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by
an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts
related to the proposed modification and its relationship to
surrounding rights-of-way and properties.
(d) For a modification of the setback requirement, the application
shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower
could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and
negotiate an agreement for collocation, and the result of such
attempts.
(e) The Board of Trustees may require the application to be
reviewed by an independent engineer under contract to the
Village to determine whether the antenna study supports the
basis for the modification requested. The costs of the review by
the Village's Engineer shall be reimbursed to the Village by the
applicant.
§ 272-20 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-21
272:303
(2) The Board of Trustees shall consider the application for
modification based on the following criteria:
(a) That the tower as modified will be compatible with and not
adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding
properties.
(b) Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse
impacts, if any, created by the modification.
(c) In addition, the Board of Trustees may include conditions on
the site where the tower is to be located if such conditions are
necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the
neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and mitigate
any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the
approval of the modification.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A of this section, in the
following cases, the applicant must also demonstrate, with written
evidence, the following:
(1) In the case of a requested modification to the setback
requirements, § 272-8, that the setback requirement cannot be met
on the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be
located and the alternative for the applicant is to locate the tower
at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned
land.
(2) In the case of a requested modification to the separation and buffer
requirements from other towers of § 272-10, that the proposed site
is zoned "industrial" or "heavy industrial" and the proposed site is
at least the double minimum standard for separation from
residentially zoned lands as provided for in § 272-10.
(3) In the case of a requested modification of the separation and buffer
requirements from residentially zoned land of § 272-10, if the
person provides written technical evidence from an engineer that
the proposed tower and telecommunications facilities must be
located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage
requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system
and if the person is willing to create approved landscaping and
other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially
zoned property.
(4) In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for
towers and telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height
requirements for antenna support structures, that the modification
is necessary to facilitate collocation of telecommunications
facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower or to meet
the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless
communications system, which requirements must be documented
with written technical evidence from an engineer that
§ 272-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 272-21
272:304
§ 272-22. Abandonment.
§ 272-23. Severability.
If any clause, section, or other part of this chapter shall be held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this chapter shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 272-24. Repealer.
All local laws or parts of local laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 272-25. Signs and advertising on towers.
The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited.
§ 272-26. Waiver.
The Board of Trustees may waive any of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 272-27. Compliance with other laws.
The operator of every tower, antenna and accessory structure shall submit
to the Village Clerk copies of all licenses and permits required by other
demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is the minimum
height required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller
than such minimum height shall be approved.
A. If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days,
the Board of Trustees shall notify the owner, with a copy to the
applicant, that the site will be subject to a determination by the Board
of Trustees that such site has been abandoned. The owner shall have 30
days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the tower has been in use or under repair during the
period. If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or
under repair during the period, the Board of Trustees shall issue a final
determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final
determination of abandonment, the owner shall, within 75 days,
dismantle and remove the tower.
B. In the event a tower is not removed within the relevant time period, the
tower and associated facilities may be removed by the Village and the
costs of removal assessed against the owner.
C. Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within six months of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the
issuance of a new special use permit.
§ 272-21 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 272-27
272:305
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of such tower, antenna and accessory structure and
shall maintain such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal
or extension thereof when granted.
§ 272-28. Assignment of permit.
Every special use permit granting approval of an antenna, tower or
accessory structure shall state that any assignment or transfer of the
special use permit or of any rights thereunder may be made only with the
approval of the Village.
§ 272-29. Review of special use permit.
The special use permit shall be subject to review by the Board of Trustees
at five-year intervals to determine the following:
§ 272-30. Fees.
Upon initial application for a special use permit for the maintenance of a
tower, antenna or accessory structure pursuant to this chapter, and upon
subsequent renewals of such special use permit, the applicant shall pay a
fee to the Village as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
§ 272-31. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 274
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 192.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
special sales — See Ch. 268.
A. Whether the technology in the provision of personal wireless services
has changed such that the necessity for the special use permit at the
time of its approval has been eliminated or modified; and
B. Whether the special use permit should be modified or terminated as a
result of any such change.
§ 272-27 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-1
274:306
§ 274-1. Statutory authorization.
Pursuant to the provisions of the New York State Constitution, the
Municipal Home Rule Law, the Suburban Town Law, the General Municipal
Law, the Town Law and the Village Law, all as amended, the Board of
Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park is empowered to
enact local laws and ordinances licensing and regulating occupations and
the conduct of business to protect and promote the health, safety, morals
or the general welfare of the community. Therefore, the Village Board of
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park enacts this chapter, entitled
"Secondhand Dealers."
§ 274-2. Findings of fact.
A. There is no control in the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
governing the activities of those persons engaged in the business of
buying and selling secondhand merchandise. Some of these dealers
represent to those persons involved in crime an opportunity to dispose
of stolen property. If the law enforcement agencies are to function, an
ordinance regulating these secondhand establishments is necessary.
B. The ease with which some secondhand dealers buy and dispose of
personal property indicates the need for the enactment of laws to
control and regulate their everyday business transactions. A few of the
dealers require scant or, very often, no identification when purchasing
personal property, and rarely, if ever, is proof of ownership requested.
C. It is a fact that secondhand dealers are not required, at the present
time, to forward reports of acquired used property to many of the police
agencies. With the passage of this chapter, reports would be required
from dealers in secondhand jewelry, marine equipment, antiques,
cameras, coins, stamps, musical instruments, firearms and televisions,
as well as stereophonic equipment. As a result of the reporting, there
would be a marked increase in the number of restitutions for the sole
reason that now these merchants would be committed to keeping
accurate records of the used property purchased and disposed of, by
forwarding the proper reports to the police, on a daily basis, at the close
of each business day.
D. This problem involving stolen property is not confined solely to the
small dealers. Some of the very largest retailers in the nation, those
whose stores are located in the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park, buy large quantities of old gold, jewelry and diamonds and
forward not one single report of purchase to any police agency in the
county. The scope for the exploitation of stolen property is further
broadened due to the operations of these merchandising giants.
E. For small or large business enterprises to be allowed to continue to
operate without laws to control and regulate the purchase of
secondhand articles not only jeopardizes the property rights of many
§ 274-1 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-2
274:307
§ 274-3. Legislative intent.
§ 274-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES — Any person who, in any way, as
principal, broker or agent:
§ 274-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to:
people but also extremely hampers the police agencies in their efforts
to recover stolen property and identify suspects.
A. The security involved in the handling of secondhand property has
become a matter of concern to the police agencies charged with the
duty and responsibility therein.
B. The increase in the incidence of property thefts, the widespread use of
alcohol and drugs, the decline in the value of the dollar, the increase in
the price of gold and diamonds and the specter of inflation, where
barter becomes more of a reality, all point to the imperative that the
best interests of the people of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park would be served by the enactment of this chapter.
C. This chapter will ensure a dramatic rise in the percentage of stolen
property recovered and an increase in the probability that the general
public will receive a fairer deal in their business transactions, and will
better the means to allow the police agencies to obtain more
information necessary to apprehend perpetrators of crimes associated
with the theft of property. Thereby the public health, morals and
general welfare of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park will be
protected and promoted.
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of secondhand articles for any
purpose and of whatever nature, including, but not limited to, old gold
or other precious metals, coins, stamps or currency, firearms, rifles,
shotguns, cameras, business machines, musical instruments, outboard
motors or electronic equipment.
A.
Accepts or receives secondhand articles as returns of merchandise or
in exchange for or for credits on any other articles or merchandise.
B.
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of pawnbroker tickets or
other evidence of pledged articles.
C.
A. Automobiles, pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, artists'
burlaps, paintings, sculpture, drawings, etchings and engravings.
§ 274-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-5
274:308
§ 274-6. Burden of proof of purchase.
The burden of proof that an article was originally purchased from the
person accepting or receiving it, that it was the first subsequent sale or
exchange thereof to a person other than an ultimate consumer or that it
was a first sale at retail of such factory-rebuilt merchandise shall be upon
the person asserting the same. Evidence of an existing trade practice in
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, if any, shall be admissible for
the purpose of determining whether or not merchandise is in new or used
condition.
§ 274-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the rule of
interpretation applicable to remedial legislation shall be used so that the
spirit and intent of this chapter shall be observed. All provisions shall
be considered as minimum requirements and deemed neither to limit nor
repeal any other powers granted to the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park under New York State statutes.
B. The first purchase or sale in the country of any imported secondhand
article.
C. The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a new condition as a
return, exchange or for credit or refund if such merchandise was
originally purchased as new merchandise from the person accepting or
receiving the same, nor to any resale of such merchandise as new
merchandise or the first subsequent nonretail or exchange of such
merchandise as used merchandise.
D. The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a used condition as a
return, trade-in, exchange or for credit or refund if such merchandise
was originally purchased as new merchandise from the person
accepting or receiving the same, nor to the first subsequent non retail
sale or exchange of such merchandise.
E. The first sale, at retail, of merchandise which has been rebuilt by the
manufacturer or vendor originally manufacturing it, or the licensed
agents thereof, and sold as factory-rebuilt merchandise.
F. A thrift shop, as defined to be so classified under the United States
Internal Revenue Code, entitled to an exemption as an eleemosynary
corporation or institution.
G. Antiques, which shall mean secondhand articles over 50 years of age,
having a value of less than $250 and void of any means of identification.
"Identification" shall mean articles which are serialized,
monogrammed, initialed or distinctly marked.
§ 274-5 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-8
274:309
§ 274-8. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park, its officers, agents or employees, the Nassau
County Police Department, its officers, agents or employees for any act or
damage caused as a result of reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 274-9. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a dealer in secondhand articles
without a license therefor.
§ 274-10. Types of licenses.
§ 274-11. Bond.
A. There shall be three types of licenses:
(1) A general license.
(2) A management license.
(3) An exposition license.
B. A general license shall authorize the licensee to act as a secondhand
dealer with respect to all articles other than secondhand automobiles
within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park during the license
period specified in § 274-13A of this chapter.
C. A management license shall authorize the licensee who is not a dealer
in antiques or unique secondhand articles to operate and manage an
antique or unique secondhand articles exposition where such antiques
or unique secondhand articles are sold at any fair, show or exhibit or
any place where this merchandise is offered for sale within the
incorporated Village of Massapequa Park during a period of one month
from the date of issuance of such license.
D. An exposition license shall authorize a dealer in antiques or unique
secondhand articles who maintains no place of business within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to exhibit and sell such
articles at any fair, show or exposition within the Incorporated Village
of Massapequa Park during a period of one month from the date of
issuance of such license.
A. Each dealer securing a general license shall furnish a bond to the
incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, with sufficient surety to be
approved by the Village Clerk in the penal sum of $2,000, conditioned
for the due observance of the ordinance relating to such dealers.
B. Each manager of an antique or unique articles exposition shall furnish a
bend to the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, with sufficient
surety to be approved by the Village Clerk in the penal sum of $2,000,
§ 274-8 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-11
274:310
§ 274-12. License fees.99
§ 274-13. License regulations.
§ 274-14. Application for license.
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Village Clerk
of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park an application, supplied by
the Village Clerk, containing the following information:
conditioned for the due observance of the ordinance relating to dealers
who are exhibitors at the exposition.
A. The general or management license fee shall be as provided in Chapter
A350, Fees, except that any license applied for after January 1 shall be
at the half-yearly rate provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
B. The exposition license fee shall be as provided in Chapter A350, Fees,
except that any license applied for after January 1 shall be at the halfyearly
rate provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
A. All general licenses shall expire on the first day of June next succeeding
the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked or suspended. A
new application for a license must be made yearly if the licensee desires
to continue such activity.
B. All licenses shall be placed and at all times displayed in a conspicuous
place at the licensee's place of activity or business for which it is issued.
C. All licenses are personal with the licensees. It does not go with title to
the land nor may it be sold, assigned, transferred or disposed of.
D. Any license may be revoked or suspended by the Village Board of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park after a hearing thereon
pursuant to the provisions of § 274-28 herein, at which time the licensee
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
E. The granting, refusal, revocation or suspension of any license by the
Village Board shall be subject to review by certiorari after applicant or
licensee has exhausted all administrative remedies.
A. The name and description of the applicant. Individuals operating under
a trade name must present a certified copy of the trade name certificate
filed in the Nassau County Clerk's office. A partnership conducting
business, whether or not under a trade name, must submit a certified
copy of the partnership certificate filed in the Nassau County Clerk's
office when partnership was formed. A corporation must furnish a
photostatic copy of the filing receipt for the certificate of incorporation
from the New York State Secretary of State. A corporation from outside
New York State must furnish a photostatic copy of its application for
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-11 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-14
274:311
§ 274-15. Issuance of license.
authority to do business in New York State from the New York State
Secretary of State.
B. The address of applicant (local and legal).
C. That the applicant is of legal age.
D. That the applicant is a citizen of the United States and whether
citizenship was obtained by birth or naturalization. If by naturalization,
the date and place where obtained shall be provided. The naturalization
certificate or permanent Board of Elections personal registration card
may be used as proof of citizenship.
E. A statement as to whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of
or is now under charge of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor, and such other facts or evidence as is
deemed necessary to establish that the applicant is a person fit and
capable of properly conducting the activity or business for which the
license is sought.
F. A description of the exact type of business the applicant intends to
conduct.
G. The name and address of the owner or owners of the land and the
nature of the right of occupancy of the applicant to the use of such land.
H. Two photographs of the applicant, taken not more than 60 days prior to
the filing of the application, which photographs shall be two inches by
two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear
and distinguishing manner.
I. If applicant is a corporation, the name, address and title of the officer of
the corporation upon whom process or other legal notice may be
served.
J. A copy of the applicant's fingerprints shall be mailed to the Division of
Criminal Justice Services, Albany, New York, requesting a fingerprint
search. The Village Clerk shall secure from the applicant the required
fee in the form of a check or money order made payable to the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
A. Upon receipt of the license application and upon the approval by the
Village Clerk of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park and the
payment of the prescribed fees and bonds required of the applicant, the
Village Clerk shall prepare and deliver to the applicant his license.
B. Every license issued hereunder shall be signed at the direction and in
the name of the Village Clerk and sealed with the Seal of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 274-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-15
274:312
§ 274-16. Reasons for denial of license.
No license shall be granted under this chapter to any dealer in secondhand
articles:
§ 274-17. Reports to Nassau County Police Commissioner.
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall furnish to the Police
Commissioner of Nassau County or his agent, at such times, in such manner
and at such intervals as shall be specified by the Police Commissioner, all
information requested by the Police Commissioner relative to all records
required to be kept under this chapter. Such information shall be supplied
on forms to be designated and supplied by the Police Commissioner. Duly
licensed dealers in antiques shall furnish daily reports of purchases or
secondhand articles within 72 hours.
§ 274-18. Unlawful acts.
C. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued as well as any
other matters herein described.
A. Who has been convicted of any offense which, under the laws of the
State of New York, constitutes a crime involving moral turpitude.
B. Who has been found by any court of the state to have practiced any
fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in the conduct of the secondhand
dealer business unless the Village Clerk, after Village Board of Trustees
approval, shall decide in any particular case upon the facts there
presented that it is proper to issue the license applied for.
C. Whose license under this chapter has been revoked at any time during
the year prior to the time of the application for the license.
D. Whose license has been suspended under this chapter and the period of
such suspension has not expired at the time of this application for the
license.
A. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to engage in
selling activities at any place other than the place of business
designated in such license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to purchase
any secondhand goods or things from any person whom he knows to be
or has reason to believe is a minor.
C. With the exception of duly licensed dealers in antiques, it shall be
unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to purchase any
secondhand goods or articles from any person between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to sell or
dispose of any secondhand articles, except articles purchased from
§ 274-15 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-18
274:313
§ 274-19. New articles to be labeled.
Every person licensed as a dealer in secondhand articles who also sells
new articles within the licensed premises shall label all new articles in such
manner that the public will be informed of the nature of such articles.
§ 274-20. Lost or stolen articles.
another secondhand dealer duly licensed by the Incorporated Village
of Massapequa Park, until the expiration of 15 business days after the
acquisition by such dealer of such articles. Duly licensed dealers in
antiques may sell or dispose of secondhand articles during a period
of time prior to the expiration of the said 15 days mentioned above,
provided that the required record of purchases and sales is met
pursuant to § 274-21.
E. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to be licensed
as a pawnbroker or to engage in the business of a pawnbroker; nor shall
any sign or emblem be displayed by any such dealer in or about the
premises where such business is conducted which in any way resembles
the sign or emblem commonly used by pawnbrokers or which is
intended to give the appearance that the business conducted on such
premises is, or is connected with, the business of a pawnbroker.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer to
deal in the purchase or sale of any junk, old rope, old iron, brass,
copper. tin, lead, rubber, paper, rags, bagging, slush or empty bottles,
or employ or use a boat, cart or other vehicle for the purpose of
collecting any such things or materials, unless he is also licensed as a
junk dealer therefor as provided for in and pursuant to Chapter 192 of
this Code, entitled "Junk Dealers," of the Village of Massapequa Park.100
A. If any articles shall be advertised in any newspaper printed in the
County of Nassau as having been lost or stolen and if any goods or
articles answering such advertised description or any part thereof shall
be in or come into the possession of any dealer in secondhand articles,
upon receiving actual written or oral notice of the similarity of
description of such articles, such dealer shall immediately give
information relating thereto to the Police Commissioner of Nassau
County or his agent. No disposition of such articles shall be effected
until authorization to do so shall be given to such dealer by the Police
Commissioner or his authorized agent. A dealer in secondhand articles,
when notified by the Nassau County Commissioner of Police or his
agent that property in his possession is stolen or alleged to be stolen,
shall take immediate steps to secure that property, and it shall be
marked "police stop." Thereafter, such property shall not be sold or
removed from the premises until notification is made to the dealer in
writing by the Police Commissioner of Nassau County or his agent,
allowing such removal or sale.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-18 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-20
274:314
§ 274-21. Recordkeeping; inspections.
B. Every dealer in secondhand articles who shall have or receive any
articles alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen shall exhibit the
same, on demand, to the Commissioner of Police of Nassau County or
any authorized inspector of licenses, to any police officer or to any
person duly authorized in writing by the Commissioner of Police to
examine such articles, who shall exhibit such written authority to the
dealer.
A. Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a bound book, in a form
prescribed by the Commissioner of Police of Nassau County, of
consecutively numbered transactions, in which shall be legibly written
in English, at the time of every purchase or sale to or from a person
other than a dealer in secondhand articles, a description of every
secondhand article so purchased or sold, the number or numbers and
any monograms, inscriptions or other marks of identification that may
appear on such article, a description of the articles or pieces
comprising old gold, silver, platinum, other metals or coins, stamps or
currency and any monogram, inscription or marks of identification
thereon, the name and residence address of the person from whom
such purchase was made and the day and hour of the purchase.
B. Every dealer in secondhand articles who receives secondhand articles
on consignment shall keep a record, in the above prescribed book,
describing the articles and the name and description of the person or
dealer from whom such items are received.
C. As between dealers, all transactions shall be recorded in the aboveprescribed
book and legible records kept describing the articles,
including a detailed description of all jewelry and costume jewelry.
D. Such books shall be kept on the business premises of the secondhand
dealership or at the place designated on the duly approved license, at
all times during normal business hours. Such books shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer, to the Commissioner of Police of Nassau
County or any inspector of licenses or to any person duly authorized in
writing for such purposes by the Commissioner of Police of Nassau
County, who shall exhibit such written authority to the dealer.
E. Duly licensed dealers in antique articles shall keep a record of bulk
purchases in the bound book, noting the invoice number on each bulk
purchase. All identifiable secondhand articles which are part of the bulk
purchase shall be entered individually in the ledger book and reported
individually to the Nassau County Police Commissioner within 72 hours
after such bulk purchase.
F. Every dealer in secondhand articles shall make available all business
premises and any and all rooms or portions of rooms thereof of the
secondhand dealership at all times during normal business hours and
all articles therein pertaining to the said business for inspection by the
§ 274-20 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-21
274:315
§ 274-22. Identification of sellers.
§ 274-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
14-1994]
Commissioner of Police of Nassau County or any inspector of licenses
or any person duly authorized in writing for such purposes by the
Commissioner of Police of Nassau County, who shall exhibit such
written authority to the dealer.
A. It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to verify the identity of
every person from whom he purchases an article and to make and keep
a written record of the nature of the evidence submitted by such person
to prove his identity.
B. Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
(1) Any official document, except a social security account number
card, issued by the United States government, any state, county,
municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or
department thereof or any public or private employer, which
requires and bears the signature of the person to whom issued.
(2) Other identification documentation which, under the
circumstances of any particular purchase, would lead a reasonable
man to believe such to be accurate and reliable when identification
under Subsection B(1) hereof is not available.
C. It shall be the duty of every dealer in secondhand articles to require
that every person from whom an article is purchased sign his name in
the presence of the secondhand dealer and to compare the signature
with the signature on the identifying document, if any, and retain on his
premises the person's signature, together with the number and
description of the identifying document, if any.
A. A failure to comply with the provisions of § 274-9 hereof, entitled
"License required," shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of up to the maximum fine allowed by law or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. A failure to comply with any other section or sections of this chapter
shall constitute a violation and shall be punishable by a fine up to the
maximum fine allowed by law or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
continuation of an offense shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation hereunder for each day the offense is continued.
C. In addition to the penalties provided above, any offense against the
provisions of this chapter shall subject the person committing the
offense to a civil penalty for each day that the offense shall continue,
collectible by and in the name of the Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 274-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-23
274:316
§ 274-24. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the County of Nassau to require
any person seen dealing in secondhand articles and who is not known by
such police officer to be duly licensed, to produce or display his secondhand
dealer's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any
person found to be violating the same.
§ 274-25. Report of violations.
The Village Clerk of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park shall
record all convictions for violations of this chapter which are officially
brought to his attention by any authorized agency or person.
§ 274-26. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 274-27. Appeals.
D. Conviction of any person or persons for any offense against the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute and effect an immediate
forfeiture of any and all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter to said
person or persons.
E. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Village
Board also may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Village of Massapequa Park in a court of competent jurisdiction to
compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to restrain by
injunction an offense against this chapter.
A. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Village Clerk, after notice, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Any violation of this chapter.
(3) Conviction of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude.
(4) Conducting the activity as a dealer in secondhand articles in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Notice of revocation or suspension of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint. Such notice shall
be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address, in
accordance with §§ 274-14 and 274-18 hereof.
A. The holder of any license which has been suspended or revoked and any
applicant who shall have been denied a license under this chapter may
§ 274-23 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 274-27
274:317
§ 274-28. Hearings.
Whenever it shall be provided herein that a hearing shall or may be held
with respect to any matter:
Chapter 276
apply for a review of the action of the Village Clerk as hereinafter
provided:
(1) Such application shall be in writing, signed and acknowledged by
the applicant, and shall state the ground or grounds on which the
applicant claims that the determination of the Village Clerk was
erroneous.
(2) Such application shall be filed with the Village Clerk by the
applicant within 20 days after notice of denial of his application or
notice or suspension or revocation of his permit by the Village
Clerk has been mailed to him or delivered to him in person.
(3) Upon the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held thereon
pursuant to the provisions of § 274-28 hereof.
(4) At such hearing the Review Board shall consider the applicant's
application upon the record before the Village Clerk in connection
with the Village Clerk's consideration thereof and, in its discretion,
receive new or additional evidence in support thereof or in
opposition thereto.
B. The Review Board, after such hearing, may affirm the action of the
Village Clerk or direct the Village Clerk to issue a proper license
pursuant to this chapter.
A. Such hearing shall be held on a date, at a place and hour designated by
the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The Village Clerk shall give notice thereof stating the name and address
of the applicant or license holder concerned, the subject matter of the
hearing and the date, place and hour thereof designated therefor, by
mailing a copy thereof to the applicant or license holder concerned at
the address shown on the most recent application of such applicant or
licensee, at least 10 days before such hearing.
C. If an applicant or licensee requests a hearing, the Village Board shall
designate two or more members of the Village Board to conduct said
hearing as a Review Board.
D. The applicant or license holder involved shall be entitled to be
represented by legal counsel and to present such competent and
material testimony or other evidence in his own behalf as may be
relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
E. All witnesses shall be sworn and examined under oath.
§ 274-27 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 274-28
276:318
SECURITY GATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enclosed garages — See Ch. 170. Property maintenance — See Ch. 254.
§ 276-1. Exterior security gates prohibited.
No owner or occupant of any commercial property shall install or maintain
or cause to be installed or maintained on any building or structure within
the Village of Massapequa Park a security gate of any make, manufacture,
design or material, including but not limited to gates or doors more
commonly referred to as "roll-up gates," "roll-up doors," "roll-up grilles,"
"roll-up shutters," "rolling doors" or "folding gates."
§ 276-2. Interior security gates; approval required.
No owner or occupant of any commercial property shall install or maintain
or cause to be installed or maintained in the interior of any building or
structure within the Village of Massapequa Park a security gate of any
make, manufacture, design or material unless such gate shall first be
approved by the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 279
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 274-28 SECURITY GATES § 276-2
276:319

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 3-23-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
§ 279-1. Findings; legislative authority; intent.
§ 279-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOMICLE — A person's true, fixed permanent home or fixed place of
habitation.
PARK — Any park, playground, athletic field, swimming pool operated by
the Village of Massapequa Park, the Massapequa School District, the
County of Nassau, the Town of Oyster Bay or the State of New York or any
other municipality.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — A sex offender who is required to register
with the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, or other
A. The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
("Village Board") recognizes that the Sex Offender Registration Act,
New York's version of Megan's Law (Correction Law Article 6-C), has
increased public awareness of sex offenders by requiring them to
become registered with authorities and making such information
available to the public.
B. The Village Board finds that registered sex offenders pose a significant
threat to the health and safety of the community and especially to
children, whose age and inexperience make them particularly
vulnerable to the heinous and reprehensible acts of these offenders.
The Village Board also finds that the rate of recidivism is high, and
programs designed to treat and rehabilitate these types of offenders
have been largely ineffective. The Village Board further finds that
restricting registered sex offenders from residing in close proximity to
places where children are likely to congregate is likely to reduce the
opportunity and temptation for, and can minimize the risk of, repeated
acts against minors.
C. It is the intention of the Village Board to exercise its authority pursuant
to Article IX of the New York State Constitution and § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law to protect and safeguard the lives and wellbeing
of the community, especially minors, from registered sexual
offenders by prohibiting registered sex offenders from residing in close
proximity to places where children could naturally congregate, such as
schools and parks.
D. This article is intended to create a civil, nonpunitive regulatory scheme
in order to protect minors to the extent possible under the
circumstances and not as a punitive measure of any kind.
§ 279-1 SECURITY GATES § 279-2
276:321
agency having jurisdiction pursuant to the provision of Article 6-C of the
Correction Law of the State of New York or other applicable or successor
law, whether or not the sex offender has actually registered in compliance
with the law of the court of competent jurisdiction.
RESIDENCE — The place where a person sleeps, which may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SCHOOL — A building or property, the principal purpose and use of which
is as a place of education, including, but not limited to, public or private
preschool, elementary and secondary schools, vocational schools and other
non-degree-granting schools, including self-defense, dance, swimming,
gymnastics and similar instruction/programs.
§ 279-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any registered sex offender to establish a residence
or domicle within a one-mile radius of:
§ 279-4. Notice; relocation required.
Any registered sex offender who establishes a residence or domicile in
violation of the residency restrictions set forth in § 279-3 of this article shall
have 30 days from receipt of a written notice from the Village Clerk to
relocate to a location which does not violate the restrictions set forth in
§ 279-3 of this article.
§ 279-5. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to a registered sex offender if that person is
required to be domiciled at a location fixed by an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction or by any federal, state of county agency having
jurisdiction thereof.
§ 279-6. (Reserved)101
§ 279-7. Administration and enforcement.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be
administered and enforced on behalf of the Board of Trustees by the
Building Inspector and by the Nassau County Police Department.
A. Any school and park.
B. Another registered sex offender.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 279-6, Exemptions, was repealed 8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012.
§ 279-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 279-8
276:322
§ 279-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of § 279-3 of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of up to $2,500. Each and every day a
violation exists or continues shall be a separate violation.
§ 279-9. Village not liable.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any civil or criminal
liability upon, or give rise to a course of action against, the Village of
Massapequa Park or to any official, employee or department of the Village
for failing to act in accordance with this article.
§ 279-10. Severability. [Added 8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the article.
§ 279-8 SECURITY GATES § 279-10
276:323
Chapter 282
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Abandoned property — See Ch. 252.
§ 282-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning or meanings indicated:
CART — A hand-drawn or -pushed cart or wheeled container made of metal,
wood or other material, such as generally provided by merchants for the use
of their customers carting or carrying goods, wares and merchandise.
PERSON — A person of either sex, corporation, partnership, association,
joint-stock company, society and any other entity capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any park, square, culvert, stream, stream bed, field,
woodland, lawn, parking area or lot, building, structure, entity or any other
place or location owned by or under the control or supervision of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
STREET — Any street, avenue, highway, thoroughfare, lane, alley, path,
stairway, concourse, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk, parking area or lot open to
the public or used by the public within the Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 282-2. Discarding and abandonment; possession.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or abandon any cart upon
any street or upon any public property or to suffer or permit any cart to
be discarded or abandoned upon any street or upon any public property,
whether such cart is owned by him or her or is in his or her possession,
custody or control, or to have in his or her possession any cart which is not
his or her property or to which said individual has no right to possession
or custody, which cart is in excess of 500 feet from the actual store or
business premises which owns the cart or which store or business premises
has custody or right to said cart or carts.
§ 282-3. Presumption of abandonment; notification of owner.
A. Any cart left unattended on any street or upon any public or private
property where there is no person present who has actual physical
custody or control of the cart shall be deemed to have been discarded or
abandoned within the meaning of this chapter. Any cart in the physical
custody or control of a person which cart is left unattended on private
property and which cart is clearly in the ownership of some individual
or entity other than the person on whose property the cart is located,
§ 279-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 282-3
282:324
§ 282-4. Removal from owner's premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart, as herein defined,
from the property of any business or enterprise without the express written
consent of the owner, where said cart is in excess of 500 feet from the actual
store or business premises which owns the cart.
§ 282-5. Situations deemed violations.
There shall be a violation of this chapter when a cart or carts is or are
abandoned or discarded in excess of 500 feet from the actual store or
business premises which owns or has legal possession of said cart or carts
and where a cart has been abandoned or discarded on private property
where the ownership or legal possession of said cart or carts is clearly other
than the person on whose property said cart or carts are located.
§ 282-6. Impoundment.
The village may remove or cause to be removed any cart abandoned or
discarded on any street or public or private property and shall take the
same or cause the same to be taken to property or premises of the village,
where the same shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of
as provided in this chapter.
§ 282-7. Notice of impoundment.
Whenever a cart that has been impounded contains sufficient information
with which to identify the owner or the person having the right of
possession thereof, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail no later than the
14th day following the date of impoundment (holidays excluded) to such
person, advising such person that the cart has been impounded, where
the cart is being stored, the amount of money and procedure necessary to
redeem the cart from impoundment and the date after which the cart, if
it has not been redeemed, can be sold at public auction pursuant to this
chapter. If any impounded cart does not contain identification sufficient to
shall be deemed to have been discarded or abandoned within the
meaning of this chapter.
B. The village shall notify the owner of the cart, if the owner can be
ascertained, of the location of the cart and give the owner an
opportunity to pick up the cart within 24 hours of the notification to the
owner. If the cart is not picked up by the owner, then the village can
pick up the cart and deposit the same in a village facility or a facility
under the supervision of the village.
C. With respect to any cart which has been abandoned or discarded upon
any street or any public property, the owner of the cart shall be deemed
to have suffered or permitted the cart to have been discarded or
abandoned. If the ownership of the cart cannot be ascertained, then the
cart shall have been deemed to have been discarded and abandoned.
§ 282-3 SHOPPING CARTS § 282-7
282:325
determine its owner or the person having the right of possession thereto,
no such notice is required to be sent; however, the provisions of § 282-9
relating to the sale of unredeemed carts must be complied with with respect
to any such cart.
§ 282-8. Redemption of impounded carts.
Any impounded cart may be redeemed by the owner or by such other
person having the right of possession thereto at any time prior to the
sale, destruction, disposal or other disposition of the cart by the Village of
Massapequa Park, upon paying the sum of $25. No cart shall be delivered to
a person seeking to redeem the same unless satisfactory proof establishing
such person's ownership or right of possession is submitted and proven. If
the name of the entity, supermarket or store is on said shopping cart, that
shall be sufficient proof of that particular entity, supermarket or store. Any
delivery to a person apparently entitled thereto shall be a valid and good
defense for the village against any other person or entity claiming to be
entitled to said cart or carts. Any and all redemption of any cart or carts
must occur prior to the legal advertisement for the auction of said cart or
carts.
§ 282-9. Sale of unredeemed carts.
When a sufficient number of carts have been accumulated by the village
or are in the custody of the village and if no person or entity has paid
the required redemption fee and/or established his, her or its ownership
or right of possession, it shall then be within the discretion of the Village
Administrator or his designee, on behalf of the Village of Massapequa Park,
to publish notice in a newspaper distributed in the Village of Massapequa
Park, advising that at a stated time and place, not less than seven days after
such notice is made public, such cart or carts shall be sold at public auction
for the best price obtained. A general description in such notice of the cart
or carts to be sold shall be sufficient. If more than one cart is to be sold at
the same time and place, this section shall be satisfied by publication of one
legal notice, provided that the aforesaid cart(s) to be sold is/are generally
described therein. This section shall not preclude the Village of Massapequa
Park from also giving notice of any sale by any other means, as long as the
provisions in this section are complied with.
§ 282-10. Disposition of unsold carts.
If any impounded cart is not sold at public auction, the village may reoffer
it for sale at any subsequent public auction held pursuant to this chapter
or dismantle, destroy or otherwise sell or dispose of such cart or carts. Any
sale or disposition of a cart pursuant to this chapter shall be without any
liability on the part of the Village of Massapequa Park to the owner or other
person lawfully entitled thereto or having any interest therein.
§ 282-7 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 282-11
282:326
§ 282-11. Proceeds of sale of unredeemed carts.
Upon redemption or sale of a cart or carts, the proceeds shall be deposited
in the general fund of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park and
used as a part thereof.
§ 282-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
15-1994]
Any person or entity who shall violate any section of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine up to the maximum fine allowed by
law. Each violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a separate offense,
punishable as provided in this section. Any person who shall violate § 282-4
of this chapter, upon conviction or by pleading guilty, shall be subject to a
minimum mandatory fine of $25.
§ 282-13. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property other than
a shopping cart or carts which come into the possession or custody of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park pursuant to any other ordinance,
law or regulation.
Chapter 286
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 64.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 282-11 SIGNS § 282-13
286:327

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 286-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate existing and proposed signs in
order to:
§ 286-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as set forth:
FRONT OR FACE OF A BUILDING — The outer surface of the building
abutting or fronting upon any street or public highway.
OBSCENE — Objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, companies and all other entities of any kind capable of suing
or being sued.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is erected or maintained over any
street, sidewalk, alley, highway or vehicle.
SIGN or SIGNS — Any material, including paper, cloth, wood, aluminum,
plastic and canvas; structure or device for visual communication composed
of lettered or pictorial matter or upon which lettered or pictorial matter is
placed, which is used outside of or on the exterior of any building, structure
or vehicle for display of an advertisement, announcement, notice, banner,
logo, flag, directional matter or name, and includes, but is not limited to,
signs, billboards, signboards, illuminated signs, neon tube or ground signs,
but does not include signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in the
discharge of any governmental function.
§ 286-3. General regulations.
A. Preserve the aesthetic value of the property in the Incorporated Village
of Massapequa Park.
B. Enhance and protect the physical appearance and environment of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
C. Preserve the scenic and natural beauty of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park.
D. Provide for a more enjoyable and pleasing community.
E. Reduce sign and advertising distractions and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic, congestion and/or accidents.
F. Reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting
over public rights-of-way.
G. Reduce hazards to bicyclists and pedestrians that may be caused from
signs being placed on or around sidewalks or streets.
§ 286-1 SIGNS § 286-3
286:329
§ 286-4. Permit required.
A. No sign shall be constructed, maintained, placed, erected or located
which shall obstruct the visibility with respect to the safety of the
motorist or pedestrian proceeding along the public way or entering or
leaving a lot or driveway.
B. There shall be no illuminated signs allowed in residential districts in the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
C. Any illuminated sign or lighting device for the sign in business districts
only shall employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity and
shall contain no lights other than those necessary for the illumination of
the script. No sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing,
intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights or moving or movable
components. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device, in
business districts only, be so placed or directed so as to permit the
beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a
public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause
glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
D. No temporary or permanent signs, except directional or traffic signs
placed by the Village of Massapequa Park or any other governmental
entity, shall be permitted on public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way.
E. Nonilluminated directional signs are permitted on any lot in business
districts, provided that such sign or signs shall not exceed 15 inches in
length and 15 inches in height and that the number of such signs on the
lot shall not exceed the number of approved ingresses and egresses
thereon. The top of the sign shall not extend beyond the top of the pole,
which pole shall not be any higher than four feet from the ground.
F. No billboards shall be allowed.
G. The carrying or placement of commercial advertising signs or sandwich
menu signs on the sidewalks, streets and/or vehicles is hereby
prohibited.
H. Any sign authorized in this chapter is allowed to contain noncommercial
copy in lieu of any other copy.
A. No sign shall be placed or maintained in public view within the
residential districts until a permit has been duly issued upon
application therefor to the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. No more than one sign permit shall be in effect at any one time for a
single parcel of property unless the property contains an identification
sign or professional sign as set forth in Article II of this chapter.
C. The Building Department shall require that the application for a permit
indicate the proposed location of the sign, which shall in no case be
§ 286-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 286-4
286:330
§ 286-5. Application for permit.
Any person or persons or legal entity desiring to procure a permit for a sign
shall file with the Building Department a written application which shall
contain:
§ 286-6. Fees.103
The fee for a permit for the placement of signs upon property within the
residential districts within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park
shall be at a level fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees. Said fee shall be submitted by the applicant at the time the
application is submitted to the Building Department.
§ 286-7. Size of signs.
No sign that is larger than 15 inches in length and 15 inches in height shall
be placed in a residential district. The Building Department or authorized
village official shall order the immediate removal of any sign in a residential
district that exceeds such 15 inches in length and 15 inches in height. The
top of the sign shall not extend beyond the top of the pole, which pole shall
not be any higher than four feet from the ground.
§ 286-8. Removal of signs.
further than three feet from the dwelling or building line in residential
districts.
D. (Reserved)102
E. Permits shall expire 60 days following the date of issuance but may be
renewed upon written application to the Building Department prior to
the expiration of said permit. The duration of all sign permits may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A. The place and position where the sign is to be located on the building or
on said real property pursuant to the requirements herein stated.
B. Written consent of the owner or owners of the building or structure or
land on which or to which the sign is to be erected.
C. A certification by a licensed electrician in the State of New York when
required by law in a business district.
D. A picture or drawing of said sign must be submitted with the
application for a permit.
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, pertaining to real estate signs, was repealed
6-14-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. A350, Fees.
§ 286-4 SIGNS § 286-8
286:331
§ 286-9. Illumination.
§ 286-10. Unsafe or unlawful signs.
Whenever it shall appear to the Building Inspector or other authorized
village official that any sign has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or is unsafe
and insecure or is in such condition as to be a menace to the safety of
the public, the Building Inspector or other authorized village official shall
thereupon issue or cause to be issued a notice, in writing, to the owner
A. Signs must be removed from the property within 24 hours of the
transfer of the title to the property or the giving of possession of the
property, whichever event first occurs.
B. Any sign which is not in conformity with the village law, as stated in the
Village Code, may be removed by the Building Department or
authorized village official without notice to the property owner or
owner of the sign, and the cost of said removal shall be the obligation of
the property owner and shall be attached to his or her tax rolls if not
paid to the village.
A. There shall be no illumination of signs in residential districts in the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The area, brilliance, character, degree, density, intensity, location and
type of illumination in business districts shall be the minimum
necessary to provide for the security of the property and the safety and
welfare of the public.
C. All sources of illumination on front-lighted signs in business districts
shall be indirect and shall be positioned so that the direct rays of such
sources are cast upon the sign from in front thereof. Such sources of
illumination shall also be shielded so that the direct rays therefrom are
not cast upon any property other than the lot on which such
illumination is situated.
D. Illumination on front-lighted signs in business districts shall be steady
in nature and not flashing or moving or changing in brilliance, color or
intensity.
E. Back-lighted signs in business districts shall have an opaque face; only
the letters and business symbols set forth thereon may consist of
translucent material.
F. Lights and hoods or shields for the lights used to illuminate signs in
business districts are permitted, provided that such light hoods or
shields do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the face of the
building.
G. Neon tubular signs and neon window framing in residential zones are
prohibited. [Amended 12-13-1999 by L.L. No. 13-1999]
§ 286-8 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 286-10
286:332
and/or occupant, informing such person of the violation of this chapter or
the dangerous condition of such sign, and directing him/her to make such
alteration or repair thereto or to do such things or acts as are necessary or
advisable to place such structure in a safe, substantial and secure condition
and to make the same comply with the requirements of this chapter within
such reasonable time as shall be stated in such notice. Upon the failure
to comply with such notice, the Building Inspector or other authorized
village official may cause such sign or such part thereof, as is constructed
or maintained in violation of this chapter, to be removed and may charge
the expense of such removal to the person so notified; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall prevent the Building Inspector or other
authorized village official from adopting such precautionary measures as
may be necessary or advisable in case of imminent danger to place such
sign in a safe condition, the expense of which shall be paid by the owner of
the property on which the sign is located and, if not paid by said owner, the
same shall be added to the tax roll of the premises.
§ 286-11. Illegal or obscene signs.
Illegal or obscene signs are prohibited.
§ 286-10 SIGNS § 286-11
286:333

ARTICLE II
Residential Property
§ 286-12. Regulation of signs in residential districts.
In residential districts, no signs shall be erected or maintained except as
permitted below:
A. Signs customarily incidental to churches and places of worship, public
buildings and structures, parks and playgrounds of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park.
B. Identification signs showing the name and address of the occupants of
the premises or professional signs which shall include the signs of
doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, chiropractors and engineers,
duly licensed by the State of New York only, occupying the premises
which shall not exceed six inches in height and 18 inches in length on a
pole no higher than 48 inches in height. The top of the sign shall not
extend beyond the top of the pole, which pole shall not be any higher
than four feet from the ground.
C. In addition to one identification sign or professional sign, one sign is
allowed for each parcel of land, provided that such sign shall be
attached either to the dwelling or not more than three feet from the
building line and shall not exceed 15 inches in length and 15 inches in
height. The second sign allowed on residential property shall not be
another professional sign or another identification sign.
D. No off-site commercial advertisements are permitted on residential
property.
§ 286-12 SIGNS § 286-12
286:335

ARTICLE III
Business Districts
§ 286-13. Regulation of signs in business districts.
In business districts, no sign shall be erected or maintained unless and until
it complies with the following provisions:
A. No such sign shall be erected on any roof, eaves or extended above a
parapet wall.
B. Such sign must be constructed and maintained flat or parallel with the
building wall to which it is attached and shall not exceed more than 18
inches from such exterior building wall.
C. At any place of business which maintains off-street parking for the use
of its customers, in addition to the signs herein permitted, there may be
one sign indicating the availability of off-street parking for such
customers. Such signs shall not be more than one square foot in area,
with the bottom of the sign no more than five feet above the ground,
provided that no letter on such sign shall be more than six inches in
height or width; such sign shall lie within the property line of the
premises on which the sign is erected; and such sign shall not be so
located so as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition with respect
to traffic. The placement of such sign in a position that makes it difficult
for the drivers of automobiles to read legal signs present on other
premises creates a presumption that such sign is so located as to create
a hazardous or dangerous condition with respect to traffic and its
proper movement at proper speed.
§ 286-13 SIGNS § 286-13
286:337

ARTICLE IV
Safety and Enforcement
§ 286-14. Safety provisions.
§ 286-15. Penalties for offenses.
For each and every failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
the owner of the real property on which a sign not in compliance with
this chapter is placed and the person or persons who placed or assisted
in the placement of the sign on that property in a manner that is not
in compliance with this chapter shall be guilty of a violation against this
chapter, which violation shall be punishable by a mandatory minimum fine
in the amount of $250 for a first offense of this chapter; said person shall
be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of $500 for a second offense of
this chapter; said person shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of
$1,000 for a third offense of this chapter; said person shall be subject to a
mandatory minimum fine of $1,500 for a fourth offense of this chapter. Each
day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and distinct additional
violation.
§ 286-16. (Reserved)
§ 286-17. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector, or other authorized village official, is hereby given
the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 286-18. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed
the local law enacting this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases might be declared
invalid.
A. No signs shall be erected so as to obstruct free egress or ingress from
any window, door, fire escape or sidewalk or so as to become a menace
to life, health or property.
B. Signs affixed to any wall or building shall be securely fastened thereto.
C. All wiring, fittings, materials, electrical or other installation of
illuminated or lighted signs, which are allowed only in business
districts, shall be subject to inspection by and approval of the Building
Inspector or other authorized village official, and shall also be subject
to the written approval of the Building Inspector or other authorized
village official, and shall also be subject to the written approval of a
licensed electrician from the State of New York, if required by law.
§ 286-14 SIGNS § 286-19
286:339
§ 286-19. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately, as provided in the Municipal
Home Rule Law, upon being filed in the office of the Secretary of State.
§ 286-19 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 286-19
286:340
Chapter 287
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental conservation — See Ch. 136.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 287-1. Purpose; jurisdiction.
The intent and purpose of site plan approval is to ensure that any plot of
land affected thereby shall be developed with proper regard for the public
health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience of the public in general and
of the occupants and users of the subject land and buildings in particular.
The authority to grant final site plan approval rests with the Board of
Trustees.
§ 287-2. Applicability; exceptions.
§ 287-3. Sketch plan submission.
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit in any zoning district for: a
new building or structure; or an addition to a building or structure; or
for the alteration of a building or structure for any new land use or any
altered land use activities requiring a variance or a special permit, the
Building Inspector shall require site plan approval in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Exceptions to these requirements are:
(1) Construction of a one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling on a
single plot;
(2) Additions to a one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling;
(3) Permitted accessory buildings or structures to a one-family
dwelling or two-family dwelling; and
(4) Exterior alterations which do not result in any modification or
rearrangement of building coverage or floor area.
B. The Building Inspector shall notify an applicant for a building permit in
each case where site plan approval is required.
A. A sketch plan conference shall be held between the Board of Trustees
and the applicant prior to the preparation and submission of a formal
site plan. The intent of such a conference is to enable the applicant to
inform the Board of Trustees of the proposal prior to the preparation of
a detailed site plan and to provide the Board of Trustees with an
opportunity to review the basic site design concept, to advise the
§ 286-19 SIGNS § 287-3
286:341
§ 287-4. Application for site plan approval.
applicant as to potential problems and concerns and to generally
determine the information to be required on the site plan.
B. In order to accomplish these objectives, the applicant shall provide nine
copies of the following to the Board of Trustees:
(1) A statement and sketch drawn approximately to scale showing the
locations and dimensions of the principal and accessory structures,
parking areas (including ingress and egress and curb cuts), signs
existing and proposed vegetation and other existing topography
and natural features; proposed water supply and sewage and waste
disposal facilities; provision for storm drainage, recreation and
open space; and preliminary zoning calculations.
(2) An area map showing the parcel under consideration for site plan
review and all properties, subdivisions, streets, rights-of-way and
other pertinent features within 300 feet of the boundaries of the
parcel.
(3) An economic analysis of the project indicating, as applicable, such
information as cost of construction and development, proposed
rental or sales prices, market area, cost and manner of providing
public utilities, etc.
C. Notwithstanding Subsections A and B above, the Board of Trustees may
waive requirements of the sketch plan submission, upon the request of
the applicant, where, due to character, size, location or special
circumstances, any particular information or the sketch plan
conference is not required in order for the Board of Trustees to properly
perform site plan review.
D. The submission of documentation for a sketch plan conference shall be
deemed a preliminary submission only and shall not commence the
running of any time periods within which any reviewing agency or body
shall be required to act.
A. Application contents. An application for site plan approval shall be
made in writing to the Building Inspector and shall be accompanied by
supporting information and documentation. If a sketch plan conference
was held, the supporting information shall include the elements
identified by the Board of Trustees at said sketch plan conference. The
site plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer or licensed architect.
In an appropriate case, the Board of Trustees may require that specific
components of the site plan be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect or licensed surveyor. The applicant for site plan approval shall
submit 15 copies, which shall include the following information unless
items(s) are waived by the Board of Trustees.
(1) An area map showing the applicant’s entire holding, that portion of
the applicant’s property under consideration, including any
§ 287-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 287-4
286:342
easements or deed restrictions, and all properties, subdivisions,
streets and areas dedicated to public use within 300 feet of the
applicant’s property.
(2) A map of site topography at two-foot contour intervals.
(3) A site plan at an appropriate scale.
(4) The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant, the owner and the person responsible for preparation of
such drawings.
(5) North arrow, scale and date.
(6) Boundaries to the property plotted to scale.
(7) Existing buildings and structures.
(8) Grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed
contours, rock outcrops, depth to bedrock, soil characteristics and
watercourses, including top elevations of all site structures.
(9) Location, design, type of construction, proposed use and exterior
dimensions of all building and accessory structures.
(10) Location, design and type of construction of all parking spaces and
loading areas, showing ingress and egress, curb cuts, size of such
spaces and areas, width of circulation aisles and distances from
property lines and all other requirements of this chapter.
(11) Preliminary floor plans and elevations of proposed buildings or
structures.
(12) Location, design and type of construction of all pedestrian access.
(13) Location of outdoor storage, including but not limited to materials,
refuse and similar items.
(14) Location and design of all existing and proposed site
improvements, including drains, culverts, walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings and all existing trees on the subject property
which have at least one trunk with a diameter of eight inches or
greater, measured 4 1/2 feet above the ground.
(15) A description of the method of public water supply, stormwater and
sewage disposal and the location of such facilities and estimated
volumes.
(16) Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the location
of fire hydrants.
(17) Location and design of all utilities, including electrical, gas and
solar energy, telephone and cable television.
§ 287-4 SIGNS § 287-4
286:343
(18) Location, size, design and type of construction of all proposed
signs.
(19) Location and proposed development of all buffer areas, including
existing vegetative cover.
(20) Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities and means of
illumination showing lighting levels achieved over the entire site.
(21) Identification of the location and amount of building area proposed
for each intended use, including storage and common areas.
(22) General landscaping plan and planting schedule and landscaping
maintenance program description.
(23) An estimated project construction schedule and the total estimated
project cost.
(24) Identification of federal, state, county or town permits required for
the execution of the project and the status thereof.
(25) Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Board of Trustees, including but not
limited to traffic studies, material samples, elevations and one
block model to scale covering a three-hundred-foot radius from the
site.
(26) Roof plan showing all mechanicals and screening for the roof.
(27) Maintenance plan for the construction phase of the project.
(28) Part 1 of an environmental assessment form (EAF) in accordance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act and regulations
(SEQRA).
(29) Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A stormwater pollution
prevention plan consistent with the requirements of Chapter 294
and Chapter 345, Art. X shall be required for site plan approval.
The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and
standards in Chapter 345, Art. X. The approved site plan shall be
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 294 and Chapter 345, Art.
X. [Added 12-10-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
B. The Building Inspector shall determine whether the proposed
development meets the requirements of all provisions of this chapter
other than those regarding site plan approval. If the Building Inspector
determines that any variances or special permits are required, the
application shall be rejected pending application to and approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals or Board of Trustees as required. If the
Building Inspector finds the application to be in order, the application
shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees for purposes of preliminary
review. The Board of Trustees shall determine whether the application
§ 287-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 287-4
286:344
§ 287-5. Factors for consideration during review.
The Board of Trustees’ review of a site plan shall include but shall not be
limited to the following considerations:
is complete. If the application is not complete, the Board of Trustees
shall notify the applicant of the additional information required.
A. Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation,
including intersections, road widths, channelization structures and
traffic controls.
B. Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation,
including separation of pedestrian from vehicular traffic, walkway
structures, control of intersections with vehicular traffic and pedestrian
convenience, including handicapped access.
C. Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street parking
spaces and loading areas.
D. Location, arrangement, size, design and general compatibility of
building, uses, lighting and sign with other buildings and uses on and in
the neighborhood of the site.
E. Adequacy of architectural and plant screening and buffer areas,
including the adequacy, type and arrangement of plant materials (to
include trees, shrubs and other landscaping) constituting a visualscreening
and noise-deterring buffer between the proposed use and
adjoining uses or properties and the manner in which new and existing
plant material will contribute to the stated purpose and development of
the buffer.
F. In the case of an apartment house or multiple dwelling, the adequacy of
usable open space for playgrounds and informal recreation.
G. Adequacy of stormwater and sanitary waste disposal facilities and
adequacy of water supply facilities.
H. Protection of existing natural and landscaping features.
I. Protection of adjacent properties against noise, glare, unsightliness or
other objectionable features.
J. Overall impact on the neighborhood, including compatibility of design
considerations.
K. Conformance with the current Village Master Plan.
L. Adequacy of overall plan in minimizing harmful effects upon the
environment and the plan’s compliance with SEQRA.
M. That the location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, its site layout
and its relation to streets giving access to it will not be hazardous or
§ 287-4 SIGNS § 287-5
286:345
§ 287-6. Board of Trustees action on site plan.
inconvenient to the residential character of the neighborhood or
conflict with the normal traffic on the residential streets.
N. That the proposed use, site layout, location, heights, signs, walls, fences
and landscaping will not hinder or discourage the appropriate use and
development of adjacent uses or impair the value thereof.
O. That the proposed use, site layout, location, size or operation will not be
objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of noise, lights or other
factors of impact.
P. That the proposed use, location, size, site layout and nature of use will
be a harmonious part of the district in which it is to be situated.
Q. Adequacy of the proposed air filtration system and soundproofing in the
premises to insure that all odors and noise emanating from the
premises are contained as much as is practical on site and that the
effects of odor and noise do not impair the use of neighboring
properties. In such cases, the Board of Trustees reserves the right to
require a filtration system with a water component to filter particles
from the air. [Added 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
A. Within 90 days of the date of determination of a completed application
by the Board of Trustees, the Board of Trustees shall approve, approve
with modifications or disapprove the site plan, except that where a
public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to § 287-8, the decision
and recommendation on the site plan shall be made within 90 days after
the public hearing. The time period in which the Board of Trustees must
render its decision may be extended by the Board of Trustees. The
failure of the Board of Trustees or any other reviewing agency to make
a determination within any formal time period shall be deemed a
disapproval or recommendation of disapproval of the application.
B. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be forwarded to the
applicant.
C. In the event that the Board of Trustees determines that the site plan
involves a need for a variance or special permit, the application shall be
deferred by the Board of Trustees so that the applicant may make
application to the Board of Appeals or the Board of Trustees as
appropriate. Where the Board of Trustees has deferred site plan
approval on these grounds, the Board of Trustees shall convey any
information or documents which it deems appropriate to the Board of
Appeals or the Board of Trustees, with respect to the variance or
special permit requested, and the Board of Trustees may convey any
opinions or recommendations which it may have with respect to the
application. If the Board of Appeals or the Board of Trustees grants the
variances or special permit, the applicant may resume the process to
obtain site plan approval.
§ 287-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 287-7
286:346
§ 287-7. Board of Trustees action on site plan.
§ 287-8. Public hearings.
The Board of Trustees may conduct a public hearing on the site plan if
a majority of the members deems that such a hearing is in the public
interest. The applicant shall provide evidence at the hearing that all record
landowners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed project, as
said record owners appear on the most current tax rolls of the Nassau
County Assessor’s office, were notified by mail not less than 15 days before
the public hearing. No hearing before any other board shall diminish the
authority of the Board of Trustees to conduct a public hearing.
§ 287-9. Reimbursable expenses.
No building permit shall be issued pursuant to the provision of this chapter
until all expenses incurred by the Board of Trustees for consultation fees
(including engineering, architectural and legal) or other expenses which, at
the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees, are necessary in connection
with the review of a site plan are reimbursed to the Village by the applicant.
At the time of application, and throughout the review process, the applicant
shall deposit with the Village Clerk such amount to cover consultation fees
and extraordinary expenses as shall be established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 287-10. Coordination of related project reviews.
A. The Village Board of Trustees shall review all site plan actions and shall
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove site plans based on
the factors set forth in § 287-5 or such other factors deemed
appropriate by the Board of Trustees.
B. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within any stated time period
or any extension of such period shall be deemed a disapproval of the
application.
A. During the site plan review process, the Planning Board and the Board
of Trustees may consult with Village officials, officials of other
governments or agencies and professional consultants.
B. Integration of procedures. Whenever the circumstances of proposed
development require compliance with this chapter and with any other
local law, ordinance or requirement of the Village, the Board of Trustees
shall attempt to integrate, as appropriate, site plan review as required
by this chapter with the procedural and submission requirements for
such other compliance.
C. State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). SEQRA shall apply to
applications and improvements authorized by this chapter. The Village
Board of Trustees shall act as lead agency for any action pursuant to
this chapter. An environmental impact statement shall be required after
§ 287-7 SIGNS § 287-10
286:347
§ 287-11. Waiver of requirements.
Where the Board of Trustees finds that extraordinary and unnecessary
hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary
or waive the provisions hereof so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest may be secured. Such waiver shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the current Village Master Plan or any
of the other requirements of this chapter.
§ 287-12. Performance bond and demonstration of financial
responsibility.
In connection with its site plan review, the Board of Trustees may require
a performance bond in an amount it shall determine to insure that upon
completion of the project all the public improvements shown on the site plan
are completed and furthermore to ensure that, in the event that the project
is abandoned, the project is either completed or the site is restored to its
condition prior to the commencement of the project. The project shall be
deemed abandoned if no substantial construction is performed on the site
for a period of one year and the site plan approval has expired. The Board
of Trustees may also require documentary demonstration to its satisfaction
of the financial responsibility of the applicant to complete the project.
§ 287-13. Expiration of site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall automatically terminate one year after the same is
granted by the Board of Trustees unless a building permit has been issued
and there is physical evidence to demonstrate that substantial construction
has taken place and is continuing. Upon application to the Board of
Trustees, the site plan approval may be extended for additional one-year
periods, upon a showing that the conditions existing at the time of the
approval have not changed and that substantial steps to commence the
project have been lawfully undertaken.
§ 287-14. Application fees.
The applicant shall be required to pay the fees as set forth in the schedule
of fees in § A350-1, as well as an application fee to the Board of Trustees of
$500.
Chapter 289
the finding of a positive declaration. No final action shall be taken by
the Board of Trustees until the provisions of SEQRA shall be satisfied.
D. Referral of site plan to Nassau County Planning Commission. Where
required by the General Municipal Law, the site plan application shall
be forwarded to the Nassau County Planning Commission for its review.
No final action shall be taken by the Board of Trustees until the Nassau
County Planning Commission has issued its report.
§ 287-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 287-14
289:348
SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES AND ROLLER SKATES
§ 289-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-LINE SKATES — Shoes, skates or footwear with a single row of roller
wheels.
ROLLER SKATES — Shoes, skates or footwear with two or more sets of
roller wheels.
SKATEBOARD — A narrow board of wood, plastic, fiberglass or similar
material with roller-skate or other type of wheels attached to each end and
used for gliding or moving on any surfaces.
§ 289-2. Unlawful activities.
No person shall use or operate a skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates
or a similar device upon sidewalks in front of commercial property in the
Village of Massapequa Park, in Municipal Parking Fields or in, under or
around the Long Island Railroad Station in Massapequa Park, New York.
§ 289-3. Precautions.
§ 289-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a mandatory
minimum fine of $50 for each offense and/or up to five days of
imprisonment.
A. Every person operating a skateboard, in-line skates or roller skates
shall operate the same in strict observance of Article 34 of the New
York State Vehicular and Traffic Law relating to the operation of
bicycles and play vehicles, except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application.
B. Whenever any person shall operate a skateboard, in-line skates or roller
skates upon a sidewalk in a residential area, such person shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates at
nighttime unless he or she is wearing reflective clothing, which shall be
visible from a distance of no less than 50 feet and a maximum of 300
feet from the front, side and rear when directly in front of the lawful
beams of a headlight on a lawful motor vehicle. "Reflective clothing"
may be defined, for the purposes of this chapter, as any shirt, vest or
jacket or any other readily visible piece of apparel equipped with a
reflective surface.
§ 287-14 SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES AND § 289-4
289:349
Chapter 293
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cesspools and septic tanks — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 289-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 289-4
293:350
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
[Adopted 9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
§ 293-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Massapequa Park through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by
federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with
requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer Systems. The objectives of this article are:
§ 293-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 293-1 STORM SEWERS § 293-2
293:351
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 293-6.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Permit for
Discharges from Industrial Activities Except Construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Massapequa Park.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Massapequa Park;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 293-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-2
293:352
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water which may cause or
might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state
in contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its permit may have caused or has the
reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an
applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges, has been approved by EPA for a
water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 293-2 STORM SEWERS § 293-2
293:353
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village of
Massapequa Park to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated
by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention
plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect
stormwater management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 293-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 293-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 293-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 293-6. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
§ 293-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-6
293:354
as provided in Subsection A(1). The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
§ 293-6 STORM SEWERS § 293-6
293:355
§ 293-7. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
§ 293-8. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants
by use of best management practices.
Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges
as defined in § 293-2 or activities contaminating stormwater as defined in
§ 293-7, the municipality may require implementation of best management
practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities.
§ 293-9. Suspension of access to MS4.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 293-2, Definitions, of this article.
B. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises which is or may be
the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 293-2 or an activity
contaminating stormwater as defined in § 293-7 may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutants to
the MS4.
C. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
§ 293-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-9
293:356
§ 293-10. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 293-11. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this article may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
§ 293-9 STORM SEWERS § 293-11
293:357
§ 293-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this article such devices as are necessary, in the opinion
of the SMO, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 293-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-12
293:358
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 293-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article,
he/she may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) Payment of a fine; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(7) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 293-12 STORM SEWERS § 293-14
293:359
§ 293-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Village Board of Trustees within 15 days of its issuance,
which shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal,
and within five days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of
the Municipal Clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the
discharger.
§ 293-15. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 293-16. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 293-17. Alternative remedies.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
§ 293-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-17
293:360
§ 293-18. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 293-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 293-17 STORM SEWERS § 293-19
293:361
Chapter 294
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 184.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 293.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 293-19 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 293-19
294:362
ARTICLE I
Findings of Fact; Purpose; Statutory Authority; Applicability;
Exemptions
§ 294-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 294-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing
within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 294-1 hereof.
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the Village of Massapequa Park;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 294-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 294-2
294:363
This chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X seeks to meet those purposes by
achieving the following objectives:
§ 294-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park
has the authority to enact local laws and amend local laws and for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the Village of
Massapequa Park and for the protection and enhancement of its physical
environment. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park
may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment of any
municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor to effectuate,
administer and enforce such local law.
§ 294-4. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X shall be applicable to all land
development activities as defined in § 345-85.
B. The Village of Massapequa Park shall designate a Stormwater
Management Officer who shall accept and review all stormwater
pollution prevention plans and forward such plans to the applicable
municipal board. The Stormwater Management Officer may:
§ 294-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 294-4
294:364
§ 294-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter and
Chapter 345, Art. X.
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massapequa Park, engage the services of a registered professional
engineer to review the plans, specifications and related documents
at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by said governing
board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 345, Art.
X.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Village of Massapequa Park, under the subdivision, site plan and site
plan approval regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in Chapter 345, Art. X.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Village of Massapequa Park on or before the effective date of this
chapter.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
§ 294-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 294-5
294:365
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 294-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 294-5
294:366
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 294-6. Construction inspection.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The Village of Massapequa Park Stormwater Management Officer
may require such inspections as necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X and may
either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the
applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements
of this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X and the stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain
inspections, the applicant shall notify the Village of Massapequa
Park enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the
following as required by the Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction;
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(c) Completion of site clearing;
(d) Completion of rough grading;
(e) Completion of final grading;
(f) Close of the construction season;
(g) Completion of final landscaping;
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Village of
Massapequa Park Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for
conducting inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs).
All applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a
professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
§ 294-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 294-6
294:367
§ 294-7. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Village of Massapequa Park Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X as are necessary
to determine compliance with this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public storm water system, the
landowner shall grant to the Village of Massapequa Park the right to
enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for
the purpose of inspection as specified in Subsection C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Massapequa
Park in its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the
Village of Massapequa Park may require the applicant or developer to
provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety
institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and
names the Village of Massapequa Park as the beneficiary. The security
shall be in an amount to be determined by the Village of Massapequa
Park based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual
construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall
remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the Village
of Massapequa Park, provided that such period shall not be less than
one year from the date of final acceptance or such other certification
that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection has
been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to
the Village of Massapequa Park. Per annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability.
§ 294-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 294-7
294:368
§ 294-8. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village of Massapequa Park with an irrevocable letter of
credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of Massapequa Park
may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Village of Massapequa Park may require entities
subject to this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X to maintain records
demonstrating compliance with this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village of Massapequa Park determines
that a land development activity is not being carried out in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X, it may
issue a written notice of violation to the landowner. The notice of
violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and
Chapter 345, Art. X and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Village of Massapequa Park by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Village of Massapequa Park may issue a stopwork
order for violations of this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X.
Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land
development activities, except those activities that address the
violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be
in effect until the Village of Massapequa Park confirms that the land
§ 294-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 294-8
294:369
§ 294-9. Fees for services.
The Village of Massapequa Park may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X to
pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections,
or SMP maintenance performed by the Village of Massapequa Park or
performed by a third party for the Village of Massapequa Park.
development activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X, may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by
law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
and Chapter 345, Art. X shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X shall be deemed misdemeanors and for
such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall
apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter and Chapter 345, Art. X, the Stormwater Management Officer
may withhold the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and prevent
the occupancy of said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of Massapequa Park
may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a
lien upon the property until paid.
§ 294-8 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 294-9
294:370
Chapter 298
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Advertising materials — See Ch. 64.
Bicycles, scooters, gopeds and similar
devices — See Ch. 84.
Dirt carts — See Ch. 110.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 214.
Parades and public assemblages — See Ch.
226.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 230.
Skateboards, in-line skates and roller
skates — See Ch. 289.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 306.
Towing and boating — See Ch. 314.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 328.
Vending vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 294-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 294-9
294:371

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. I of Ch. 16 of the 1967 Code]
§ 298-1. Permission required to encumber or obstruct. [Amended
1-8-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
No person shall encumber, obstruct or use any street, highway, sidewalk or
other public place in such a manner as to hinder, impede, delay or interfere
with the free flow of traffic thereon, nor place or deposit any merchandise,
building material or other things in or upon any street, highway, sidewalk or
other public place, including municipal parking fields, without first having
obtained written permission from an officer and/or employee designated by
the Village.
§ 298-2. Obstruction of view at intersections. [Amended 11-1-1982
by L.L. No. 14-1982]
A. It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit to remain any bushes or other
plants on a corner lot within 25 feet of the curbline which obstruct a
view of more than 30 inches above the level of the sidewalk of the
adjacent street pavement. Any bush or tree within the twenty-five-foot
triangle must be trimmed free of branches and foilage between 30
inches and eight feet in height. [Amended 12-10-1984 by L.L. No.
12-1984; 9-18-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006; 9-26-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
B. Violation of this section shall be given to the homeowner, lessee, tenant
and/or occupant of the real property involved by a certified letter,
return receipt requested, from the Village of Massapequa Park,
addressed to said homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant at his last
known address, setting forth the violation of this particular section and
giving him 30 days from the date of the mailing of said certified letter to
correct and rectify said violation under this section.
C. In the event that said violation is not corrected after the
aforementioned thirty-day notice and a summons for said violation is
issued and said homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant is found to
be guilty of said violation or complies with this section after the
summons has been issued, there shall be mandatory minimum fine to
said homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant in the amount of $25.
D. Compliance by said homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant after
the summons is issued shall, under no circumstances, relieve said
homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant or defendant from the said
mandatory minimum fine of $25 per week for each week the violation
continues without compliance by the homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or
occupant, and it is mandatory that said homeowner, tenant, lessee and/
or occupant must correct said violation and comply with this section
§ 298-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-2
294:373
§ 298-3. Bearing capacity of sidewalks.
All sidewalks constructed in the Village shall have a bearing capacity of
3,000 pounds per square inch.
§ 298-4. Awnings.
No person shall erect or permit or allow to be erected any awning upon any
building owned by him which shall project over or upon any street, sidewalk
or public place in the Village unless such awnings shall be at least eight feet
above the sidewalk of such street, highway or public place and a permit to
erect same has been obtained from the Building Department of the Village.
§ 298-5. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks.
Unless otherwise provided by Village officers, it shall be the duty of each
property owner to remove snow or ice from the sidewalk in front of his
premises within 24 hours after a snowfall of three inches or more has
occurred.
§ 298-6. Glass, nails and other destructive matter.
No person shall place, drop or throw any glass, nails or other destructive
matter in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place, or leave or permit
any such article or matter to remain thereon.
§ 298-7. Spills from vehicles.
No person being the driver or owner of any vehicle shall scatter, drop or
spill any dirt, sand, clay, loam, stones or building material or rubbish from
said vehicle on any street, sidewalk or public place in the Village.
after court verdict or after the defendant pleads guilty before the
mandated minimum fine of $25 per week terminates.
E. In the event that the defendant does not correct the violation and
comply with this section after a court verdict or a pleading of guilty or
an agreement to comply with this section, the Village of Massapequa
Park has the right to enter the real property to make the necessary
repairs so that this section is complied with, and said homeowner,
lessee, tenant and/or occupant shall be charged by the Village for said
cost of same. In order to prove compliance with this section, said
homeowner, lessee, tenant and/or occupant must submit written proof
of compliance by a notarized affidavit to the Village affirming that this
section has been complied with completely.
F. This section shall apply to all residentially zoned property in the Village
of Massapequa Park and shall not apply to any deal property improved
by any existing fence or any existing structure constructed or erected
after the issuance of a valid permit from the Village of Massapequa
Park.
§ 298-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-8
294:374
§ 298-8. Sand, earth and other materials.
§ 298-9. Athletic games in parking fields. [Added 1-8-1979 by L.L.
No. 1-1979]
No person shall conduct athletic games of any type within the municipal
parking fields without the written consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 298-10. Dumpsters and other deposits. [Added 8-22-1983 by L.L.
No. 33-1983]
A. Restriction. No person shall cause or permit any accumulation of sand,
gravel, cinders, topsoil, mud, earth or other material to be placed,
deposited, tracked or flowed upon any road in the Village. Material may
be placed or raked into the streets only during certain periods of time
as specified by the Board of Trustees. [Amended 10-22-1979 by L.L.
No. 15-1979]
B. Penalties for offenses. The violation of any provision of this section shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 20 days for each such offense, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
C. Abatement. The Village may also maintain an action or proceeding to
enjoin the violation and recover the cost incurred by the Village to
clean, repair, recondition or restore the road or otherwise remedy the
condition.
A. No person shall be allowed to place or deposit any merchandise,
dumpster, building material or any personal property or other things,
except a lawful motor vehicle duly licensed and registered, in or upon
any street, highway, sidewalk or other public place, including municipal
parking fields, unless such person has first obtained written permission
from an authorized officer and/or employee designated by the Village of
Massapequa Park for a permit from the Village to perform such an act,
subject to the rules and regulations as set forth by the Village.
B. Special permits under exceptional and emergency conditions.
(1) Under exceptional and emergency conditions, a special permit may
be sought by application of any person for a dumpster from the
Board of Trustees or by approval by the Village Administrator,
subject to review and approval by the Board of Trustees.
(2) Such special permit shall be issued in the event of severe structural
damage to a dwelling such as to render it uninhabitable or in the
nature of another emergency, including but not limited to fire,
flood, hurricane, tornado or other natural disaster which may be
declared by the federal or state governments.
(3) In the event that a special permit is issued as stated above, it shall
be subject to the condition that the person applying for the special
§ 298-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-10
294:375
permit shall furnish a cash bond in the amount of $500 to the
Village at or before the date of issuance of the special permit.
(4) The applicant for special permit shall be charged $25 a day for
each and every day the said dumpster is on the public street of the
Village, and the Village of Massapequa Park shall have the option of
deducting the said $25 a day from the cash bond supplied to the
Village by the applicant for a special permit.
(5) As a further condition to the issuance of the special permit, the
applicant shall supply reflective tape, battery-operated lights,
reflectors and such other material and items as may be required by
the Village Administrator or the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massapequa Park for the health, safety and welfare of the persons
traveling the streets of the Village.
C. It shall be unlawful for any store owner or operator to use municipal
trash or garbage containers or receptacles for disposal of their garbage
or trash. These receptacles are for the general public's use for trash as
a result of a purchase from a store owner or operator. [Added
12-8-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008104]
D. Any persons, corporations or other legal entity found guilty of a
violation of this section shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of
$500. [Amended 12-8-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
104. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this local law, former Subsection C was redesignated as
Subsection D.
§ 298-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-10
294:376
ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Art. II of Ch. 16 of the 1967 Code]
§ 298-11. Permit required.
No person shall excavate in or otherwise open any street or highway in the
Village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village as herein provided.
§ 298-12. Deposit; bond. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 298-13. Waiver of deposit.
The Board of Trustees, upon recommendation by the Superintendent of
Public Works, may grant the utilities companies permission to forego the
deposit for each street opening provided for herein, with the understanding
that full liability for refilling and resurfacing in accordance with the
specifications shall be accepted by them and covered by a performance
bond. Unsatisfactory work not rectified within the prescribed periods set
forth in the specifications shall be completed properly by the Village and
billed to the utilities concerned at the rate stated in § 298-16.
A. Each application for a street opening permit shall be accompanied by a
deposit of $200 for each five square yards or less of opening, plus $30
for each additional square yard or fraction thereof exceeding five
square yards. This deposit shall be held by the Village Clerk pending
proper refilling and repaving in accordance with the specifications
relating to and being a part of this article. In the event that such
refilling and repaving is not replaced properly and exactly within the
time prescribed in said specifications, the full deposit shall be utilized
by the Village to complete such work. All deposits made for street
openings shall be retained for a period of two years as a guaranty of
maintenance and performance. [Amended 3-22-2004]
B. An applicant hereunder may, in lieu of payment of the required deposit
for each opening, execute to the Village a surety bond to be approved
by the Village in an amount not less than $5,000 for a maximum of 10
street openings or trenches; such bond shall provide for the applicant to
refill and repave the street openings or trenches in conformity with the
specifications. In the event that such refilling and repaving is not
replaced properly and within the time prescribed in said specifications,
all such work involved shall be replaced by the Village; and upon
presentation of its claim to the surety company, such claim shall be paid
to the Village by the surety company. All bonds held in lieu of a deposit
for street openings shall be retained for a period of two years as a
guaranty of maintenance and performance.
§ 298-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-14
294:377
§ 298-14. Issuance of permit.
Upon application in writing, filed with the Superintendent of Public Works,
stating the purpose, extent, location and nature of a proposed street
opening, the Superintendent of Public Works may grant or refuse a permit
therefor.
§ 298-15. Permit fee. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The fee for a permit hereunder shall be as provided in Chapter A350, Fees,
the same to cover the administrative procedures hereof and the costs of
inspections.
§ 298-16. Resurfacing by Village. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
In the event that an applicant shall prefer to have the Village do the
resurfacing provided for herein, arrangements may be made through the
Superintendent of Public Works by paying in advance for each permitted
opening a cost established yearly by the Village of Massapequa Park, based
upon the actual cost to the Village plus any administrative costs incurred by
the Village.
§ 298-17. Specifications.
Copies of specifications shall be given to an applicant hereunder upon the
issuance of a permit, and said specifications shall be and hereby are made
a part of this article as fully as if the same were here set forth at length.
§ 298-18. Location of openings.
All street openings made for the purpose of the installation of gas and/
or water service shall be made only in those locations designated by the
Village.
§ 298-19. Jetting and tunneling.
There shall be no jetting or tunneling under a road, and no trench shall be
dug across any road or street for any purpose without special permission.
§ 298-20. Notification of Department of Public Works; time and
procedure for backfilling. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. The Department of Public Works shall be notified on the day of opening
and when ready for backfill.
B. An excavation shall be made the day a tap for water and/or gas service
is to be made, and it shall be backfilled and tamped immediately after
completion of the installation. A temporary blacktop must be put down.
§ 298-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-21
294:378
§ 298-21. Protection of excavations.
All work must be properly barricaded at all times and shall have two or more
flares at night in the event that the installation is not completed the same
day. In the event that holes must be left open overnight or over a holiday or
weekend, the same shall be attended by the contractor or plumber.
§ 298-22. Installation of paving or wearing course. [Amended
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
The Department of Public Works shall be notified when final restoration is
made. After backfill has thoroughly compacted for a period of 60 days, the
area shall be excavated again and cut back 18 inches on all sides. A sixinch
concrete base shall be poured, leaving room for a two-inch blacktop
wearing course. This wearing course shall consist of an asphalt and stone
mixture secured at any of the local plants. In temperatures above 50º F., a
hot plant mix will be required. In the event the temperature is below 50º F.,
sides of the excavation will be evenly cut and sealed with liquid tar before
placement of asphalt mixture. The mixture shall then be sealed evenly and
rolled to a maximum density.
§ 298-23. Sunken excavations.
The person making an excavation and responsible hereunder for restoring
the same shall also be responsible for backfilling excavations in the event
that they sink due to heavy rains, thaws or any other causes.
§ 298-24. Inspection and approval of work.
All work hereunder shall be inspected upon completion by the
Superintendent of Public Works and approved by him before the bond,
certified check or cash deposited by the person making the excavation is
released.
§ 298-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-24
294:379

ARTICLE III
Fire Hydrants
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Sec. 8-3 of the 1967 Code]
§ 298-25. Obstruction.
No person shall obstruct or injure any fire hydrant or throw or pile snow,
ice or other substances or materials in close proximity thereto or otherwise
obstruct the full vision and use thereof.
§ 298-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-25
294:381

ARTICLE IV
Recreational Use
[Adopted 5-22-1967 as Sec. 14-10 of the 1967 Code; amended
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 21-1983]
§ 298-26. Restrictions. [Amended 5-21-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984;
6-10-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996]
No person shall engage in ballplaying or other sports whatsoever upon
any street or municipal parking lot within the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park.
§ 298-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-26
294:383

ARTICLE V
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 1-7-1991 as part of L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 298-27. Liability of Village.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of
Massapequa Park for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in
consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or in
consequence of the existence or accumulation of snow or ice upon any
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk unless written notice
of the existence of such condition, relating to the particular place, had
theretofore actually been given to the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massapequa Park through its agent, the Village Administrator, and there
had been a failure or neglect on the part of said Village to cause such
condition to be corrected or such snow or ice to be removed or the place
otherwise made reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt
of such notice.
§ 298-28. Existing claims and limitations.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of
limitations, nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 298-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-28
294:385

ARTICLE VI
Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted 1-7-1991 as part of L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 298-29. Authority of Board.
The Board of Trustees may from time to time by resolution require the
construction or repair of sidewalks or curbs along streets and highways in
the Village of Massapequa Park at the expense of the abutting owners or
otherwise upon such notice and pursuant to the authority and requirements
of § 161 of the Village Law, as amended.105
§ 298-30. Compliance with specifications required.
No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or permitted to be
constructed along any street or highway in the Village unless such
construction shall be of concrete and conform to lines and grades furnished
by the Village Engineer and in conformity with all of the specifications and
requirements hereinafter set forth.
§ 298-31. New construction; failure to comply.
All sidewalks, curbs and gutters constructed on any privately owned street
or on any streets of a new development shall be subject to these regulations
and must comply in all respects with the regulations governing streets
the title of which is vested in the Village. Failure to comply with these
regulations will constitute sufficient cause for the Village to reject any
proffered dedication of such streets.
§ 298-32. Sidewalks required.
A. All newly constructed houses shall be required to have sidewalks in
front of said houses according to the rules, regulations and
specifications of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
B. All houses or property which is renovated or restructured in any
manner whatsoever, with actual construction costs in excess of $3,000,
and which house or property does not have sidewalks shall be required
to have sidewalks in front of the same according to the rules,
regulations and specifications of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park. Any bills, records or other papers requested or
demanded by the Village from said homeowner as to said construction
costs shall be furnished to the Village within 10 days after said request
or demand.
C. This section is being enacted pursuant to the authority of the Board of
Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park to require that
105. Editor's Note: Section 161 of the old Village Law referred to here was repealed by P.L.
1972, c. 892.
§ 298-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-32
294:387
§ 298-33. Permit.
sidewalks be installed, be constructed and be placed in front of a
residential house or home.
D. This section does not apply to any district designated as Business GG
District.
A. Permit required. No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or
work thereon commenced until the owner of the premises in front of
which such sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed, or the
authorized agent of the owner, shall have obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permit shall be made in writing to the Village in
such form as may be required by the Board of Trustees. No permit
issued by the Village shall be valid or become operative until signed by
the Village Engineer after furnishing the required line and grade,
unless otherwise directed by resolution of the Village Board. The permit
here required shall not be confused with the permit required for street
openings and sidewalk obstruction. No drain or drains shall be
constructed which lead from any building or buildings across any
sidewalk in any street, road or roadway in this Village without
permission having first been obtained from the Village Clerk.
B. Costs to be paid. At the time of making application to the Village for a
permit to construct sidewalk, curb or gutter, the owner or his agent
shall pay to the Village a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
C. Availability of permit. The permit shall be kept at the site of the work
and shall be made visible to any officer or agent of the Village.
D. Issuance and duration of permit. The permit shall be issued by the
Village only upon the representation of the owner or his agent of his or
their immediate intention to construct a sidewalk and/or curb. Said
permit shall be considered to have expired on the 11th day succeeding
the date thereon or the eighth day succeeding the date of the
Engineer's certification thereon.
E. Separate permits. Separate permits shall be secured for each parcel or
plot of land unless the several plots in front of which sidewalks and/or
curbs are to be constructed are contiguous.
F. Corner lots. Where it is desired to construct a sidewalk or curb on
corner plots on both streets, the engineering fee shall be calculated on
the sum of the two frontages.
G. Repairs. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, a permit
shall be issued without charge and no inspection shall be required when
the work to be done is the repair or replacement of an existing sidewalk
and/or curb of not more than 25 linear feet.
H. Certificates required. No permit shall be issued until the contractor
shall file with the Village Clerk certificates showing that:
§ 298-32 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-33
294:388
§ 298-34. Inspection.
During the construction of the sidewalk or curb, the Village may inspect
the work and materials being used for which the permit was issued. Such
inspection may include checking for compliance with line or grade,
workmanship, safety measures and protection of the public and adjoining
properties. If the work is not being done in accordance with the
requirements of this article, the Village may stop the work and order the
owner to have the improper work corrected.
§ 298-35. Trees, shrubs and hedges. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L.
No. 11-2000]
(1) Said contractor carries workmen's compensation insurance to
adequately cover all of said contractor's employees; and
(2) Said contractor carries public liability insurance to protect said
contractor and any subcontractors doing work and to protect the
Village of Massapequa Park from any claims for personal injuries,
including accidental death, which may arise out of the work to be
performed pursuant to said permit, said public liability insurance to
be in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 per person and not less
than $2,000,000 per occurrence. The Village of Massapequa Park
shall be named as an additional insured on said policy or policies
and a copy of a certificate of insurance must be provided to the
Village of Massapequa Park at least five days prior to the
commencement of any work or labor to be performed by any
contractor or subcontractor. [Amended 12-9-1996 by L.L. No.
21-1996; 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
A. Planting trees, shrubs or hedges. No trees, shrubs or hedges shall be
planted within the sidewalk area in front of or adjacent to any private
premises, including all areas in any development, a map for which has
been filed or may hereafter be filed with the Village of Massapequa
Park, without first obtaining a permit for an approved tree from the
Superintendent of Public Works. In case of existing trees, shrubs or
hedges located within the sidewalk areas, the owners or occupants of
the premises in front of or adjacent to which such trees, shrubs or
hedges are located shall be responsible for their maintenance, as
provided in Subsection B.
B. Removing shrubs and hedges and repairing damage to sidewalks
caused by roots.
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant or other occupant of any
house or structure, and every owner or person entitled to
possession of any vacant lot, to remove trees, shrubs or hedges
when required by the Village authorities and to keep trees, shrubs
and hedges in front of or adjacent to their premises and within the
sidewalk area trimmed so that overhanging limbs will not interfere
with passersby on the sidewalk, such limbs to be kept trimmed at
§ 298-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-35
294:389
§ 298-35.1. Restriction on types of planting. [Added 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 11-2000]
No person shall plant any species of trees except those designated on the
approved tree list to be maintained by the Department of Public Works.
§ 298-35.2. Mutilation of trees. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
11-2000]
No person shall mutilate, injure, destroy or cause to be destroyed any shade
or ornamental tree or shrub or disturb any guard protecting such tree or
shrub planted upon any street, park or other public place of said Village.
§ 298-35.3. Trimming or cutting of trees in public places; permit
required. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
all times to allow a passage space of not less than eight feet above
the center of the sidewalk.
(2) It shall also be the duty of every owner, tenant or other occupant of
any house or structure, and every owner or person entitled to
possession of any vacant lot, to repair any sidewalk or curb in front
of or adjacent to such premises damaged by tree, shrub or hedge
roots located in front of or adjacent to said premises, whether or
not within the property line or sidewalk area.
(3) The Village authorities may from time to time by resolution require
the removal or trimming of any trees, shrubs or hedges within the
sidewalk area or overhanging the same and the repair of sidewalks
or curbs damaged or encumbered by such roots in the same
manner and upon notice as provided for the repair or construction
of sidewalks and curbs in § 298-29 hereof.
C. Injuring, destroying or removing trees. No person shall in anyway
injure, destroy or remove any shade tree of over 10 feet in height
without first securing the written approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Massapequa Park.
A. No firm or corporation, public service, water, light or power company,
telephone company or television company, utility or any other
municipality other than the homeowner of record or his authorized
agent shall cut or trim any shade or ornamental tree in any street, park
or other public place within the Village of Massapequa Park without
first obtaining a permit from the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. Such permit shall be issued only if the applicant:
(1) Identifies the particular trees to be cut or trimmed in a specified
area within the Village shown with reasonable particularity on the
application.
§ 298-35 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-35.3
294:390
§ 298-35.4. Right of the Village to ensure public safety. [Added
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
(2) Substantiates that the proposed work is necessary to maintain safe,
reliable and efficient utility service, to protect public safety or to
protect property.
(3) Provides the identity and address of the contractor performing the
proposed work and the name of the individual who will be
supervising the proposed work and the date or dates when the
proposed work is to be performed, together with a verified copy of
the contractor's license to perform work in Nassau County and a
certificate of insurance signed by the insurance company issuing
same in the name of the contractor.
(4) Pays the required fee set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. In reviewing an application, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
ensure that only such amount of the trees is cut or trimmed as
necessary to protect property, preserve public safety and to ensure that
such cutting or trimming is necessary to maintain utility service
provided to Village residents.
D. The permit fee shall be applied for annually in January of each year
regardless of the number of trees that are affected by such permit. Such
permit shall be effective until December 31 of each year.
E. In the case of an emergency or other exigent circumstances where it is
necessary to immediately restore or maintain service to Village
residents, a utility company will not be required to obtain a permit
under this section, but must obtain oral approval from the
Superintendent of Public Works. If such oral approval cannot be
obtained after good faith efforts, the utility company may proceed with
the tree trimming work but must then obtain oral approval from the
Superintendent of Public Works as soon as practicable.
A. Removal required. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works of the Village of Massapequa Park to cause any poplar trees,
willow trees, swamp maple trees or any other trees not growing in any
street in the Village of Massapequa Park which are causing any damage
to any water conduit, sewage main or storm drain belonging to the
Village of Massapequa Park or the Town of Oyster Bay or the County of
Nassau or the State of New York to be forthwith removed, and it shall
be further the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village
of Massapequa Park to cause to be removed any poplar trees, willow
trees, swamp maple trees or any other trees growing on any property
within 25 feet of a water conduit, sewage main or storm drain belonging
to either the Village of Massapequa Park, the Town of Oyster Bay, the
County of Nassau or the State of New York and which are causing any
damage to such water conduit, sewage main or storm drain, after giving
§ 298-35.3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-35.4
294:391
§ 298-35.5. Planting locations. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
11-2000]
§ 298-35.6. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. [Added 6-12-2000
by L.L. No. 11-2000]
to the owner of the property on which such tree is or trees are located
five days' written notice by mail of his intention.
B. Duty of owner or occupant. It shall be the duty of each owner or
occupant of real property within the Village of Massapequa Park to
afford access to such property to the Superintendent of Public Works of
the Village of Massapequa Park or his employees or appointees for the
purpose of inspecting any tree or removing the same in accordance
with the provision of this article.
A. No tree shall be planted along any street in the Village of Massapequa
Park nearer than 25 feet to the point of intersection of the curb of such
street with the curb of any other street.
B. No tree shall be planted nearer than one foot to the established curbline
or outside line of the sidewalk.
C. No trees shall be planted less than 20 feet apart or within 20 feet of any
existing tree.
D. No tree shall be planted unless the trunk is at least two inches in
diameter when measured one foot above the ground.
E. No bush, plant, shrub or any kind of planting shall be placed or
maintained in front of any premises between the sidewalk and curbing
on any street or public place.
F. No tree, bush, plant or shrub shall be planted, placed or maintained on
any private premises, nor shall any tree be planted, placed or
maintained between the sidewalk and the curbline in or on any street or
public place, that obstructs or in any way interferes with a clear view of
the public highways for both pedestrians and operators of any vehicles,
nor shall any tree be maintained not having a proper clearance of at
least eight feet above the sidewalk.
A. Any person committing an offense against this chapter or any section or
provision hereof shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, for each tree illegally removed or
substantially altered. Each such violation shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
B. In addition, this chapter may be enforced by civil action for monetary
damages and/or for an injunction, and any person who has violated or
permitted a violation of this chapter may be directed by the Village to
replace any trees removed, destroyed or substantially altered in
§ 298-35.4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-35.6
294:392
§ 298-36. Maintenance of grade.
All sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be maintained at the grade
established by the Village Engineer. No ashes, cinders or other material
shall be placed in the roadway in such a manner as to interfere with the
proper drainage. The grade of the ground between the sidewalk and curb
shall be maintained sufficiently low to allow the free passage of stormwater
from the sidewalk into the street.
§ 298-37. Maintenance of sidewalks. [Amended 5-12-1997 by L.L.
No. 8-1997]
violation of this chapter with new trees having a diameter not less than
two inches when measured six inches above the ground level; and,
where such direction has been made, no building permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for structures on said real property until
such replacement has been completed or a guaranteed replacement
bond has been posted.
A. Each owner and occupant of any house or other building, and any
owner or person entitled to possession of any vacant lot, and any person
having charge of any church or any public building in the Village shall
keep the sidewalk in front of the lot or house free from obstruction by
snow or ice and icy conditions, and shall at all times keep the sidewalk
in good and safe repair and maintain it in a clean condition and free
from filth, dirt, weeds or other obstructions or encumbrances, and such
owner or occupant and each of them shall be liable for any injury or
damage by reason of omission, failure or negligence to make, maintain
or repair such sidewalk or for a violation or nonobservance of the
ordinances relating to making, maintaining and repairing sidewalks,
curbstones and gutters. [Amended 6-29-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
B. In case of failure to comply with the above, such owner and/or occupant
shall be subject to the penalties or offenses against this article as
hereinafter provided. In addition to said penalties, in case of a failure to
remove such accumulations within 24 hours, the Superintendent of
Public Works or the Board of Trustees may cause the same to be
removed at the expense of such owner and/or occupant and assess the
expense upon such adjoining property.
C. The adjoining owner and/or occupant of the house adjoining any
sidewalk or curb shall have the sole and exclusive duty to keep said
sidewalks and curbs in good repair.
D. Whenever the Superintendent of Public Works of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park or any other authorized employee of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park shall determine that an
unsafe or dangerous condition exists or that repairs to a sidewalk or
curb on a street, highway or road in the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park are necessary, the Superintendent of Public Works or
other authorized employee of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
§ 298-35.6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-37
294:393
§ 298-38. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No person, firm, association or corporation who is the owner, occupant
or lessee of any premises abutting on any street, avenue or highway in
Park is hereby authorized and directed to cause notice to be served
upon the owner or owners and/or occupant or occupants of the lands
adjoining such street, highway or road where such sidewalk or curb is
located. Such notice shall direct that repairs to said sidewalk or curb
be made within 21 days of the date of such notice.
E. Whenever notice or notices is referred to in Subsection D above, were
or have been served upon the owner or owners and/or occupant or
occupants of the lands and such owner or owners, occupant or
occupants shall not cause the repairs to be made at the sidewalk or
curb as required by notice, the Superintendent of Public Works or other
authorized Village employee is hereby authorized and directed to cause
the repairs to be made as required by the notice. The Superintendent of
Public Works or other authorized Village employee is hereby authorized
to perform such work or repairs or cause a contract or contracts to be
let therefor and to pay therefor from the funds of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
F. Whenever the owner or owners and/or occupant or occupants shall
make the repairs called for said notice, he/she shall submit drawings
and obtain a permit as required. The Village Superintendent of Public
Works may require such bonds or deposits and issue such permit
subject to such terms and conditions as he/she may consider for the
necessary protection of the Village and Village property by not in excess
of requirements for the issuance of a permit for work required under
the ordinance regulating such work.
G. Whenever such repairs are to be made under the provisions of
Subsection E above, this article and by contract, the provisions of
Subsection F above of this article and in respect to obtaining permits
and powers of the Superintendent of Public Works of the issuance of a
permit shall apply to the contractor for such work.
H. In the event that the charges therefor for said repairs are not paid to
the Superintendent of Public Works or the Board of Trustees, then the
Village is hereby granted the right to assess such expense against the
adjoining property with the same force, effect and legal status as an
assessment for benefit. The same shall constitute as a lien against the
owner and/or occupant of the said real property.
I. The validity of any word, section, clause, paragraph, sentence, part, or
provision of this section shall not affect the validity of any part of this
section which can be given after without such invalid part or parts.
J. This section shall take effect immediately upon the filing according to
law.
§ 298-37 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-38
294:394
the Village of Massapequa Park, Nassau County, New York, shall place,
keep, permit or suffer to be placed or kept on any sidewalk in front of,
adjoining or adjacent to such premises any goods, wares or merchandise of
any description, but nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit persons
from placing goods, wares or merchandise or household furniture on the
sidewalk temporarily while loading or unloading the same, provided that it
shall be done without unreasonable delay, and provided that such goods,
wares and merchandise are not allowed or permitted to remain on said
sidewalk within the prohibited area for a longer period than one hour.
§ 298-39. Specifications.
A. General.
(1) All sidewalks shall be four feet in width in residential areas; and in
business areas, including nonconforming business use areas, such
sidewalks shall be constructed so as to cover the full area between
the curb and the property line, unless otherwise directed by the
Superintendent of Public Works, and shall not be less than four
inches thick in areas zoned for residential use and not less than five
inches thick in areas zoned for business use. All sidewalks shall be
constructed in one course. Where crossed by driveways, all
sidewalks shall not be less than six inches thick through the width
of the driveway.
(2) All curbs shall be 18 inches in depth and not less than six inches
thick.
(3) Concrete gutters shall not be less than 18 inches wide and six
inches thick and shall be built in one course.
B. Excavation. All topsoil and loam or impervious material and all tree
roots, stumps, rock, sod, broken concrete and like matters encountered
in a subgrade must be removed for a depth of not less than four inches
below the bottom grade of the proposed construction and the
excavation refilled with sand, gravel or cinders well tamped into place.
No concrete shall be placed on a frozen subgrade or one which is soft or
springy.
C. Composition. The mixture for concrete in construction of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters shall conform to the following specifications: Concrete
for curbs, sidewalks and gutters shall consist of one part portland
cement, two parts fine aggregate and four parts coarse aggregate.
D. Cement. All cement shall conform to the standard specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials, Serial Designation C-9-30 or
subsequent amendments thereto.
E. Fine aggregate. Sand shall be clean, free of gravel, uncoated and shall
not contain more than 3% by weight of clay or loam nor any vegetable
matter, silt or other deleterious matters. No more than 5% shall pass a
§ 298-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-39
294:395
one-hundred-mesh screen. Not more than 25% shall pass a fifty-mesh
screen. One hundred percent shall pass a four-mesh screen.
F. Coarse aggregate.
(1) Gravel or broken stone shall be clean, hard, durable and free of
elongated, thin or laminated particles. It shall contain no vegetable
or other deleterious substances.
(2) The sizes shall be well graded approximately as follows:
(a) Maximum size shall be one inch.
(b) Not more than 5% shall pass a four-mesh screen.
(c) Intermediate sizes shall not have been removed and shall be
well proportioned between maximum and minimum size
limitations.
(3) The use of pit- or bank-run gravel will be permitted at the
discretion of the Village where the ratio of fine materials to coarse
is approximately that required for the specified mix.
G. Water. Water used shall be free of oil, alkali, acid or vegetable matter.
H. Mixing and placing.
(1) Ingredients of the concrete shall be measured separately in
approved receptacles. All materials shall be thoroughly mixed for
not less than one minute in an approved mechanical mixer. Mixing
by hand will not be accepted except in an emergency and in the
repair or replacement of an existing sidewalk or curb of not more
than 25 linear feet and in the case of other minor repairs. The
maximum water content, including moisture contained in the
aggregate, will be 5 1/2 gallons of water per cubic foot of cement.
The concrete when in place shall be thoroughly worked to expel the
air, fill voids and secure continuous contact with the forms. All
voids of honeycomb appearing after forms are removed shall be
plastered with mortar.
(2) Concrete shall not be allowed to stand more than 20 minutes before
being placed between the forms. Retempering and remixing are
expressly forbidden. Care shall be exercised in placing concrete to
prevent any segregation of materials.
(3) All forms shall be of lumber at least two inches thick or of steel and
of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the wet concrete and
any external pressure applied while placing and finishing the
concrete. All forms shall be held rigidly in place by stakes or
braces, with top edges set true to line and grade and held with
suitable clamps or pins to prevent displacement.
I. Joints.
§ 298-39 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-39
294:396
(1) Sidewalks shall be cut into rectangular sections. No plain concrete
section shall be longer than six feet on any one side. Where division
plates have been used, they shall be removed after the concrete has
hardened sufficiently to avoid breaking the edges or corners of the
slabs. Where division plates have not been used, the partially set
concrete shall be cut through to the subgrade.
(2) All surface edges of concrete slabs shall be tooled so as to be
rounded to a radius of approximately 1/4 inch.
(3) Expansion joints shall be constructed for the full depth of the
concrete. They shall not be less than 1/2 inch wide and spaced not
more than 20 feet apart. Expansion joints shall also be provided at
intersecting sidewalks or curbs and along the curb in business
areas where the sidewalk extends from the building line to the
curb.
(4) Curbs shall have dummy joints at intervals not exceeding 10 feet
and expansion joints at intervals not exceeding 20 feet. Expansion
joints shall not be less than 1/2 inch wide and shall extend clear
through the concrete so as to completely separate adjoining
sections.
(5) Gutters shall have dummy and/or expansion joints as directed by
the Engineer, rules for which are not set forth herein. Persons
desiring to construct gutters will be required to abide by
specifications which will be prepared by the Village Engineer to fit
the conditions. All requirements set forth herein are minimum.
J. Finishing.
(1) A curb shall be struck off true to the cross section required, after
which it shall be finished smooth by means of a wooden float. Face
forms shall be left in place until the concrete has set sufficiently so
that they can be removed without injury to the curb. The exposed
face of the curb will be finished smooth by means of a moist wooden
float or a moist wet brick. The edges shall be rounded with an
edging tool.
(2) All sidewalks shall be finished by screeding with a light weight-type
hand screed which will push the surplus concrete ahead of it. Any
depressions or voids created will be immediately filled in and such
surfaces will be rescreeded. The surface shall then be completed by
floating the concrete with hand floats, taking care to leave a
minimum of float marks. All edges shall be rounded with a steel
edging tool to a minimum radius of 1/4 inch.
(3) Curing. All cement work exposed to a hot summer sun as soon as
finished must be covered from the sun for two days and kept moist
by sprinkling morning and afternoon until thoroughly set.
§ 298-39 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-39
294:397
§ 298-40. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
16-1994]
This article shall be enforced by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massapequa Park under the rules and regulations adopted by it. For every
violation of the provisions of this article, the owner of the property adjacent
to which such violation has been committed or shall exist and the owner,
general agent or contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or
premises to which such violation has been committed or shall exist and the
general agent, builder, contractor or any person who commits, takes part
or assists in such violation or who maintains any property adjacent to any
such violation shall, for each and every violation and for each and every day
that such violation continues, be subject to a fine of up to the maximum fine
allowed by law, and in addition thereto, any person violating the provisions
of this article or any part thereof shall be and is hereby declared to be
disorderly person.
K. Protection. The contractor shall protect the concrete from damage by
all elements, including rain, freezing, pedestrians, animals, falling
leaves, etc. Suitable methods shall be employed to cover the work and
to erect barricades and red lights at night.
L. Cleaning up. Upon completion the contractor or owner must remove all
forms, neatly fill the space occupied by the forms and remove all excess
dirt. Where the ground adjoining the sidewalk is high or low, the
contractor shall leave an earth or other ramp to provide safe access to
and from the walk. The entire site shall be left in a clean, orderly
manner, all obstructions removed and the work be made otherwise safe
for pedestrian movement.
§ 298-39 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-40
294:398
ARTICLE VII
Belgian Block Curbs
[Adopted 10-25-1999 by L.L. No. 11-1999]
§ 298-41. Installation by homeowner allowed.
Any homeowner in the Village of Massapequa Park or resident having
lawful authority shall be allowed to install Belgian block curbs within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park as long as the same complies
with the terms and conditions of the Nassau County Standard Specifications
for the Construction of Bridges and Highways and subject to the written
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works of Massapequa Park.
§ 298-42. Responsibility for maintenance.
§ 298-43. Failure to repair; removal by Village.
§ 298-44. Installation by Village prohibited.
The Village shall not install or repair any curbs for any property within
the Village with Belgian block curbs and, as stated above, shall install only
standard concrete curbs in the event that it becomes necessary, even if
the Belgian block curbs were originally installed legally and pursuant to
specification by the homeowner or resident.
A. The homeowner or resident at all times, regardless of the reason, shall
be solely responsible for the maintenance or care of said curb. In the
event that there is any damage or repair which is required to the said
curb, the homeowner or resident must immediately make repairs to
same at his or her sole cost and expense.
B. In the event that the homeowner or resident is advised by the Village to
make said repair, the homeowner or resident shall make the required
repairs within 10 days after the notice from the Village at the
homeowner's or resident's sole cost and expense.
A. In the event that the homeowner or resident fails to make said repairs
in a timely fashion, the Village shall perform all the necessary work to
remove the blocks and install a standard concrete curb and the
homeowner shall be assessed for the full cost for the labor and
materials for same and shall pay for said repairs to the Village promptly.
B. In the event that the homeowner or resident shall fail to pay for said
cost and expense, then the same shall be imposed as a lien against the
subject real property where the work was performed by the Village.
§ 298-41 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-44
294:399

ARTICLE VIII
Village Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 11-27-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 298-45. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONMENT or ABANDONED — The permanent cessation of all uses
of equipment located in a Village right-of-way.
DAMAGED POLE — Any utility pole that may be structurally compromised
and poses a potential threat to public safety.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Village of Massapequa Park
Department of Public Works.
DOUBLE POLE — Any utility pole that is located directly next to or in close
proximity to another utility pole.
EMERGENCY — A condition that affects the public's health, safety or
welfare, and includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of preexisting
equipment. Permittee shall, within 72 hours of the identification of an
emergency, provide written notice to the Department of Public Works of the
emergency response and the placement or maintenance of equipment in a
Village right-of-way as a result of the emergency.
EQUIPMENT — Any permanent or temporary structure, wires, cables,
service lines, utility pole or other mechanical or electrical device placed or
maintained or to be placed or maintained directly upon, above, or below
the surface of the Village right-of-way and used for the transmission or to
facilitate the transmission of electricity, or voice, data, audio, video or any
other information.
PERMITTEE or ENTITY — Any person, association of persons, corporations,
municipal corporations, or other legal entity that has placed equipment in
any Village right-of-way.
PLACE OR MAINTAIN or PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE or PLACING
OR MAINTAINING — To exercise physical control over, erect, construct,
install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or
relocate.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works.
UTILITY POLE — A column or post used to support wires, cables, or service
lines for permittee.
VILLAGE — The Village of Massapequa Park.
VILLAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY — A public right-of-way, public utility easement,
highway, street, bridge, tunnel, alley or sidewalk for which the Village is the
authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access
pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the
§ 298-45 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-45
294:401
surface and the area below the surface. "Village Rights-of-Way" shall not
include private property.
§ 298-46. Placement or maintenance of equipment in Village rightof-
way.
A. A permittee shall not commence to place equipment in a Village rightof-
way until all applicable permits have been issued by the Village of
Massapequa Park Department of Public Works or other appropriate
authority, except in the case of an emergency.
B. Permits for an emergency shall meet the requirements of the
Department of Public Works. Permittees shall be responsible for the
restoration of Village right-of-way to the extent required by this article.
C. With respect to permit applications to place new or replace existing
equipment in the Village right-of-way, the Department of Public Works
may require the following:
(1) The location and specifications of the proposed equipment,
including a description of the work to be performed;
(2) A description of the manner in which the equipment will be
installed detailing anticipated construction methods and
techniques;
(3) A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the Village rightof-
way;
(4) A description of the plan to restore the Village right-of-way
including construction details in conformance to the Village
standards and specifications;
(5) The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof,
including restoration of the Village right-of-way;
(6) Information as to anticipated disruptions in services provided by
the permittee as a result of the proposed work;
(7) Such additional information as the Department of Public Works
finds reasonably necessary with respect to the placement and
maintenance of the equipment that is the subject of the permit
application to review such permit application.
D. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the
Department of Public Works shall have the power to impose terms and
conditions with respect to the issuance of any permit issued pursuant to
this article.
E. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the
Department of Public Works shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional equipment within a particular area of
Village right-of-way.
§ 298-45 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-46
294:402
§ 298-47. Suspension of permits.
F. All equipment shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably
interfere with Village and other municipal public safety systems, the
use of the Village right-of-way by the public and with the rights and
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the Village rights-ofway.
G. After completion of any placement or maintenance of equipment in
Village right-of-way, a permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the
Village right-of-way to its original condition before such work, to the
extent possible, in conformance to Village standards and specifications.
If the permittee fails to make such restoration within 30 days, or such
longer period as may be agreed to by the Superintendent, following the
completion of such placement or maintenance, the Department of
Public Works may perform the restoration, and permittee shall be liable
for all costs and expenses, including administrative expenses incurred
by the Village, in connection with such restoration. Such costs and
expenses may be recovered by the Village from any construction bond
or security fund required by the Department of Public Works. For 12
months following the original completion of the work, the permittee
shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any restoration
work that does not satisfy the requirements of this article at its own
expense. Failure to make such restoration within 30 days, or such
longer period as may be granted by the Superintendent shall subject
the permittee to the penalties described herein.
H. The Department of Public Works may promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of equipment in
the Village right-of-way consistent with this article and other applicable
law.
I. A permit from the Department of Public Works constitutes
authorization to undertake only certain activities in Village rights-ofway
in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right
or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an
interest in the Village right-of-way, nor does it relieve the permittee of
its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and authority
and to comply with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
A. The Department of Public Works may suspend a permit without a fee
refund for work in the Village right-of-way for one or more of the
following reasons:
(1) Violation of permit conditions, this article, the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Superintendent pursuant to this
article, or any other applicable Village ordinances, laws, rules or
regulations governing the placement or maintenance of equipment
in the Village right-of-way;
§ 298-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-47
294:403
§ 298-48. Indemnification.
§ 298-49. Construction bond.
§ 298-50. Security fund.
(2) Misrepresentation or fraud by permittee in a permit application to
the Village.
A. A permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the Village, its officials, boards, members, agents,
and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and
expenses incurred by the Village arising out of the placement or
maintenance of equipment in the Village right-of-way, regardless of
whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this article; provided, however, that a permittee's
obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the
negligence, gross negligence or willful acts of the Village. This
provision includes, but is not limited to, the Village's reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or
proceeding. The Village shall notify the permittee, in writing, within a
reasonable time of the Village receiving notice, of any issue it
determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the Village from participating in the defense of any litigation by
its own counsel and at its own cost if in the Village's reasonable belief
there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of
conflict.
B. The indemnification provisions of this article shall survive and be in
effect after the termination or cancellation of a permit.
A. Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will require
restoration of Village Right-of-way, the Department of Public Works
may, at its sole discretion, require a construction bond, other surety
and/or cash escrow, as a condition to granting such permit, to secure
the restoration of the Village right-of-way.
B. The rights reserved by the Village with respect to any construction
bond or cash escrow established pursuant to this article are in addition
to all other rights and remedies the Village may have under this article,
or at law or equity.
C. The rights reserved to the Village under this article are in addition to all
other rights of the Village, whether reserved in this article, or
authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the
Village may have.
A. As a condition to the granting of any permit, permittees may be
required to file with the Village an annual bond, cash deposit or
§ 298-47 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-50
294:404
§ 298-51. Removal of equipment from Village right-of-way.
To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the
Department of Public Works shall have the power to require the removal
of equipment from a Village right-of-way, it being the intent of the Village
to limit the use of Village right-of-way to nonredundant equipment actively
in use. Failure to remove any equipment if required by the Department of
Public Works within a time period specified by the Department of Public
Works may result in penalties provided for in § 298-58 of this article.
§ 298-52. Double poles and damaged poles.
irrevocable letter of credit in a sum to be determined by the
Department of Public Works having as surety a company qualified
to do business in the State of New York, and acceptable to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, which shall be
referred to as the "security fund." The security fund shall be maintained
until the transfer, sale, assignment, or removal of all equipment located
in the Village right-of-way.
B. The security fund shall be furnished annually or as frequently as
necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the permittee's full and
faithful performance at all times. In the event a permittee fails to
perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the permittee by the
provisions of this article, there shall be recoverable, jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of the security fund, any damage
or loss suffered by the Village as a result, including the full amount of
any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or
abandonment of the equipment in the Village right-of-way, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees and administrative expenses.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Department of Public Works may, in
its discretion, not require a security fund or may accept a corporate
guarantee of the permittee or its parent company.
A. Double poles.
(1) When the Department of Public Works issues a permit for the
installation of a utility pole that is directly next to or in close
proximity to another utility pole in the Village right-of-way, the
permittee shall within five business days of the installation of the
new utility pole notify any other entity that has equipment on that
utility pole that such entity has 30 days to remove such equipment
from that utility pole. A copy of such notification shall be provided
to the Department of Public Works. Any entity receiving such
notification shall have 30 days to remove any equipment from the
utility pole that is to be replaced and shall provide written notice to
the Department of Public Works of its intention to relocate its
equipment on the new pole. This thirty-day deadline will be tolled
for any entity that is prevented from removing its equipment due to
the presence of equipment owned by a different entity until all such
§ 298-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-52
294:405
§ 298-53. Abandoned equipment and abandonment of equipment.
interfering equipment shall have been removed. The last entity to
remove such equipment shall remove the utility pole that is to be
replaced within 30 days of the removal of its equipment.
(2) The permittee shall notify the Department of Public Works of any
entity that has failed to remove its equipment within the required
30 days of notification and any applicable tolling periods. Failure to
remove any equipment from the pole that is to be replaced
pursuant to this section may result in penalties provided for in
§ 298-58 of this article.
(3) Any permittee that submits proof to the Department of Public
Works that its failure to remove its equipment from the utility pole
that is to be replaced was due to the failure of another entity to
remove its equipment from that pole shall not be liable for any
penalty and such permittee's thirty-day deadline to remove
equipment shall be tolled until the interfering equipment is
removed by such other entity. However, any entity that due to its
placement of equipment on the utility pole that is to be replaced
prohibits or interferes with any other entity from the removal of its
equipment or from the removal of the pole in accordance with this
section shall be liable for double the penalty provided for in
§ 298-58 of this article.
(4) Failure to remove the utility pole that is to be replaced and any
equipment that is located on such utility pole may result in
penalties provided for in § 298-58 of this article.
B. Damaged poles.
(1) When the Department of Public Works determines that a utility pole
in a Village right-of-way may be damaged and poses a potential
threat to public safety, the Department of Public Works shall notify
the owner or permittee, in writing, that it must be removed and
replaced within 72 hours, or such longer period as may be agreed
to by the Superintendent.
(2) Failure to remove the damaged pole and any equipment that is
located on such pole may result in penalties provided for in
§ 298-58 of this article.
A. Upon abandonment of equipment owned by a permittee in the Village
right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the Village within 72 hours.
B. Upon abandonment of equipment owned by a permittee in the Village
right-of-way, the permittee shall remove such equipment within 30
days.
C. The Village may direct the permittee, by written notice, to remove all or
a portion of such abandoned equipment at the permittee's sole expense.
§ 298-52 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-53
294:406
§ 298-54. Interference with facilities or underground utilities;
inspections.
§ 298-55. Enforcement.
D. If the permittee fails to remove all or any portion of abandoned
equipment as directed by the Village within a reasonable time period as
may be required by the Village under the circumstances, the Village
may perform such removal and charge double the cost of the removal
against the permittee.
E. Failure to notify the Village of abandoned equipment shall constitute a
violation of this article and subject the permittee to penalties as set
forth in § 298-58 of this article.
F. Upon Village notifying permittee of abandoned equipment, permittee
must remove abandoned equipment within 30 days.
G. Failure to remove equipment owned by a permittee in the Village rightof-
way within 30 days of abandonment shall constitute a violation of this
article and subject the permittee to penalties as set forth in § 298-58 of
this article.
A. A permittee shall not place or maintain its equipment so as to interfere
with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities or underground
utilities, including but not limited to sewers, gas or water mains, storm
drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the Village or any other permittee's
facilities lawfully occupying the Village right-of-way.
B. The Department of Public Works shall have the right to make such
inspections of equipment placed or maintained in Village right-of-way
as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
A. A permittee's failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall
constitute a violation of this article and subject the permittee to
penalties defined herein.
B. Before assessing any fine or penalty pursuant to this article, the
Department of Public Works shall give written notice of the violation
and its intention to assess such fines or penalties, which notice shall
contain a description of the alleged violation. Following the receipt of
such notice, the permittee shall have 30 days to either: a) cure the
violation to the Village's satisfaction and the Village shall make good
faith reasonable effort to assist in resolving the violation; or b) file an
appeal, as described herein, with the Village to contest the alleged
violation or to request additional time to cure the violation. If no appeal
is filed and if the violation is not cured within the thirty-day period, the
Village may assess all fines and penalties owed, beginning on the first
day of the violation.
C. Appeals to challenge a notice of violation issued by the Department of
Public Works shall be made in writing and be directed to the
§ 298-53 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-55
294:407
§ 298-56. Force majeure.
In the event a permittee's performance of or compliance with any of the
provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the
permittee's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed
excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result;
provided, however, that such permittee uses all practicable means to
expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For
purposes of this article, causes or events not within a permittee's control
shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes,
landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public
enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints
imposed by order of a governmental agency or court.
§ 298-57. Reservation of rights.
Any person, association of persons, corporation, municipal corporation, or
any other legal entity who uses the equipment of a permittee, other than
the permittee that owns the equipment, shall not be entitled to any rights
to place or maintain such equipment in excess of the rights of the permittee
that places or maintains the equipment.
§ 298-58. Penalties for offenses.
Superintendent, who shall, after due deliberation, accept, reject or
modify the notice of violation.
D. If the permittee fails to remedy an alleged violation within a reasonable
time period as may be required by the Department of Public Works, the
Village may perform such remedial actions and charge the cost of the
removal, including the cost of any administrative expenses incurred by
the Village, against the permittee.
E. Failure of the Village to enforce any requirements of this article shall
not constitute a waiver of the Village's right to enforce that violation or
subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate
enforcement remedies.
A. Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $500. Each
additional day or part of a day in which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation subject to a fine of $100.
B. Failure to perform restoration activities as required by this article shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 in addition to the repayment
of any costs incurred by the Village. Each additional day or part of a day
in which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
subject to a fine of $100.
C. In addition to any charges imposed pursuant to this article, there shall
be a penalty of three times the amount of the applicable permit fee for
any violation of the terms and conditions or requirements of a permit
§ 298-55 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-58
294:408
§ 298-59. Official website.
The Department of Public Works shall maintain on the official website of
Massapequa Park Village a webpage to allow residents to report to the
Department of Public Works incidents of abandoned, damaged or doubled
utility poles.
§ 298-60. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
article or the application thereof to any permittee, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this article or in its application to the
permittee, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance
directly involved in the controversy in which order or judgment shall be
rendered.
§ 298-61. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
issued by the Department of Public Works pursuant to this article or
for any actions improperly undertaken without obtaining such a permit
from the Department of Public Works in violation of this article.
§ 298-58 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 298-61
294:409
Chapter 300
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Environmental conservation — See Ch. 136.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 294.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 298-61 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 298-61
300:410
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words used herein are defined
as follows:
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the village.[Amended
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
DATE OF SUBMISSION PLAT — The date of the first public hearing at
which the Commission considers the plat.[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L.
No. 25-1983]
PLAT — The final map showing the subdivider's plan of subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval and which, if approved, will be
duly filed by the applicant with the Village Clerk.[Amended 8-2-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary map showing the proposed
subdivision layout to be presented to the Commission for its
consideration.[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983)
PRINT — Any paper print which reproduces legibly and exactly the original
tracing from which it was made.
ROAD or STREET —
SECRETARY — The duly designated Secretary to the Planning Commission
or the Village Clerk. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other divisions of land for immediate or future sales or for
building development, in such a way as to create one or more new streets
or extensions of existing street or lot lines.
MAJOR ROAD — -A road which provides or is officially planned to
provide four or more lanes for vehicular traffic.
A.
SECONDARY OR FEEDER STREET — A street intended to serve as a
link or connection from a major road to a minor residential street or
streets.
B.
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street intended to serve primarily
for the use of the occupants of the residences fronting thereon. A
street upon which multiple dwellings (constructed for occupancy by
more than two families) or business buildings are proposed to front or
under the applicable zoning ordinances are permitted to front shall be
considered as a secondary street.
C.
§ 300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-2
300:411
§ 300-2. Requirements for sale of lot, building permit and
certificate of occupancy.
In any subdivision of land subject to § 334-a of the Real Property law or
Article 9-A of the Real Property Law, no lot shall be sold or offered for sale,
no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on
any such lot and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building on
any such lot unless lot is located either upon a highway or upon a street or
laid out on the subdivision map and connecting with a highway, nor until the
owner or subdivider shall have complied with such statutes and shall have
filed a duplicate copy of the required map of such subdivision in the office
of the Village Clerk.
§ 300-3. Map and plans.
§ 300-4. Procedure for plat approval.
A. Approval required. No subdivision of land shall be made until the map
and plans therefor have been submitted to and approved by the Board
of Trustees. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983; 1-7-1991 by
L.L. No. 1-1991]
B. Contents of map. Such map shall layout not less than 20 acres, and the
plans therefor shall include adequate and suitable provision for:
(1) Streets having a right-of-way width of at least 50 feet.
(2) Permanent markers to be installed at all points reasonable and
necessary for the marking of the lot lines.
(3) Water supply and sanitary facilities.
(4) To the extent the size, location and potential population of such
subdivision shall make the same reasonable and necessary,
bayfront recreational areas, parks and other land and services
appropriate for the convenience of the inhabitants of such
subdivisions. A minimum area acceptable to the village for
recreation and parks shall be provided so that each subdivider shall
dedicate to the village an area for recreational purposes suitable in
character representing not less than 5% of the gross area being
subdivided.
A. Preliminary layout; submission. The subdividing owner or his agent
shall present at the office of the Commission, upon forms provided by
the Commission and in duplicate, the application for consideration of
the preliminary layout, together with six prints of the preliminary
layout, accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees. The
Secretary of the Commission will notify the applicant of the date and
time of the meeting of the Commission, at which the application will be
considered. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983; 1-7-1991 by
L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 300-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-4
300:412
B. Compliance with applicable regulations. The preliminary layout, street
profiles, drainage plan and plat and all procedures relating thereto
shall in all respects comply with the provisions of the County
Government Law of Nassau County, the appropriate building zone
ordinance and all applicable regulations, except where variations
therefrom may be specifically authorized by the Commission.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
C. Action on preliminary layout. The applicant or his duly authorized
representative shall be prepared to attend the designated meeting to
discuss the preliminary layout. Presentation of a preliminary layout
shall not be deemed a submission of the plat for approval. Nothing
contained herein shall prohibit the submission of the final plat in lieu of
such preliminary layout.
D. Final plat; submission. The applicant shall, within six months after
approval of the preliminary layout, present at the office of the Village
Clerk, upon forms provided by the Commission and in duplicate, the
application for consideration of the final plat, the estimate of the cost of
public improvements and utilities and the consent of the mortgagee to
the filing of the plat, together with a certificate of title of an approved
title company and in form satisfactory to the Commission and certifying
record title in the name of the applicant, and also six prints of the final
plat, accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees. Said
application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission at least
20 days before a regular meeting of the Commission. The Secretary will
then arrange for a public hearing at a regular meeting of the
Commission. The applicant shall also send notice of public hearing, on
forms supplied by the Planning Commission, to the adjacent property
owners as required by Section 1610 of the County Government Law of
Nassau County (the addresses to be obtained from the last completed
tax roll), and shall file with the Secretary of the Commission, at least
five days prior to public hearing, an affidavit executed by the applicant
or his agent on a form supplied by the Commission, stating the name
and address of each person to whom notice was sent and the date when
such notice was sent. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983;
1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
E. Bond in lieu of improvements. If required improvements and utilities
have not been completed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of
the Commission prior to final approval of the plat, then and in that
event and before such final approval of the plat, the applicant shall file
with the Commission a surety company bond in an amount determined
by the Commission and in accordance with a form supplied by the
Commission, to secure to the village the actual construction and
installation of such improvements required by the Commission on such
final approval and at a time fixed by the Commission and in accordance
with the requirements of the Commission under these regulations. As to
utilities required by the Commission on such final approval, the
Commission may in its sole discretion accept assurance in writing from
§ 300-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-4
300:413
§ 300-5. Contents of preliminary layout. [Amended 8-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
each public utility company whose facilities are proposed to be
installed. When such writing is acceptable, it shall be addressed to the
Commission and state in substance or effect that such public utility
company will make the installations necessary for the furnishing of
its services within the time therein specified satisfactory to the
Commission. There may also be included in determining the amount of
such bond the reasonable cost of inspection of such improvements by
the Commission, the estimated cost for employing a watchman to guard
any stormwater drainage or storage basins required to be installed by
the Commission, the cost of liability insurance and the estimated cost of
installation of necessary water supply facilities. [Amended 8-22-1983
by L.L. No. 25-1983]
F. Approval of plat. After completion of the foregoing procedure to the
satisfaction of the Commission and if the Commission shall approve the
plat, the approval of the Commission shall be endorsed thereon,
together with the date thereof, over the signature of the Chairman or
the Secretary of the Commission or an alternate designated by
resolution of the Commission. Prior to such endorsement the developer
shall file with the Commission five prints of the street profiles and
drainage plans as approved by the Commissioner of Public Works of
Nassau County. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
G. Filing plat. Within 90 days following the endorsement of final approval
by the Commission, the plat, together with one duplicate tracing, shall
be filed with the Village Clerk. Three duplicate tracings of the plat shall
be presented at the office of the Commission. [Amended 8-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
H. County approval. In the case of a subdivision plat showing premises
located within 300 feet of the village line, an endorsement by the
County Planning Commission shall be affixed to the plat.
I. Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of Chapter
294 and Chapter 345, Art. X shall be required for preliminary and final
subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and
design criteria and standards in Chapter 345, Art. X. The approved
preliminary and final subdivision plats shall be consistent with the
provisions of Chapter 294 and Chapter 345, Art. X. [Added
12-10-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
A. The preliminary layout presented to the Commission shall show the
following:
(1) Street and lot layout: the street and lot layout covering the entire
holding. Where the subdivision is to be divided into sections for the
purpose of submitting final plats, the preliminary layout shall show
§ 300-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-5
300:414
the boundaries of each section, and each section shall bear a
number indicating numerically the order in which the developer
proposes to submit for approval the plats covering such sections.
Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the order of
submission of final plats shall follow the sequence of the section
numbering.
(2) Scale: the scale of the drawing, 80 feet to the inch preferred.
(3) Topography: the topographic character of the land by means of
contours of existing surface at intervals not to exceed two feet.
Where the terrain is unusually flat or unusually steep, the
Commission may require a smaller contour interval or permit a
greater contour interval. The topography shall be drawn from an
actual field survey certified by a licensed land surveyor. Contours
shall be extended to cover an area 200 feet beyond the boundaries
of the parcel to be subdivided.
(4) Identification: the proposed subdivision name or identifying title
and the names of the incorporated village, town and county in
which the subdivision is located.
(5) Owner; subdivider: the name and address of the record owner and
subdivider.
(6) Surveyor: the name, license number and seal of the licensed land
surveyor.
(7) Tax Map description: the Tax Map description according to Nassau
County Tax Map.
(8) Post office: the name of the United States Post Office which will
serve the proposed subdivision.
(9) North point, date: the true or accurate magnetic North point and
date taken.
(10) Adjoining properties: the names and layouts of all adjacent
subdivisions, the names of owners of record of adjoining
undeveloped properties and the uses of adjacent lands. This
information shall be shown for the area extending 200 feet beyond
the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
(11) Zoning restrictions: the applicable use districts of the Zoning
Ordinance106 and the boundaries of such districts as affect the area
to be subdivided and the area extending 200 feet beyond the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
(12) Property lines, other lines: the location of property lines, school,
fire and other special district lines and municipal subdivision lines.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 300-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-5
300:415
(13) Existing features: the location of existing buildings, watercourses,
streams, ponds, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, gas
mains, parks and other essential existing features, as well as
easements, rights-of-way or other encumbrances.
(14) Elevation, etc: approximate key elevations, directions of water flow
and rate of grade on all proposed streets.
(15) Elevations on existing streets: established and existing elevations
on existing streets.
(16) Stormwater: proposed provisions for collecting and disposing of
stormwater.
(17) Street widenings, etc: the names, widths and proposed widenings
of existing streets located within the area to be subdivided or in the
area extending 200 feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision. On existing streets the location and type of sidewalk,
curb and pavement shall be shown. Required widenings on county
and town roads shall be shown.
(18) Street locations: the location of streets, public ways or any other
pertinent features.
(19) Street names: the names of all proposed streets, which names shall
be the same as the names of the streets of which they are
continuations, or if not continuations, shall not be similar to the
names of streets within the same fire district or within the area
served by the same Fire Department.
(20) Property for public use: all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated
for public use, such as parks, playgrounds, recharge basins, etc.
(21) Distances: approximate distances to nearest schools and firehouses
serving the proposed subdivision.
(22) Easements: boundaries of proposed easements over, under or
through private property. Permanent easements shall be not less
than 10 feet in width and shall provide satisfactory access to an
existing public open space shown on the layout.
(23) Lot lines; dwellings: proposed lot lines with approximate
dimensions. The proposed location of the dwelling and garage to be
erected shall be shown on each lot.
(24) Boundaries: the boundary description.
(25)Key map: key map at a scale of 400 feet to the inch and location
diagram at a scale of 3,000 feet to the inch.
(26) Number of acres and lots: the total number of acres and total
number of lots in the proposed subdivision.
§ 300-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-6
300:416
§ 300-6. Contents of final plat. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No.
25-1983]
The final subdivision plat presented to the Commission shall show the
following:
A. Street and lot layout. The original shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
India ink upon tracing cloth. The size of the sheets shall be not greater
than 36 inches by 48 inches. The drawing shall be at a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch. When more than one sheet is required, an
additional key sheet 36 inches by 48 inches shall be filed showing upon
a reduced scale the entire subdivision on one sheet with lot and block
numbers.
B. Sufficient data to enable any surveyor to determine readily the location
of every street line, lot line and boundary line and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground. This data shall be made by a licensed land
surveyor and tied in, where possible, with reference points previously
established by a public authority or by a licensed land surveyor.
C. The length and bearing of all straight lines and the radius, length and
central angle of all curves. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and
decimals of a foot.
D. By proper designation thereon, all public open spaces for which deeds
of cession are to be given and those spaces title to which is reserved by
the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with the
final subdivision plat copies of agreements or other documents showing
the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and the provision
made therefor.
E. A representation that all lots conform to and are in accordance with the
minimum requirements of the applicable use districts.
F. Lot and block numbers in accordance with the Nassau County Land and
Tax Map.
G. Monuments shall be set at all points required by the Commission.
Proposed monuments, to be shown thus:
Existing monuments shall be shown thus:
H. The title and location of the proposed subdivision as approved by the
Commission.
I. A North arrow. The North direction shall be at the top of the map or
within 20º east or west thereof.
J. The location of village, town, city, school district and other special
district lines.
§ 300-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-6
300:417
K. Proposed widenings of existing streets.
L. Approval of street grades and drainage by the Commissioner of Public
Works.
M. Approval of water supply and sewage disposal by the State Health
Department.
N. A key map at a scale of 400 feet to the inch and location diagram at a
scale of 3,000 feet to the inch.
O. A typical cross section of the proposed streets showing general
specifications for the public improvements.
P. A note signed by the owner stating: "The lands shown on this map as
roads, streets or highways, or for the widening thereof, and also
easements for the installation of sanitary sewers or drains in all streets
shown and locations indicated on the map and also land indicated for
other public use are hereby irrevocably offered for dedication to the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park."
Q. A note signed by the applicant's surveyor stating: "The land shown on
this map lies wholly within the limits of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park and not within 300 feet of any town boundary." The
note shall be appropriately amended when the foregoing statement
does not accurately describe the location of the plat.
R. Certification of a licensed land surveyor.
§ 300-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-6
300:418
ARTICLE II
Minimum Standards
§ 300-7. Conference with zoning regulations.
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the applicable Zoning
Ordinance107 affecting the area.
§ 300-8. General requirements.
Pursuant to § 179-1 of the Village Law,108 in any subdivision of lands subject
to § 334-a of the Real Property Law or Article 9-A of the Real Property Law,
no lot shall be sold or offered for sale, no building permit shall be issued
for the construction of any building on any such lot and no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for a building on any such lot unless such lot shall
be located either upon a highway or upon a street laid out on the subdivision
map and connected with a highway, nor until the owner or subdivider shall
have complied with such statutes and further provided that such subdivision
map shall lay out not less than 20 acres and the plans therefor shall include
adequate and suitable provisions for the matters specified in this article.
§ 300-9. Streets.
A. Layout. The street layout shall be in conformity with an advantageous
development of the area covered by the plat submitted and of the entire
neighboring area.
B. Continuation of streets. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision
shall provide for the continuation of the streets in adjoining
subdivisions or for their proper projection when adjoining property has
not been subdivided, so far as in the judgment of the Commission such
continuations or projections are necessary for fire protection, for the
proper movement of traffic or for the construction or extension,
presently or when required, of needed utilities and public services such
as sewers, water and drainage facilities. Where streets are continued,
they shall be not less than 50 feet wide. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L.
No. 25-1983]
C. Width. The width of street rights-of-way and paved areas shall be in
accordance with the improvement requirements in §§ 300-15 through
300-26.
D. Culs-de-sac and dead-ends. Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets shall be
avoided. When a cul-de-sac is permitted, it normally shall not exceed
350 feet in length and shall be equipped with a turnaround roadway
having a minimum radius of 40 feet for the curbline at the closed end. A
dead-end street for the purpose of future development of adjacent
property may be permitted or required by the Commission. In such case
107. See Ch 345, Zoning.
108. Editor's Note: See now § 7-730 of the Village Law.
§ 300-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-9
300:419
a turnaround may be required by the Commission. [Amended
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
E. Contour. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land
and to avoid streets of dangerous gradient. Curved alignment should be
used to secure economic location of streets where the terrain is steep.
F. Crossings. In the location of streets, consideration should be given to
possible underground or overhead crossings in connection with
railroads, traffic separation or major highways and parkways. Traffic
distributing circles may be required where needed.
G. Title reservation. Reservation of the title in any of the platted land or of
any land controlling access to streets or land otherwise reserved for
public use is prohibited.
H. Provision for widening. Whenever a street abuts property to be
subdivided and is less than 50 feet in width, provision for the widening
thereof may be required as directed by the Planning Commission.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
I. Curves. Within a block, street lines deflecting from each other at any
one point by more than 10º shall be connected with a curve, the radius
of which shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
J. Grades; vertical curves. Grades of all streets shall be the reasonable
minimum, and unless warranted by extenuating circumstances, shall be
not less than 3/10% nor more than 5% for major and secondary roads
and not less than 3/10% nor more than 10% for minor roads. Gradients
shall be used to facilitate surface drainage to proper natural or artificial
outlets. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical
curves as approved by the Commissioner of Public Works. Such vertical
curves shall give a minimum sight distance of 1,000 feet on major
roads, 500 feet on secondary streets and 300 feet on minor residential
streets.
K. Drainage. The developer shall install facilities for the drainage of
streets as approved by the Commissioner of Public Works. Any recharge
basins required by the Commission shall be constructed and completed
and any other drainage facilities required to be installed on the plat
shall be constructed and completed prior to the installation of any other
improvements required on the plat. All such drainage structures shall
be maintained in good operating condition until such time as the bond is
released. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
L. Intersections. Four-way street intersections shall be avoided where
possible, with the exception of major highway crossings. Where streets
intersect one another, the angle of intersection shall be as near 90º as
possible. Curb radii at intersections where the interior angle is greater
than 80º shall be not less than 12 feet, and where the interior angle is
less than 80º, larger curb radii shall be provided as determined by the
§ 300-9 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-9
300:420
§ 300-10. Block frontages. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No.
25-1983]
§ 300-11. Lots
Commission and property lines shall be established concentric thereto.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
M. Distance between street openings. Minor or secondary street openings
into a major road shall be at least 500 feet apart.
N. Sidewalks, pavements, signs, etc. The developer shall install sidewalks,
curbs, and pavements on proposed streets as well as curbs and
sidewalks on existing streets which bound or intersect the proposed
subdivision, as approved by the Commission. The developer will also be
required to install street signs, property line monuments and driveway
aprons. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
A. Length. No street frontage between intersecting streets shall exceed
1,200 feet nor be less than 200 feet unless otherwise approved by the
Commission.
B. Rows of lots. Areas bounded entirely by streets shall provide for two
rows of lots unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
A. Size generally. All lots shall at least conform to applicable village zoning
regulations. Ample space shall be provided for the entire erection of a
garage and the construction of a driveway on each lot. If garages are
not to be built prior to sale of lots, ample space shall be left to permit
erection of a garage and construction of a driveway in conformance
with the side yard requirements as specified in the applicable zoning
regulations.
B. Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to street
lines unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
C. Frontage. Lots shall not front directly on (that is to say, have ingress
from or egress to) a major road, but shall front on a marginal road or on
a minor interior street. Unless otherwise permitted by the Commission,
such marginal roads shall be at least 36 feet in width and shall provide
for an eight-foot sidewalk area, a twenty-four-foot paved roadway and
four-foot strip adjoining the major road. Where a proposed subdivision
abuts a state park or parkway, a marginal street or service road
adjacent to the right-of-way of such parkway or abutting such state park
may also be required by the Commission. When required, such streets
adjacent to a state park or parkway shall be a minimum of 50 feet in
width. In the case of lots abutting a major road and fronting on a minor
interior street, such lots shall be at least 115 feet in depth, of which the
15 feet nearest the major road shall be restricted for planting; the plat
shall carry a note prohibiting vehicular access from such lots to the
major road, a declaration to that effect shall be recorded in the office of
§ 300-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-11
300:421
§ 300-12. Recreation and parks.
Adequate and suitable area shall be provided for recreation and parks. The
minimum area acceptable to the village for recreation and parks, to be
dedicated by the developer to the village, shall be not less than 5% of the
gross area being subdivided.
§ 300-13. Public utilities. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
The Commission may require the developer to furnish all necessary public
utilities in and to the proposed subdivision. Water supply and sewage
disposal must be furnished in accordance with the plan approved by the
State Health Department.
§ 300-14. Bulkheads. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
The developer shall install bulkheading, as approved by the Commission, on
existing or proposed canals and all other waterfront plots.
§ 300-15. Street rights-of-way.
§ 300-16. Street width.
the Village Clerk and the deeds of these lots shall carry such
restrictions as may be approved by the Commission. [Amended
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
A. Minor residential streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet.
B. Secondary or feeder streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 54
feet.
C. The width of proposed future major roads shall be determined by the
Commission but shall be not less than 80 feet. [Amended 8-22-1983
by L.L. No. 25-1983]
A. Where the right-of-way is 50 feet, there shall be 30 feet between the
curblines.
B. Where the right-of-way is 54 feet, there shall be 34 feet between the
curblines.
C. Where the right-of-way is 80 feet or wider, the minimum width between
the curblines shall be as determined by the Planning Commission.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
D. The required width of pavement shall be the distance between the
curblines, unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Sidewalks
shall be four feet in width and in residential areas shall be placed two
feet outside the property line. The placing of any street trees,
shrubbery or retaining walls within the right-of-way is not permitted.
[Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
§ 300-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-17
300:422
§ 300-17. Grading.
§ 300-18. Installation of utilities. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No.
25-1983]
§ 300-19. Storm and sanitary sewers.
A. All grading of streets shall be in accordance with the grades approved
by the Department of Public Works Nassau County.
B. All streets shall be graded between the property lines to conform to the
established cross section and to provide for required pavements,
drainage, utilities, sidewalks and driveway aprons. All driveway aprons
shall be constructed to meet the sidewalk grade.
A. All gas and water mains required by the Commission shall be installed
in accordance with the specifications of the utility company or
municipal authority or district serving the area.
B. All streetlights and streetlighting standards shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications of the lighting agency serving the
area. Where required by the Commission, the developer shall install
streetlighting standards.
C. Electric light and telephone wires shall be either underground or on
poles along the rear property lines or as modified and amended by the
Commission.
A. All storm and sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with
the specifications of the village and the County Department of Public
Works.
B. The following regulations shall apply to stormwater drainage or storage
basins:
(1) Permits. No construction of any stormwater drainage or storage
basins required to be constructed by the Commission upon its
approval of a subdivision plat shall be commenced without first
notifying the Commission when such work is to begin and
permission in writing given by the Secretary of the Commission to
the developer or his agents to begin such work. [Amended
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
(2) Fences. No excavation for the pit in such a stormwater drainage or
storage basin shall be made unless and until there shall be
constructed a permanent fence entirely surrounding the proposed
excavation, built in accordance with the specifications of the
County Department of Public Works.
(3) Safety. On and after the time of the commencement of the
excavation for the pit on the site of the stormwater drainage or
§ 300-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-19
300:423
storage basin and until such time as the village shall have accepted
title to the plot on which it is located, the developer shall:
(a) Employ a watchman or guard or such number of them as shall
be necessary to protect children against injury, who shall be
maintained at such site at all times when work is being
performed on the site.
(b) At all other times keep all entrances or means of ingress or
egress in the fence closed and securely locked.
(4) Liability insurance. No permit shall be issued by the Secretary of
the Commission to commence work on such a stormwater drainage
or storage basin unless there shall be filed in his office by the
developer a public liability insurance policy insuring the village and
the developer, covering the operation of such developer and the
construction of such stormwater drainage or storage basin, with
limits of one hundred $100,000/$200,000, such insurance to
continue in force until the performance bond has been discharged,
the form and manner of execution of such policy of insurance to
bear the approval of the Village Attorney. [Amended 8-22-1983
by L.L. No. 25-1983]
(5) Pending and uncompleted construction. [Amended 8-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
(a) The regulations in Subsection B(1) through (4) shall apply to all
stormwater drainage and storage basins shown on plats for the
subdivision of land which have been approved by the
Commission prior to the effective date hereof, except that if the
performance bond for the installation of the improvements has
been discharged, only Subsection B(3) shall continue in force
and effect.
(b) Wherever there shall exist at the time of the effective date of
these regulations any excavations for a stormwater drainage or
storage basin shown on a plat for the subdivision of land
approved by the Commission, the following additional
regulations shall apply:
[1] The developer shall file with the Commission, within 15
days, the public liability insurance policy required in
Subsection B(4). [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
[2] No further excavation shall be made until the permit to
resume work shall have been issued by the Secretary of
the Commission.
[3] If the stormwater drainage or storage basin has not been
completely surrounded by a fence and the performance
bond furnished to the village for the installation of the
§ 300-19 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-19
300:424
§ 300-20. Monuments.
Monuments shall be reinforced concrete or stone and shall be dour inches
square, with a length of at least 36 inches, and shall be embedded the full
depth.
§ 300-21. Street signs.
Street signs shall be placed at all intersections and shall be constructed as
follows:
§ 300-22. Bulkhead specifications.
Bulkheading shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
prescribed in § 300-26.
§ 300-23. Inspection. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 25-1983]
The Commission may employ inspectors to ensure the satisfactory
completion of improvements and utilities required by the Commission. If the
applicant elects to install such improvements and utilities before the final
approval of the plat, the applicant shall notify the Commission in writing
and an inspector will be assigned thereto. If a bond is to be given to ensure
improvements has not been discharged, the developer
shall immediately:
[a] Employ a watchman or guard or such number of them
as shall be necessary to protect children against
injury, who shall be maintained at such site from 7:00
a.m. to two hours after sundown daily until a fence
completely surrounding such excavation shall have
been erected and constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the village.
[b] Proceed to install the fence required in Subsection
B(2).
A. Standard. Steel post three inches in diameter or galvanized iron 2 1/2
inches in diameter, 10 feet in length, 2 1/2 feet embedded in concrete, 7
1/2 feet above grade, finished at top with post cap.
B. Sign.
(1) Galvanized or bonderized steel, No. 12 gauge, 4 1/2 inches in width
by a length of between 19 and 30 inches, securely fastened to a
post cap to prevent swinging or turning. The sign shall be of
durable finish with letters at least two inches in height; or
(2) Street signs of different design and specifications may be placed
upon approval of the Commission. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L.
No. 25-1983]
§ 300-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-23
300:425
completion of such improvements, the Commission will assign an inspector
to ensure such satisfactory completion after final approval of the plat. The
developer shall pay to the Commission the cost of such inspections. The
approximate cost shall be agreed upon by the Commission and the applicant
and be included in the amount of the bond as required in § 300-4E.
§ 300-24. Variances.
§ 300-25. Street specifications.
A. The Commission may vary, subject to appropriate conditions, such
requirements of the foregoing regulations as in its judgment of the
special circumstances and conditions relating to a particular plat are
not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare. When making its determination as to the improvements to be
required, the Commission shall take into consideration the prospective
character of the development and the allowed density of population
under the applicable zoning regulations. [Amended 8-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
B. The Commission shall also hear and decide all matters upon which it is
required to pass under these regulations. [Amended 8-22-1983 by
L.L. No. 25-1983]
C. Where the applicant desires the variance of any provision of the within
regulations, he shall include a request therefor, with a statement of
reasons for such request, with his application for the approval of the
preliminary layout.
A. All street paving, curbs, gutter slabs, sidewalks and driveway aprons
shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications for
subdivisions prepared by the County Department of Public Works and in
effect at the time of the final approval of the plat or as modified,
changed or amended by the Board of Trustees of the village. The
general types, thickness and other requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Pavement specifications.
(a) Soil cement base pavement specifications shall be as
prescribed in §§ 300-27 through 300-34.
(b) Concrete-type pavement shall be six-inch-thick portland
cement reinforced concrete pavement mixed proportionately
using one part portland cement and two parts washed sand
and four parts broken stone aggregate, measured separately
by weight.
(2) Curb specifications. Curbs shall be 18 inches in depth with five
inches extending above the waterline and six inches in width at the
top expanding to a width of seven inches at the waterline and
continuing at that width to the bottom. The curb shall be
constructed of concrete with a one-to-two-to-four mix.
§ 300-23 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-25
300:426
§ 300-26. Timber bulkheads.
(3) Gutter slab specifications. A gutter slab of concrete shall be
required in conjunction with bituminous-type pavement where the
gradient is less than 0.3% and shall be constructed three feet wide
adjacent to the curb with a one-to-two-to-four mix and six inches
thick.
(4) Sidewalk specifications. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick and at
least four feet wide, constructed of one course of concrete with a
one-to-two-to-four mix. Where the sidewalk is laid in driveway
entrances, it shall be six inches thick.
(5) Driveway apron specifications. Driveway aprons shall be six inches
thick, 10 feet in width at the face of the curb and seven feet in the
width at the sidewalk, with a step in the face of the curb of one
inch, constructed of one course of concrete using a one-to-two-tofour
mix.
B. The foregoing specifications are subject to change by the County
Department of Public Works at any time. Specifications for any
subdivision approved prior to any change shall remain in force.
A. All timber bulkheads in subdivisions shall be designed in accordance
with accepted engineering practices and shall take into account site
conditions, type and extent of soil conditions on both sides of the
bulkhead line, depth of water, purpose bulkhead is to serve and other
pertinent design data. Plans, specifications and design computations
prepared by a licensed professional engineer shall be submitted to the
village for approval prior to the start of any construction. Bulkhead
design shall be prepared for conditions of deep water at the high-water
line and for separation of beach land at high water from the uplands.
B. All bulkhead designs shall consider the specifications for timber
bulkheads of the Nassau County Planning Commission as a minimum
requirement but shall be reinforced where design data warrants.
§ 300-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-26
300:427

ARTICLE III
Specifications for Soil Cement Base Pavement
§ 300-27. Performance of work.
§ 300-28. Materials.
A. Under this section, the developers and/or their contractors shall finegrade
the pavement areas and construct a soil cement base pavement
having a minimum compacted thickness of five inches. The base
pavement will conform to the lines, grades and typical sections shown
on the plans and be in accordance with these specifications and the
directions of the Engineer.
B. The soil cement base pavement shall consist of a simple, intimate
mixture of pulverized soil, measured quantities of portland cement,
calcium chloride and water, combined, uniformly mixed, compacted,
finished and cured to form a hard, durable, semirigid base pavement.
C. The preparation and admixing of soils for the soil cement base
pavement is to be included as a part of this section.
A. Portland cement shall be Type 1 conforming to ASTM C-150. One cubic
foot of cement shall be considered to weigh 94 pounds. Cement will be
paid for separately.
B. Water shall be free from oil, acid alkali, vegetable or organic matter and
all other substances deleterious to the hardening of the soil-cement
mixture. The developers and/or their contractors shall procure all such
necessary water at their own expense.
C. Soil shall consist of the in-place materials existing within the area to be
paved, approved selected borrow materials or a combination of both
these materials in order to correct deficiencies in the existing grade
and/or to provide more favorable soil characteristics.
D. Calcium chloride.
(1) Calcium chloride shall be in the form of loose dry lumps or flakes
and fine enough to feed readily through the common forms of
spreaders used in roadwork and shall meet the requirements of
ASTM Designation D 98.
(2) The calcium chloride shall be delivered in containers of a type
acceptable to the Engineer. The name of the manufacturer, the
approximate net weight and the percentage of calcium chloride
(CaC12) guaranteed by the manufacturer shall be plainly marked
on the container.
§ 300-27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-29
300:429
§ 300-29. Equipment.
All equipment shall be of an approved type, in first-class mechanical and
operating condition and of adequate capacity to properly perform the
required work in a satisfactory manner. The equipment shall be such as
to ensure proper pulverization of soils, accurate application of cement
and water, thorough mixing and incorporation of all materials, compaction,
finishing and curing of the pavement as required. Standby equipment shall
be available to the developers and/or their contractors so as to be in
operation within one hour after any breakdown occurs on the job.
§ 300-30. Preparation of subbase.
§ 300-31. Fine grading and soil cement construction.
A. Generally. The subbase shall be defined as that portion of the roadbed
or parking field upon which the soil cement base pavement is to be
placed. The subbase soils shall be defined as that thickness of soils
below the base pavement as may need to be stabilized by materials
admixed therein to form a suitable subbase for a pavement of several or
more courses. The developers and/or contractors shall remove all
boulders, mulch, soft clay and other objectionable materials to such
depths as may be directed by the Engineer. These areas are to be
backfilled with acceptable material to subgrade for base pavement.
B. Preparation of base pavement soils. Depending upon the character of
soil encountered at base pavement elevations, all or parts of the base
pavement soils, where directed by the Engineer, shall be improved with
material added from the excavation or borrowed. The developers and/or
their contractors shall save, during the excavation operation, sufficient
selected materials for this purpose. Suitable loamy, silty or sandy soils
shall he added to form a stable base for a minimum of six inches
compacted thickness. The areas to be treated in cuts shall be excavated
to a depth of three inches below soil cement pavement or more as
directed by the Engineer. A layer of proper-type material between three
and five inches loose measure shall be spread over the area and
thoroughly mixed to a depth of six inches by scarifying or other method
approved by the Engineer. The base soils shall then be shaped and
compacted to the approximate finished line and grade. Smooth-wheel
rollers weighing at least 10 tons shall be used for compaction. Shaping,
filling and rolling shall continue until the base pavement soils are
compacted to a depth of six inches and are within two inches of final
grade and ready for the fine-grading operation. Where required, water
shall be added to effect compaction. The base pavement soils shall be
kept free from ruts and depressions and properly drained.
A. Prior to starting construction of the soil cement base pavement, the
developers and/or their contractors shall complete all fine grading of
the area as is required to establish the completed work to the lines,
grades, thickness and typical section shown on the plans. All unsuitable
§ 300-29 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-31
300:430
soils or other materials shall be removed, disposed of off the site and
replaced with acceptable material obtained on the site or from off-site
borrow as required and directed by the Engineer.
B. The subgrade of the area to be paved shall be firm, stable and capable
of supporting all construction equipment employed and permit the
required compaction of the soil cement mixture. All soft yielding or
unstable subbase soils shall be satisfactorily corrected before
construction of the pavement is initiated.
C. After all fine grading has been completed and subbase properly
prepared, the area to be processed shall be prewetted if necessary,
scarified and pulverized as required. It shall then be bladed and leveled
to approximate true grade and section. Pulverizing of soil materials
shall continue until 100% by dry weight passes a one-inch sieve and a
minimum of 80% passes a No. 4 sieve, exclusive of retained gravel and
stone after completion of moist mixing. All gravel, stone and
unpulverized road metal over 1 1/2 inches in size shall be removed from
the site. No stones greater than two inches in size shall be permitted in
the soil cement mixture.
D. Before the cement is distributed and spread upon the soil, calcium
chloride at the rate of 0.6% by weight of soil shall be evenly distributed
over the entire area of the soil cement pavement. An approved spreader
shall be used to distribute the calcium chloride.
E. Cement.
(1) Portland cement of the type specified shall be uniformly distributed
and evenly spread over the area at the rate of not less than 47
pounds per square yard. The developers and/or their contractors
shall furnish suitable equipment of an approved type for handling,
accurate weighing and spreading of the cement where bulk cement
is used. When bag cement is used, the containers shall be
accurately spotted and spaced in such manner as to ensure that the
required quantity of cement will be obtained with uniform
distribution over the area to be processed.
(2) The percentage of moisture in the soil at the time of cement
application shall not exceed the quantity that will permit a uniform
and intimate mixture of soil materials and cement during mixing
operations.
(3) All displaced cement shall be replaced prior to starting mixing
operations.
(4) No cement shall be applied when the soil materials or the subgrade
is frozen. Air temperature in the shade shall be at least 40º F. and
rising.
§ 300-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-31
300:431
(5) Distribution of bulk cement over the area to be processed shall be
accomplished by a cement spreader equipped with suitable device
to accurately regulate and control the quantity of cement spread.
(6) Where bag cement and hand pumping is employed, bags shall be
emptied to form a uniform transverse windrow across the
processing area and spread by means of a spike-tooth harrow, nail
drag or other approved equipment. A sufficient number of passes
shall be made to ensure a uniform and even distribution of cement
over the area.
F. Equipment for mixing the soil cement shall be a traveling mixing
machine of the multiple-pass rotary type. Window mixing will not be
permitted under any conditions. After spreading of cement has
advanced sufficiently, the developers and/or their contractors shall
proceed with dry mixing and blending together of cement and the soil
materials. The operation shall continue only until cement is sufficiently
blended with the soil to prevent formation of cement balls when water
is applied. Complete and thorough mixing of the material is not
essential for this phase of the processing.
G. Water.
(1) Water supply shall be adequate and the equipment for its
application and distribution shall be pressure type of such capacity
to ensure that the complete application of the total quantity
required will be accomplished within a period of not more than
three hours.
(2) The total quantity to be applied shall be such as will bring the
entire soil cement mixture to optimum moisture content or slightly
above. It shall not be of such excessive quantity as will result in the
mixture becoming unstable during the compaction and finishing
operation.
(3) The developers and/or their contractors shall proceed with the
application and incorporation of water and mixing of the soil
cement immediately after the dry mixing is completed. Water shall
be applied uniformly, and excessive concentrations on or near the
surface shall be avoided. Each increment of water applied shall be
incorporated and mixed with the soil cement mixture before
applying the next increment.
(4) After all required water has been applied, mixing shall continue
until a uniform, intimate and homogenous mixture of soil, cement
and water is obtained for the full width and required depth of the
area being processed. The mixture shall be of a uniform color and
free of wet or dry streaks or stratas.
(5) The percentage of moisture in the completed mixture, based on
over-dry weight, shall not be below or more than 20% above
optimum moisture content as determined by moisture density test
§ 300-31 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-31
300:432
ASTM Designation D-1557, Method C, on representative samples of
the mixture obtained in the area being processed.
H. Shaping.
(1) Compaction of the soil cement mixture shall be with pneumatic
tired or sheepsfoot rollers. Shaping shall be performed with a
motor-grader. Spike-tooth harrow or nail drag shall be employed
for removal of compaction planes.
(2) The moisture content of the mixture shall be maintained at not less
than the optimum during the entire compaction operation. The
entire area shall be compacted to a density of not less than 95% of
the maximum density. Weight of roller equipment shall be the
heaviest that will not overstress the soil and not less than 12 tons.
(3) Rolling shall start at the edges and proceed to the center;
compaction to specified density shall be satisfactorily completed
within a period of two hours.
(4) After rolling and compaction has advanced sufficiently, the surface
shall be shaped and trued with a motor grader as necessary to
obtain uniform compaction and required grade and cross-section.
Compacting, rolling and shaping shall continue as required until
the specified density is obtained and the surface is true to line,
grade and cross section. Water shall be applied as necessary to
maintain and provide the required moisture content. Compaction
planes shall be removed from the surface by use of equipment
stipulated above.
(5) Final surface of pavement shall be developed by use of steel wheel
or pneumatic tired rollers, or both, compacting to specified density.
When directed, final rolling shall be supplemented with broom
drag.
(6) The completed surface shall be smooth, dense, free of compaction
planes, cracks, ridges or loose materials and true to line, grade and
section. The pavement shall be at least the specified thickness and
the density not less than the minimum specified. Any portion of the
pavement found to have a density less than 95% maximum density
as determined by standard test procedures shall be rectified or
removed and replaced by the developers and/or their contractors at
no additional cost to the village.
I. Curing.
(1) After the soil cement has been satisfactorily finished, the
developers and/or their contractors shall cure the completed
pavement for a period of not less than three days. Bituminous
material shall be applied to the pavement surface at the
approximate rate of 0.20 gallon per square yard. Curing material
shall be applied not more than 12 hours after finishing operations
§ 300-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-31
300:433
§ 300-32. Testing.
are completed, but not before all excess water or moisture shall
have dried from the pavement surfaces.
(2) Multiple-spray equipment of an approved type shall be employed
for application of the bituminous material. The distributors shall be
so constructed as to cover not less than a ten-foot width in one
pass, with nozzles so arranged that each spray will overlap the next
by 1/2 its width. Bituminous material shall be RC-2 and rate of
application shall be such as to give complete coverage without
excessive runoff. The finished pavement shall be kept continuously
moistened with water until curing materials are applied.
J. At the completion of each day's construction, a straight construction
joint shall be formed by cutting back into the completed work to form a
true vertical face for the following construction to abut.
A. The developers and/or their contractors shall be required to retain a
reputable private laboratory experienced in testing soil cement work.
The laboratory must be approved by the Engineer prior to the start of
the soil cement work. The cost of testing will be paid by the developers
and/or their contractors and included in the price bid under this item.
B. The laboratory will be required to perform the following tests and
services and provide five copies of all test results. No soil cement work
shall begin until preliminary tests have been submitted to the Engineer
and approved.
(1) The laboratory will drill test holes into the completed base
pavement soils along the roadway or parking field at points no
greater than 500 feet apart in the parking fields, at the rate of one
test hole for each 1,000 square yards of pavement area and at every
location where a noticeable change in soil is evident. The
laboratory will make a composite sieve analysis of the soils in place
before the cement is added. The laboratory will provide the
Engineer with a test hole location, graphical analysis of the soils, a
pH test and organic content of each sample.
(2) The laboratory will perform moisture density tests or Modified
Proctor Tests (ASTM D-1557, Method C) to determine the optimum
moisture content for the soil cement mixture.
(3) The laboratory shall determine the required cement factor for the
soil cement pavement by means of the short-cut test procedures as
outlined in the Soil Cement Laboratory Handbook of the Portland
Cement Association.
(4) The laboratory shall keep a technician on the site to perform field
moisture density tests; to verify the amount of cement used; to
verify the thickness of the compacted soil cement; and to note the
air temperatures during placement of the soil cement pavement.
§ 300-31 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-32
300:434
§ 300-33. Cold-weather restrictions.
§ 300-34. Measurement and payment.
The developers and/or their contractors shall not proceed with
mixing the cement into the subgrade unless the technician is
present at the site.
A. Unless approved by the Engineer, no soil cement shall be mixed when
weather conditions indicate the temperature may within 24 hours drop
to 35º F. On a rising temperature, no soil cement shall be mixed at a
temperature lower than 40º F., and only when weather conditions
indicate the temperature will be above this point for at least 24 hours.
B. When the air temperature may be expected to drop below 40º F. at any
time during the day or night, a sufficient supply of hay, straw or other
material suitable for covering and protection shall be provided at the
site of the soil cement work. This hay or straw shall be applied to the
pavement surface and edges at the rate of one bale for each 12 square
yards of finished soil cement.
C. Soil cement which has been damaged by freezing shall be removed and
replaced by the developers and/or their contractors at their own
expense.
A. The quantity to be paid for under this article will be the total number of
square yards constructed and includes the following work acceptably
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and to the
satisfaction of the Engineer: preparation of subbase and base pavement
soils, fine grading, prewetting, scarifying, pulverizing, spreading,
mixing, compacting and curing the soil cement base pavement. This
item shall include the cost of all laboratory testing required.
B. The unit price bid for this item per square yard shall include the cost of
furnishing all labor, materials, tools, equipment and incidentals
necessary to satisfactorily complete the entire work.
C. Portland cement required for the soil cement base pavement shall be
paid for separately.
§ 300-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-34
300:435

ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Review
[Added 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 300-35. Applicability; conformance with approved site plan
required.
Any permitted or special permit use in any business district occupying one
or more buildings or structures or areas of open land situate on a plot
having an area of 80,000 square feet or more in single ownership at the
date of enactment of this article, shall be subject to the provisions of this
article, and no permit shall be issued by the article, Building Inspector for
the erection or alteration of any structure or for any land or building on
such plot unless the same shall be in conformity with a site plan approved by
the Village Board prior to the submission to and consideration as described
herein.
§ 300-36. Purpose.
The intent and purpose of this article is to ensure that any plot of land
affected thereby shall be developed with proper regard for the public
health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience of the public in general and
of the occupants and users of the subject land and buildings in particular.
§ 300-37. Objectives.
The site plan shall be proposed and considered with the following objectives
in view:
A. That all proposed traffic accessways shall be sufficient, but not
excessive, in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and
visibility; sufficiently removed from street corners and places of public
assembly; and in compliance with other traffic and safety
considerations.
B. That adequate loading spaces shall be provided to eliminate the need
for truck parking in public streets or interference with the flow of traffic
within the area and provide suitable accessibility to loading bays and
service areas.
C. That all service areas shall be reasonably screened at all seasons of the
year from the view of adjacent streets and that the general landscaping
of the site shall be such as to enhance the suburban character of the
village and in character with that generally prevailing in the
neighborhood.
D. That all existing trees over eight inches in diameter, measured three
feet above the base of the trunk, shall be retained to the maximum
possible.
§ 300-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-37
300:437
§ 300-38. Procedure.
E. That all plazas and other paved areas intended for pedestrians shall be
of suitably finished pavement and shall be arranged with plant
materials to prevent the creation of excessive expanses of pavement.
F. That all outdoor lighting shall be of such nature and so arranged as to
provide adequate illumination to the entire area included in the site
plan without causing objectionable glare on adjoining streets or
properties.
G. That there shall be provision for suitable fencing, landscaping and
adequate protective and screening planting of trees and shrubs to
provide an attractive overall appearance within the development site
and to protect surrounding properties from encroachment of
deterioration.
H. That the exterior design of buildings, structures and signs shall be
harmonious and shall present a pleasing overall pattern and
appearance and shall avoid disfiguration of the surrounding
neighborhood.
I. That there is adequate provision for off-street parking.
J. That all other requirements of the Village Planning Commission and of
the Village Board necessary to prevent noise, congestion, confusion or
accumulation of litter and to provide proper drainage and related
facilities shall be complied with.
A. Prior to the submission of a preliminary site plan to the Village Planning
Commission, a presubmission conference shall be held wherein the
applicant shall meet with the Village Planning Commission or its
designated representative to discuss the proposed site plan so that the
necessary subsequent steps may be undertaken with a clear
understanding of the Village Planning Commission's requirements and
the village's standards in matters relating to the development of the
site.
B. Within six months following the presubmission conference, the
applicant shall submit three copies of the preliminary site plan and any
related information to the Building Inspector. If the proposed site plan
is not submitted within this six-month period, another presubmission
conference may be required at the option of the Village Planning
Commission.
C. The Building Inspector shall determine whether or not the preliminary
site plan meets the requirements of all Zoning Ordinance provisions
other than those of this article regarding site plan review.109
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 300-37 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-38
300:438
§ 300-39. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed directly or indirectly to
constitute a waiver or modification of any provision or requirement of any
section of any zoning ordinance regulating construction and maintenance
or use of any building or the use of any lands situate in a business district.
§ 300-40. Amendments to approved site plans.
Review of any amendment to an approved final site plan shall be processed
in the same manner as herein provided.
§ 300-41. Contents of site plan.
The applicant shall cause the preliminary site plan map to be prepared
by an architect, landscape architect, civil engineer, surveyor, land planner
or other competent person approved by the Planning Commission, at a
scale sufficient in size to permit an adequate review as determined by
the Village Planning Commission. The preliminary site plan shall contain
those elements which are appropriate to the proposed development or
use as indicated by the Village Planning Commission in the presubmission
conference, to include the following:
D. Should the Building Inspector determine that the preliminary site plan
does not meet such requirements, he shall so notify the applicant, who
shall have 30 days after receipt of such notice to appeal such
determination by filing an application with the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals.
E. Should the Building Inspector determine that the preliminary site plan
meets such requirements, he shall so notify the applicant, who shall
have 30 days after receipt of such notice to submit eight copies of the
site plan to the Village Planning Commission.
F. Upon receipt of a preliminary site plan approved by the Building
Inspector, the Village Planning Commission shall forward a copy thereof
to the Nassau County Planning Commission for its review.
G. The Village Planning Commission shall act to recommend approval,
approval with conditions or disapproval of any preliminary site plan
within 60 days after submission of the preliminary site plan to it. Failure
to act within 60 days shall be deemed recommendation for approval.
H. The Village Board shall approve or disapprove any preliminary site plan
within 60 days after submission to it of such site plan and the Village
Planning Commission's recommendation or, if such site plan has been
submitted to the Nassau County Planning Commission, within 30 days
after receipt of the recommendation of the Nassau County Planning
Commission, whichever is later. A preliminary site plan shall, upon
approval by the Village Board, become a final site plan.
A. Legal data.
§ 300-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-41
300:439
(1) The name and address of the owner of record and date of
acquisition of the subject property.
(2) The name and address of the person, firm or organization
preparing the map, together with the preparer's professional
license number and seal.
(3) The date, North point and written and graphic scale.
(4) Sufficient description or information, together with a metes and
bounds description, to define precisely the boundaries of the
property. All distances shall be in feet and tenths of a foot. All
angles shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds or closer. The error
of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000.
(5) The locations, names and existing widths of adjacent streets and
curblines.
(6) The locations and owners of all adjoining property within a fivehundred-
foot radius as shown on the latest tax records, together
with the present use of such adjoining lands.
(7) The locations, width and purpose of all existing and proposed
easements, setbacks, reservations and areas dedicated to public
use on or within a five-hundred-foot radius of the subject property,
together with copies of such documents, existing or proposed.
(8) The location of all existing and proposed deed restrictions or
covenants applying to the subject property, together with copies of
such documents, existing or proposed.
(9) Existing zoning of the subject property and of all abutting property
within a five-hundred-foot radius of the subject property.
B. Natural features.
(1) If applicable, existing contours at intervals of two feet or less, in
form satisfactory to the Village Planning Commission.
(2) The location of existing isolated trees on the subject property with
a diameter of eight inches or more, measured three feet above the
base of the trunk.
(3) The location of any other significant existing natural features.
C. Existing structures and utilities.
(1) The location of all structures and of all uses not requiring
structures.
(2) The location of any other existing development or features,
including fences, landscaping and screening.
§ 300-41 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-41
300:440
(3) The location of all paved areas, sidewalks and vehicular access
between the subject property and public streets.
(4) The locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of any existing
sewers, culverts, waterlines, as well as other underground and
aboveground utilities within and adjacent to the subject property.
D. Proposed development.
(1) The location of all proposed structures or alterations to existing
structures.
(2) The location and layout of all proposed uses not requiring
structures, such as loading areas.
(3) The location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed
outdoor lighting or public-address system.
(4) The location of any outdoor signs and any means of illumination.
(5) Profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing width of
proposed roadways, location and width of proposed driveways,
sidewalks and other paved areas and proposed direct pedestrian
connection to public parking lots or structures.
(6) The location, layout, design and arrangement of the proposed
means of ingress and egress, including sidewalks, driveways or
other paved areas.
(7) The location, layout, design and arrangement of all off-street
parking and loading spaces, including the size of such spaces and
width of circulation aisles.
(8) Any proposed screening and other landscaping, including types
and locations of proposed street and other trees and shrubs.
(9) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and of
all lines or alternate means of water supply and sewage disposal
and treatment.
(10) Any contemplated public improvements on or adjoining the subject
property within a five-hundred-foot radius.
(11) Any proposed new grades, indicating clearly how such grades will
meet existing grades of adjacent streets.
(12) A scale drawing of the exterior of all proposed structures and
identification and location of all building materials to be used on
exterior surfaces.
(13) If the site plan only indicates a first stage, a supplementary plan
shall indicate ultimate development.
§ 300-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-41
300:441
§ 300-42. Extension of approval.
Approval of a site plan by the Village Board shall be valid for a period of 120
days from the date thereof for the purpose of obtaining a building permit.
Any extension of said period shall require approval of the Village Board.
(14) Any other information deemed by the Village Planning Commission
to be necessary to determine conformity of the site plan with the
spirit and intent of this article.
§ 300-41 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 300-42
300:442
Chapter 304
TAXATION
§ 300-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 300-42
300:443

ARTICLE I
Utilities
[Adopted 5-28-1962 by L.L. No. 1-1962]
§ 304-1. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 131 of the Village Law of the State of
New York,110 from, on and after June 1, 1962, there is hereby imposed:
§ 304-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes:
A. A tax equal to 1% of the gross income of every utility doing business in
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park which is subject to the
supervision of the New York State Department of Public Service and
which has an annual gross income in excess of $500, except motor
carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-B of the
Public Service Law.111
B. A tax of 1% of the gross operating income of every other utility doing
business in the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park which has an
annual gross operating income in excess of $500.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
services, only receipts from local exchange service wholly
consummated within the village.
A.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph
service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the
village.
B.
In the case of any utility other than as described in Subsections A and
B above, shall include.
Receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or
otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to
which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in
gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption
or use by the purchaser in the village, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made
or such service is rendered for profit), without any deductions
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost
of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or
discount paid or any other expense whatsoever.
(1)
C.
110. Editor's Note: See now § 5-530 of the Village Law.
111. Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267, § 5.
See now Transportation Law, § 240 et seq.
§ 304-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-2
300:445
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service
in the village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the
cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount
paid, or any other expense whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in fiduciary capacity or any other entity; and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by
any other means; except the state, municipality, public districts, and
corporations and associations organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of
which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
UTILITY — Includes:
(2) Profits from the sale of securities.
Profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
or use of or interest in such property.
(3)
Profits from the sale of personal property (other than property
of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of a
taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is
made).
(4)
Receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from
sources within the village (other than such as are received from
a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the
taxpaying utility), without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt
thereof.
(5)
Profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals)
within the village whatsoever.
(6)
Every person subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Public Service, except:
Persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping
and parlor railroad cars.
(1)
Persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing railroads
other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated
railroads.
(2)
Omnibus corporations subject to supervision under Article 3-A of
the Public Service Law.
(3)
A.
§ 304-2 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-2
300:446
§ 304-3. Applicability.
This article and the tax imposed thereby shall:
§ 304-4. Disposition of revenues.
All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax imposed by this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the village.
§ 304-5. Collections and enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Village Treasurer shall be the chief enforcement officer of this article
and shall make and be responsible for all collections hereunder. He shall
also have the power and authority to make any rules or regulations or
directives, not inconsistent with law, which, in his discretion, are reasonably
necessary to facilitate the administration of this article and the collection
of taxes imposed hereby. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
directives as may from time to time be promulgated shall be sent by
registered mail to all utilities subject to this article which register as such
with the Village Treasurer. All such rules, regulations and directives shall
be deemed a portion of this article.
§ 304-6. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and such
Every person who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration,
telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or wires,
whether or not such person is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service.
B.
Every person who furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration,
telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such
person or are duly incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the
public streets.
C.
A. Apply only within the territorial limits of the Village of Massapequa
Park.
B. Not apply and the tax shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the
Village of Massapequa Park notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such
limits.
C. Be in addition to any and all other taxes.
D. Apply to all such income received on and after June 1, 1962.
§ 304-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-6
300:447
records shall be preserved for a period of three years unless the Village
Treasurer directs otherwise.
§ 304-7. Returns.
§ 304-8. Payment.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed hereby for the period covered by
such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of
the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 304-9. Penalties and interest.
Any utility failing to file a return or a corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the Village
Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any
portion of such penalty.
§ 304-10. Tax to constitute operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
A. Time of filing. Every utility subject to a tax hereunder shall file on or
before January 25 and July 25 a return for the six calendar months
preceding each return date, including any period for which the tax
imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective. However, any
utility whose average gross income or gross operating income for the
aforesaid six-month period is less than $3,000 may file a return annually
on July 25 for the 12 calendar months preceding each return date,
including any period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any
amendment hereof is effective. Any utility, whether subject to tax under
this article or not, may be required by the Village Treasurer to file an
annual return.
B. Contents. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to
be furnished by him for such purpose and shall show thereon the gross
income or gross operating income for the period covered by the return
and such other information, data or matter as the Village Treasurer may
require to be included therein. Every return shall have annexed thereto
a certification by the head of the utility making the same or of the owner
or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal corporate officer, to the effect
that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 304-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-11
300:448
§ 304-11. Failure to file; incorrect returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, he may require at any time a further
or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days
after the same is required by notice from him or if no return is made for
any period, the Village Treasurer shall determine the amount due from such
information as he is able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on
the basis of external indexes or otherwise. He shall give notification to the
utility liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix
such tax unless the utility against which it is assessed shall, within one year
after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to him for a hearing,
or unless the Village Treasurer of his motion shall reduce the same. After
such hearing he shall give notice of his decision to the utility liable for such
tax.
§ 304-12. Review of final determination.
Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall
reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other reason
whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within 90
days and after giving of such notice of such final determination; provided,
however, that any such proceeding under said Article shall not be instituted
unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
penalties thereon as are herein provided for, shall be first deposited and
an undertaking filed, in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of
the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding be
dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges
which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 304-13. Service of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article, may
be given by mailing the same to the utility for which it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such utility at the address given by it in
the last return filed by it under this article, or if no return has been filed,
then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the utility to
which addressed. Any period of time which is determined, according to the
provision of this section, by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 304-14. Refunds.
A. If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the utility liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court
shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
§ 304-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-14
300:449
§ 304-15. Review of proceedings for refunds.
Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally
or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund thereof duly
made to the Village Treasurer and he shall have made a determination
denying such refund, such determination shall be reviewable by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules; provided,
however, that such proceeding is instituted within 90 days after the giving
of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was not
previously made and that an undertaking is filed with the Village Treasurer,
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 304-16. Limitation of additional tax.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment or additional tax shall be made with respect
to taxes imposed under this article after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that where no
return has been filed as required hereby, the tax may be assessed at any
time.
§ 304-17. Powers and duties of Village Treasurer.
In addition to any other powers herein given the Village Treasurer and in
order to further ensure payment of the tax imposed hereby, he shall have
the power to:
erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and with the same period,
a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer.
However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to
a determination of the Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless he,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion, shall
have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a
certiorari proceeding that such determination was erroneous or illegal.
B. An application for refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be
deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained
of and the Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect
thereto. After making his determination, he shall give notice thereof to
the utility interested, and it shall be entitled to a certiorari order to
review in accordance with the provisions of the following section
hereof.
A. Prescribe the form of all reports and returns required to be made
hereunder.
§ 304-14 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-17
300:450
§ 304-18. Action on nonpayment. [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
being an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law are made a lien.
B. Take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter
hereby entrusted to him.
C. Subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books, papers, records and documents.
§ 304-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-18
300:451

ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 304-19. Exemption granted.
Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of whom
is 65 years of age or over shall be exempt from taxation by this municipal
corporation to the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof to the
extent as provided by local law.
§ 304-20. Exception.
Exception from taxation for school purposes shall not be granted in the case
of real property where a child resides if such child attends a public school
of elementary or secondary education.
§ 304-21. Exemption schedule and conditions.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds $36,400. [Amended
12-9-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991; 10-5-1992 by L.L. No. 8-1992;
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 25-1994; 2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996;
11-18-1996 by L.L. No. 16-1996; 12-28-1998 by L.L. No. 10-1998;
10-16-2000 by L.L. No. 19-2000; 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003;
6-14-2004 by L.L. No. 6-2004; 3-12-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007112;
3-10-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
(1) Incomes of less than $36,400 shall be exempted according to the
following schedule:
Maximum Income Percentage of Exemption
Less than $28,000 50%
At least $28,000, but less than
$29,000
45%
At least $29,000, but less than
$30,000
40%
At least $30,000, but less than
$31,000
35%
At least $31,000, but less than
$32,000
30%
112. Editor's Note: This local law stated that it would take effect 7-1-2007 and also provided
that the Board of Trustees may increase the partial exemptions in the future by
resolution.
§ 304-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-21
300:453
§ 304-22. Application for exemption; false statements.
Maximum Income Percentage of Exemption
At least $32,000, but less than
$32,800
25%
At least $32,800, but less than
$33,700
20%
At least $33,700, but less than
$34,600
15%
At least $34,600, but less than
$35,500
10%
At least $35,500, but less than
$36,400
5%
(2) "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if
no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
retirement benefits, interest, dividends, net rental income, salary
or earnings and net income from self-employment but shall not
include gifts or inheritances. Income shall be offset by 50% of
medical and prescription drug expenses actually paid which were
not reimbursed or paid for by insurance.
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
all of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then the title becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue
of devise by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of
ownership of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the survivor and such ownership
shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing such period
of 24 consecutive months, and provided further that where property of
the owner or owners has been acquired to replace property formerly
owned by such owner or owners and taken by eminent domain or other
involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, the period of ownership of
the former property shall be combined with the period of ownership of
the property for which application if made for exemption and such
periods of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of
this section.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
§ 304-21 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-22
300:454
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the State Board, to be
furnished by the appropriate assessing authority, and shall furnish the
information and be executed in the manner required or prescribed in
such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or before the
appropriate taxable status date.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
assessing authority shall mail to each person who was granted
exemption pursuant to this article on the latest completed assessment
roll an application form and a notice that such application must be filed
on or before taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. Failure to mail any such application form and
notice or the failure of such person to receive the same shall not
prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes
on property owned by such person.
C. Any conviction of having made any willfully false statement in the
application for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $100 and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further
exemption for a period of five years.
§ 304-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-22
300:455

ARTICLE III
Real Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-5-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992]
§ 304-23. Exemption for the physically disabled.
§ 304-24. (Reserved)113
A. Any improvement to real property shall be exempt to the extent of any
increase in value attributable to such improvement if such improvement
is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the use and
accessibility of such real property.
B. To qualify an individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified
statement from a physician.
C. The exemption continues until the improvement ceases to be necessary
to facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility of the property
by the resident who is physically disabled.
113. Editor's Note: Former § 304-24, Exemption of capital improvements on residential
property, added 4-11-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994, as amended, was deleted 4-30-2007 by L.L.
No. 6-2007.
§ 304-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-24
300:457

ARTICLE IV
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-22-1994 by L.L. No. 24-1994]
§ 304-25. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by a
chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A,114 the Village of Massapequa Park hereby acts by local law, not
subject to referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall
continue to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property
Tax Law, as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 304-26. Filing with state.
Upon adoption and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 304-27. When effective.
This Article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of
1994 takes effect as proposed in legislative bill number S. 8560-A, except
that if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this article, this
article shall take effect immediately.
114. Editor's Note: See L. 1994, c. 532.
§ 304-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-27
300:459

ARTICLE V
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 11-18-1996 by L.L. No. 17-1996; amended in its
entirety2-11-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
§ 304-28. Exemption enhanced.
The maximum range of property tax relief offered to wartime veterans,
combat zone veterans and disabled veterans under the alternative veterans
exemption is enhanced to $45,000, $30,000 and $150,000.
§ 304-29. When effective; applicability.
This article takes effect immediately and applies to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after January
1, 2008.
§ 304-28 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-29
300:461

ARTICLE VI
Foreclosure of Tax Liens
[Adopted 10-25-1999 by L.L. No. 12-1999]
§ 304-30. Purpose; effect on state law.
§ 304-31. Written notice required.
No conveyances can be made by the village by deed to any individual,
corporation or entity until the following conditions pursuant to the Real
Property Tax Law and pursuant to this article have been complied with:
§ 304-32. Personal notice required.
A. The purpose and intent of this article is to supplement the conditions
which must be complied with if any parcel of real property sold for
taxes pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law is not redeemed within a
period of two years and the owner of the certificate of sale commences
an action to foreclose his tax lien pursuant to law and/or makes
application to the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park for
conveyance to him by deed of the real property described in said tax
certificate.
B. This article is being enacted to supplement §§ 1454, 1458 and 1464 and
other applicable sections relating to tax liens, redemptions,
conveyances and unpaid taxes of the Real Property Tax Law.
A. All notices required by the Real Property Tax Law must be sent by the
Village of Massapequa Park to the owners of the real property:
(1) By certified mail, return receipt requested; and
(2) By first-class mail; and
(3) By notice being delivered to each and every homeowner at the
address of the subject real property and, if applicable, at their last
known legal address if different from the address of the subject
premises, which personal delivery of the notice must be made by a
duly authorized village employee.
B. Affidavits of service must be duly signed and acknowledged before a
notary public by the individuals serving the notices as set forth in
Subsection A above confirming all of the services.
A. If the real property in question is not redeemed within a period of two
years as set forth in the Real Property Tax Law, then at least two
authorized village officers must go to the subject premises in an
attempt to inform the owner of the status of the default of the tax
relating to the subject real property and informing the owner
specifically that he, she or they are in imminent threat of losing their
home for unpaid back taxes.
§ 304-30 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-32
300:463
§ 304-33. Execution of deed.
B. An affidavit setting forth the facts and circumstances of the attempts of
the village officers to comply with the above must be set forth in writing
by the individual complying with Subsection A above, and his signature
must be acknowledged before a notary public.
A. The authority to execute a deed to the holder of the tax sale certificate
can only be effectuated pursuant to a duly constituted public hearing by
the Board of Trustees and upon a majority vote of the Board of Trustees
authorizing the execution of the deed and only upon the prior written
recommendation of the Village Attorney that all legal requirements
have been complied with pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law and
pursuant to this article and any subsequent local laws or amendments
related thereto.
B. The only persons authorized to sign an executed deed from the village
to the holder of the tax certificate are the Mayor of the Village of
Massapequa Park and one member of the Board of Trustees, together
with the written approval of the Village Attorney.
§ 304-32 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-33
300:464
ARTICLE VII
Payment by Senior Citizens
[Adopted 4-24-2000 by L.L. No. 8-2000]
§ 304-34. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person residing in the Village of Massapequa Park
who has attained the age of 65 years as of the time that the village taxes
become due on June 1 of any particular tax year.
§ 304-35. Payment in installments.
A. The Village of Massapequa Park shall allow senior citizens with senior
citizen exemptions, at their option, to pay village taxes in two equal
installments on their particular parcel of property within the village, 1/2
to be paid on June 1 of any particular tax year, and the 1/2 to be paid on
December 1 of any particular tax year, without incurring any penalty or
interest on the taxes due and owing to the village.
B. For each six-month installment of the village tax, senior citizens with
senior citizen exemptions of the Village of Massapequa Park shall have
an additional grace period of 30 days from either June 1 of any
particular tax year, or December 1 of any particular tax year, to pay said
taxes without incurring any penalty or interest.
§ 304-34 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-35
300:465

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Gold Star Parents
[Adopted 12-11-2000 by L.L. No. 21-2000]
§ 304-36. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the new subdivision 7 of § 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law, which was enacted on March 13, 2000, by the
State of New York.
§ 304-37. Definition.
As used in this article, "Gold Star Parent" shall mean the parent of a child
who died in the line of duty while serving in the United States Armed Forces
during a period of war.
§ 304-38. Application of veterans exemption.
§ 304-39. Effect on veterans exemption.
An exemption under this article shall not add to or increase any veterans
exemption which the Gold Star Parent presently has or would have in the
future on the same parcel of real property.
§ 304-40. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after the first
day of June next succeeding the date on which this article shall become
effective.
A. The Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park is adopting this article to
include a Gold Star Parent within the definition of a qualified owner, as
provided in Paragraph (c) of subdivision 1 of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law, and to include property owned by a Gold Star Parent
within the definition of qualified residential real property as provided in
Paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law,
provided that such property shall be the primary residence of the Gold
Star Parent.
B. The additional exemption provided for in Paragraph (c) of subdivision 2
of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law shall not apply to real property
owned by a Gold Star Parent.
§ 304-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-40
300:467

ARTICLE IX
Tax Exemption for Disabled Individuals115
[Adopted 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003; amended in its entirety
3-10-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
§ 304-41. Exemption created.
A. A partial exemption for disabled individuals from real estate taxes
pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law is created as follows:
Annual Income Percentage of Exemption
Less than $28,000 50%
At least $28,000, but less than
$29,000
45%
At least $29,000, but less than
$30,000
40%
At least $30,000, but less than
$31,000
35%
At least $31,000, but less than
$32,000
30%
At least $32,000, but less than
$32,800
25%
At least $32,800, but less than
$33,700
20%
At least $33,700, but less than
$34,600
15%
At least $34,600, but less than
$35,500
10%
At least $35,500, but less than
$36,400
5%
115. Editor's Note: See also Art. III, Real Property Tax Exemption.
§ 304-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-41
300:469

ARTICLE X
Fire Fighter's Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-4-2004 by L.L. No. 12-2004]
§ 304-42. Exemption granted. [Amended 12-27-2004 by L.L. No.
13-2004; 12-10-2007 by L.L. No. 10-2007]
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 440 of the Laws of 2002
enacted by the State Legislature, real property owned by an enrolled
member of the Volunteer Fire Department, or the spouse of such person,
or the unremarried widow or widower of such person of the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park's three firehouses (Park House, East End and
West End) shall be exempt from taxes to the extent of 10% of the dollar
amount of the fire fighter's real property tax bill.
§ 304-43. Requirements.
§ 304-44. Application.
Application for such exemption shall be filed annually with the Village
Assessor on or before the taxable status date of the first of January on a
form prescribed by the New York State Office of Real Property Services.
§ 304-45. Effect on other tax benefits.
No applicant who is a volunteer fire fighter who by reason of such status
is receiving a tax benefit under the Real Property Tax Law shall suffer any
diminution of such benefit because of the enactment of this property tax
exemption.
A. Such exemption shall not be granted to an enrolled volunteer firefighter
unless:
(1) The applicant resides within the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park;
(2) The property is the primary residence of the applicant;
(3) The property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
(4) The applicant has been certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the Fire Department as an enrolled member for at
least five years.
B. Any enrolled member who has accrued more than 20 years of active
service, and is so certified by the authority having jurisdiction for the
Fire Department, shall be granted this exemption as long as his or her
primary residence is within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park.
§ 304-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-45
300:471

ARTICLE XI
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 8-11-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
§ 304-46. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
This article is enacted pursuant to § 458-b of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law and is intended to recognize veterans who served on
active duty in the United States Armed Forces between September 2, 1945
and December 26, 1991, and who are not currently receiving either the
eligible funds or alternative veterans exemption.
§ 304-47. Exemption amount; compensation rating; duration.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed $12,000 or the product
of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the
assessing unit.
B. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans' Administration or from the United States
Department of Defense because of a service-connected disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property multiplied
by 50% of the Cold War veteran's disability rating; provided, however,
that such exemption shall not exceed $40,000 or the product of $40,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit. If
a Cold War veteran receives the exemption under § 458 or § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law, the Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to
receive the exemption under this section.
C. The exemption provided by Subsections A and B of this section shall be
granted for a period of 10 years. The commencement of such ten-year
period shall be governed pursuant to this subsection. Where a qualified
owner owns qualifying residential real property on the effective date of
this article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the
assessment roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date
occurring on or after the effective date of this article. Where a qualified
owner does not own qualifying residential real property on the effective
date of this article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the
assessment roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date
occurring within 60 days after the date of purchase of residential real
property; provided, however, that should the Cold War veteran apply for
and be granted an exemption on the assessment roll prepared pursuant
to a taxable status date occurring within 60 days after the date of
purchase of residential real property, such ten-year period shall be
measured from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs.
If, before the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property
§ 304-46 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 304-47
300:473
§ 304-48. When effective; applicability
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessments
rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after the
first day of June next succeeding the date on which this article shall become
effective.
is sold and replaced with other residential real property, such
exemption may be granted pursuant to this Subsection C for the
unexpired portion of the ten-year exemption period.
§ 304-47 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 304-48
300:474
Chapter 306
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Towing — See Ch. 314.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
Vending vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Fees — Ch. A350.
§ 306-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings given to them by this section:
OPERATING A TAXICAB SERVICE WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF
MASSAPEQUA PARK — The privilege of operating a taxicab service in the
Village shall be awarded to any person or company at a meeting of the
Board of Trustees, at which time the financial responsibility of the individual
applying for such privilege will be inquired into and the character,
reputation and fitness of the applicant to operate such service will be
investigated.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for hire and subject to use by the general public, whether the
same is operated from a street stand or subject to calls from a garage, or
otherwise operated for hire.
TAXI COMPANY — Any person having the authority to exercise control over
a taxicab or driver in respect to the general operation or dispatching of the
vehicle.
§ 306-2. Administration and enforcement of provisions.
The Village Board of Trustees shall have authority to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter and to promulgate rules and regulations
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 306-3. Licensing of taxi companies.
A. No taxi company shall operate within the Village of Massapequa Park
without having first obtained a taxi company license. This restriction
shall not prohibit any person from using a taxicab of his or her choice
notwithstanding the fact that the taxicab does not operate in the
Village.
§ 304-48 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 306-3
300:475
§ 306-4. Permitting of vehicles.
B. Applications for licenses shall be made on forms to be furnished by the
Village Administrator. Each application shall be submitted to the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa Park, which said Board of
Trustees shall approve or disapprove the application in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, and no permit shall be issued unless the
issuing of same shall be in the best interest of the Village of
Massapequa Park, as determined by the Board of Trustees.
C. No taxicab shall be operated by a taxi company within the Village until
approval has been obtained as prescribed under Subsection B of this
section.
D. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator shall
issue said license, as prescribed herein, as of the first of January, except
where applied for after January 1, and then shall issue said permit as of
the date of approval of the application, and said license shall expire on
the final day of December next succeeding unless sooner suspended or
revoked.
E. In the event that any license hereunder shall fail to conform to all of the
rules and regulations made pursuant to this chapter, such license to
operate shall be suspended or revoked in the following manner:
(1) A written notice of complaint and hearing shall be served upon the
permittee at least seven days prior to the hearing date to be
scheduled by the Board of Trustees.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall be empowered to revoke or suspend
the license of any licensee pursuant to this section upon its finding
that the licensee has failed to conform to all of the rules and
regulations made pursuant to this chapter.
F. Any license issued under this section may be renewed for additional
periods of one year from the date of expiration, upon the filing of an
application containing all of the information required by the provisions
of this chapter for the original application and upon approval of the
Board of Trustees pursuant to Subsection B herein.
A. Applications for permits for taxicabs shall be made by the licensed taxi
company obtaining the vehicle to be permitted, on forms to be
furnished by the Village Administrator's office. Such application shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, serial
number and year of manufacture of the taxicab for which the permit is
desired, the number of passengers it is capable of carrying, the motor
power thereof and such other information as may be required by the
Village Administrator.
B. Each application for a permit, as defined herein, shall be submitted to
the Board of Trustees for examination and investigation, and said
§ 306-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 306-4
300:476
§ 306-5. Inspection of vehicles.
§ 306-6. Permit cards.
application shall be approved or disapproved in accordance to the
terms of this chapter.
C. No taxicab shall be operated as such within the Village until approval
has been obtained as prescribed under Subsection B of this section.
D. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator shall
issue said license, as prescribed herein, as of the first of January, except
where applied for after January 1 and then shall issue said license as of
the date of approval of the application, and said license shall expire on
the final day of December next succeeding unless sooner suspended or
revoked.
E. Any license issued under this section may be renewed for additional
periods of one year each from the date of expiration, upon the filing of
an application containing all of the information required by the
provisions of this chapter for the original application and upon the
approval of the Board of Trustees pursuant to Subsection B herein.
A. No vehicle shall be permitted or have its permit renewed as a taxicab
until it has been inspected and approved by an official New York State
motor vehicle inspecting station.
B. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs, the
standards to determine their condition of fitness and the form of
certificate to be issued therefor.
C. Certificates, in writing, of all inspections shall be promptly filed with
the Village Administrator.
D. In the event that any taxicab shall be certified as unfit or unsuitable for
operation in the Village of Massapequa Park, the permit to operate such
vehicle shall be revoked or suspended, upon the order of the Board of
Trustees being filed with the Village Administrator and notice, in
writing, of the revocation or suspension being given to the permittee.
Any revocation or suspension made hereunder may be appealed by the
permittee to the Board of Trustees by a notice of appeal, in writing, filed
with the Village Administrator within 10 days after said revocation or
suspension. The Board of Trustees shall hear and decide any appeal
within 30 days of filing.
A. If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of proper construction and
in proper condition, as described herein, and a certificate has been
issued, upon payment of the permit fees hereafter set forth, the same
shall be permitted by delivering to the applicant a card which shall
contain the official permit number of the taxicab, together with the date
§ 306-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 306-6
300:477
§ 306-7. Taxicab driver's permit required; application.
of the permit. Such card shall be signed by the Village Administrator
and shall be displayed permanently in the taxicab.
B. Failure of the taxicab to display a permit card when required shall be
presumptive evidence that said vehicle is not, in fact, permitted.
A. Every driver operating a taxicab within the Village of Massapequa Park
must be permitted by the Village of Massapequa Park as a taxicab
driver.
B. Application for a permit as a taxicab driver shall be made on forms to be
furnished by the Village Administration Office.
C. Every applicant for a taxicab permit shall satisfactorily meet or comply
with the following conditions:
(1) Be of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of the body or
mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a
taxicab.
(2) Be able to read and write the English language.
(3) Be clean in dress and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor
or narcotics.
(4) Shall not have a previous conviction of a felony or misdemeanor,
except that this requirement may be waived at the discretion of the
Village Board of Trustees.
(5) Shall file with the Village Administrator a sworn application
containing the information required herein and any other
information that may be required.
(6) Shall submit to fingerprinting and police examination as required.
(7) Shall be duly licensed by the State of New York to drive passenger
vehicles for hire, as evidenced by a proper license issued by the
Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of New York.
(8) In the event that any of the statements made on the application, as
aforesaid, shall be false, then any permit issued pursuant to the
said application shall be suspended or revoked.
(9) All taxicab driver applications shall be accompanied by a letter
from the authorized taxicab company.
(10) In addition to any other requirements provided for in this section or
in this chapter, it shall be required that every person making
application for a permit as a driver, as provided herein, must
submit a current doctor's certificate attesting to his physical ability
to operate a motor vehicle in the State of New York.
§ 306-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 306-8
300:478
§ 306-8. Issuance, renewal and revocation of driver's permit.
§ 306-9. Fees.
Fees for the following items shall be paid to the Village Administrator; said
fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
with a schedule of such fees to be maintained by the Village Administrator.
A. A driver's permit shall be issued as of January 1, except where applied
for after January 1, and then said permit shall issue as of the date of
approval of the application.
B. All driver's permits expire on the last day of December unless sooner
suspended or revoked, provided that a permit issued in December shall
expire on December 31 of the year following the year in which the
permit is granted provided further that the permit shall not expire until
January 31 if an applicant has filed for renewal prior to January 31.
C. Any permit issued under this section may be renewed on or before
January 31 for an additional year from the date of expiration, upon the
filing of an application containing all of the information required by the
provisions of this chapter for the original application and paying a
renewal fee which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
D. In the event that any permit hereunder shall fail to conform to all of the
rules and regulations made pursuant to this chapter, the Board of
Trustees may request that the permit to operate be revoked in the
following manner:
(1) A written notice of complaint and hearing shall be served upon the
permittee at least seven days prior to a hearing date scheduled by
the Board of Trustees.
(2) Upon the hearing, the Village Administration Office shall present to
the Board of Trustees the facts and circumstances of the violation
and the permittee shall have full opportunity to be heard.
(3) The Board of Trustees shall be empowered to revoke or suspend
the permit of any permittee pursuant to this section upon its
findings that the permittee has failed to conform to all of the rules
and regulations made pursuant to this chapter.
A. For each taxi company license: annual renewal or renewal after
revocation or suspension.
B. For each taxicab: an amount for each fiscal year or any part thereof,
except that in the event that a permit shall be applied for to permit a
vehicle which shall replace an existing permitted vehicle, there shall be
a fee for such replacement permit.
C. For each taxicab driver's permit: an amount for each fiscal year or any
portion thereof.
§ 306-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 306-10
300:479
§ 306-10. Records of Village Administrator.
§ 306-11. Taxicab stands.
The Village Administrator of the Village is hereby authorized to locate,
designate and control the number of taxicabs that shall be allowed to
stand at any location designated by the Village Board of Trustees as a
public taxicab stand. Only permitted taxicabs, in such manner as the Village
Administrator shall designate, may remain at a stand while waiting for
employment, and such taxicabs shall be pointed in such direction as shall
conform to traffic regulations.
§ 306-12. Operation of taxicabs.
A. The Village Administrator shall keep a record of the name and address
of each person owning or operating a vehicle permitted under this
chapter, together with the permit number, the description and the serial
number of each vehicle, with the date and complete details of the
inspection made of it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of
the public at all reasonable times and shall be public records.
B. There shall be kept in the office of the Village Administrator a complete
record of each permit issued to a driver and all renewals, suspensions
and revocations thereof, which records shall be open for inspection by
the public at all reasonable times and shall be public records.
A. Every taxicab is required to go to any part of the Village at the call of
any patron and upon tender of the fare at the proper time in the amount
provided herein. Refusal of a driver to accept a patron on the grounds
that his taxi is not going in the direction requested will be considered a
violation of this rule. This rule is subject to modifications only as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. For the convenience of patrons arriving on incoming trains, the
direction (east, west, north or south) requested by the first patron to
board a taxicab in the Long Island Rail Road Depot area will determine
the direction to be taken by the taxicab. As nearly as practicable,
patrons are to be taken to their destination in the order of their
entering the taxicab.
C. Upon request for taxicab service by telephone to a taxicab office or by
any other means of communication, the person receiving the call shall,
upon request, identify himself and the company, giving the names of
both. If no taxicab is available, the patron must be notified to that effect.
D. Patrons are not to be coerced, cajoled or threatened in selection of a
taxicab they wish to patronize by any taxicab operator, owner or
representative; nor shall any taxicab operator be discourteous to
persons while they are passengers in such taxicab or while they are
seeking transportation.
§ 306-10 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 306-12
300:480
§ 306-13. Posting of permit cards and identification.
E. Taxicab operators are forbidden to demand or suggest that any
passenger pay more than the established rate for transportation to his
destination.
F. No special service of favoritism in treatment is to be given to any
person or passenger at the inconvenience of another.
G. Regulations for drivers.
(1) No taxicab driver shall sit in the passenger compartment of a public
taxicab, nor permit anyone who is not a passenger to do so while on
a public taxicab stand.
(2) Every taxicab driver shall be in immediate calling distance from his
taxicab and shall have his taxicab under visual surveillance at all
times while the taxicab is on a public taxicab stand.
(3) If a taxicab driver is forced to leave his taxicab for any reason
whatsoever, he shall remove, or cause to be removed, his taxicab
from the public taxicab stand, and any other permitted taxicab may
then move into the space then vacated.
(4) No taxicab driver shall leave the doors of his taxicab open while
such taxicab is on a public taxicab stand, except for the purpose of
taking on and discharging passengers.
(5) Any permitted taxicab driver has the right to stop and take his
position on any taxicab stand where there is a vacancy.
(6) Overcrowding or "crashing" in a public taxicab stand will not be
permitted.
(7) There shall be no more than one passenger in the front
compartment of any taxicab.
H. A taxicab driver shall notify the Village Administrator of any change of
address or the loss of his taxicab driver's permit within 48 hours after
such change of address or loss of his taxicab driver's permit.
I. No taxicab company license shall be issued and no taxicab company
shall operate in the Village of Massapequa Park unless a regular place
of business is maintained within a business district of the Village for the
dispatching of the taxicabs by the company.
J. No taxicabs shall be dispatched from a location in any residential-zoned
area of the Village, and no taxicabs shall be stored or parked in any
residential-zoned area of the Village, except to pick up or discharge
passengers. In the event that a taxicab is disabled, it must be removed
from the public streets as soon as practicable, but in no event shall a
disabled taxicab remain on a public street or in a public parking area
for more than 12 hours.
§ 306-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 306-13
300:481
§ 306-14. Maximum number of taxicab permits.
In accordance with § 181 of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York, the number of taxicab permits to be issued under this chapter is
hereby limited to 10. Application for renewal shall be filed not less than 15
days nor more than 30 days prior to the expiration of the license. The Board
of Trustees may, from time to time, by resolution, grant additional permits
considering the needs of the community.
§ 306-15. Maximum taxicab rates.
§ 306-16. Suspension and revocation of license permit; appeal.
Besides the penalties provided for violation of any section of this chapter for
which a specific penalty is designated, the holder of any license or permit
hereunder, upon conviction for any violation of this chapter, shall be subject
to suspension or revocation of his license or permit, upon the order of the
Village Administrator being filed with the Village Administrator and notice,
in writing, of the revocation or suspension being given to the licensee or
permittee. Any revocation or suspension made hereunder may be appealed
by the licensee or permittee to the Board of Trustees by a notice of appeal,
in writing, filed with the Village Administrator within 10 days after said
revocation or suspension. The Board of Trustees shall hear and decide any
appeal within 30 days of filing.
A. There shall be posted conspicuously and permanently over the glove
compartment the taxicab permit and the taxicab driver permit.
B. The schedule of fares shall be conspicuously posted in the interior of
the taxicab.
C. The name and telephone number of the taxicab company operating the
vehicle shall be prominently displayed on the exterior of the vehicle on
each front door, and the taxicab permit number shall be prominently
displayed on the rear of the vehicle.
A. The rate of fare which shall be charged by taxicab operators for
transportation of passengers within the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Board
of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park and entered
in its minutes
B. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to modify or affect the fares
charged by taxicab operators for transportation of senior citizens, i.e.,
persons over the age of 65 years, pursuant to a program subsidizing the
transportation of senior citizens and implemented by resolution of the
Board of Trustees now or hereafter adopted.
C. It shall be unlawful to charge or attempt to charge any person a greater
rate of fare than that which the taxicab is entitled to under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 306-13 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 306-17
300:482
§ 306-17. Corporate responsibility.
In case the person violating any provision of this chapter is a corporation,
the officer, agent or employee thereof who shall violate or procure, aid or
abet any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or permit the
operation of any taxicab or vehicle for hire contrary to the requirements
thereof shall be subject to the same penalties as if he himself were
personally operating such vehicle at the time such violations were
committed.
§ 306-18. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxicab Local Law of
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park."
§ 306-19. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the rate posting provisions of § 503-13A shall
be punishable as provided in General Business Law § 396-p. Any person who
shall violate any other provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum term of imprisonment of
15 days, or both, for each offense, and to the suspension or revocation of
any permit hereunder held by him.
Chapter 310
TENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 310-1. Use or occupancy restricted.
No person shall erect, raise, establish or maintain, on any beach, park or
other public place, nor on any private property in the village, any tent, camp
or other temporary habitation for use or occupancy as a place for living or
sleeping or for any purpose other than religious service, for which a permit
is herein required.
§ 310-2. Certificate of approval from County Fire Marshal.
No tent used or intended for use for public assembly of any character shall
be erected or used unless a certificate of approval shall first be issued
by the County Fire Marshal upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of
compliance with his rules and regulations.
§ 306-17 TENTS § 310-3
310:483
§ 310-3. Certificate of approval from County Health Department.
No tent used or intended for use for public assembly of any character shall
be erected or used unless a certificate of approval shall first be issued by
the County Health Department upon presentation of satisfactory evidence
of compliance with its rules and regulations.
§ 310-4. Compliance and permit required.
Any tent intended for use for public assembly shall be erected only after
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and issuance of a permit
therefor after approval by the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 314
TOWING AND BOOTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 328.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 310-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 310-4
310:484
ARTICLE I
Towing
§ 314-1. Power of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees is hereby empowered to promulgate and prescribe
rules and regulations for the proper administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 314-2. License required.
Except as provided in § 314-10, no person shall operate a towing car for
hire within the Village of Massapequa Park unless a license therefor shall
first be obtained from the Board of Trustees, signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk/Treasurer, as hereinafter provided.
§ 314-3. Application for license.
No license to operate a towing car for hire shall be issued unless an
application therefor shall have been filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer
upon a written form mandated therefor by the Board of Trustees, which
shall include the following information:
§ 314-4. License and other fees.
The fee payable for each license hereunder or renewal thereof, which
license shall cover two towing cars operated by the same owner, shall be
as provided in Chapter A350, Fees, provided that if such license is issued
less than six months before the expiration thereof, such fee shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees. In the event that an applicant operates and
owns more than two such towing cars, then the fee per annum shall be as
provided in Chapter A350, Fees, for each additional car and as provided in
Chapter A350, Fees, for a period of six months or less.
A. If a corporation, the name and principal place of business of the
applicant, together with a certified copy of the certificate of
incorporation and, if the applicant is an individual, the name and
principal place of business of the individual, together with his age and
residence, which information must be set forth in a written, notarized
statement by the applicant to the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The registration number of each towing car to be operated within the
Village of Massapequa Park.
C. A detailed schedule of prices and fees as prescribed in § 314-6.
D. Such license will be limited to tow car companies operating a business
within the boundaries of the incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
[Added 7-11-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 314-1 TENTS § 314-5
310:485
§ 314-5. Suspension of license.
The Board of Trustees, in its discretion, shall have the power to suspend
any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the violation of any rules
thereof or of any rules and regulations promulgated by it or for the failure of
the owner or operator of any towing car to render services to the owner or
driver of a disabled vehicle who is able and willing to pay the fee prescribed
in the schedule of prices filed by the licensee as hereinbefore prescribed.
§ 314-6. Schedule of charges for services.
An applicant for a license hereunder shall file with the Board of Trustees
for its approval a schedule of the maximum prices to be charged for towing
and storage of disabled motor vehicles. Such charges shall be based on
the distance that each disabled motor vehicle is to be towed and shall
not be based on available of towing car facilities. No towing car owner or
operator or other person employed by the owner shall base any charge upon
estimation.
§ 314-7. Identification of towing cars.
Conspicuously on each side of every towing car for which a license has been
granted there shall be legibly inscribed in letters not less than three inches
high the name and address of the owner of such towing car or of the person
having the license therefor and the license number assigned to such towing
car by the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 314-8. Removal of vehicle in accident.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tow away any motor vehicle which
has been involved in an accident without the prior written consent of the
owner of said motor vehicle or the police officer at the scene of the accident.
No car shall be removed from the scene of an accident where the police
officer requires or requests that an examination be held for the purpose of
determining whether the car is defective.
§ 314-9. Soliciting work.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along any street or highway in
the Village of Massapequa Park for the purpose of soliciting towing work.
§ 314-10. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cases where, without
solicitation, the owner of a damaged car shall have specifically requested
that his vehicle be towed by an unlicensed tow car.
§ 314-11. Cruising.
It shall be unlawful for owners or operators of tow trucks to solicit business
or cruise for said purposes within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
§ 314-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 314-11
310:486
Park unless specifically summoned by person or persons requiring such
service.
§ 314-12. Towing of vehicles on private property, public property or
public streets.
A. No motor vehicle which is parked on private property, public property
or public streets within the Village of Massapequa Park, shall be towed
without prior written authorization of the property owner where the
motor vehicle is located unless the following requirements are met:
(1) The property owner or his authorized agent shall file with the
Police Precinct of the Nassau County Police Department having
jurisdiction and with the Village Clerk/Treasurer of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park, a copy of a written
agreement authorizing one or more tow car owners to tow
unauthorized parked motor vehicles located on the property
owner's premises.
(2) The property owner shall conspicuously post at all entrances to the
property owner's premises signs large enough to be read by the
general public stating that an unauthorized parked motor vehicle
shall be towed at the motor vehicle owner's expense, and such
signs must state the name of the company and the telephone
number where the motor vehicle can be recovered. If there are no
entrances, signs must be placed in conspicuous places when
entering and/or parking the motor vehicle. The lettering of the
signs shall be large enough to be seen when entering the property
of the property owner and/or parking the motor vehicle. Any and all
signs required to be installed pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to the prior written approval of the Board of Trustees.
(3) The authorized tow car owner shall tow an unauthorized parked
motor vehicle only upon the express direction and written consent
of the property owner or his authorized agent of the premises
where the unauthorized motor vehicle(s) is located.
(4) Motor vehicles must be lifted and towed by the towing company in
such a manner as to prevent damage to said vehicle and roadway,
and if not, the towing company and property owner shall jointly and
severally be legally responsible for all damages of any kind
whatsoever resulting therefrom.
(5) The tow car owner shall immediately notify, in writing, both the
Village of Massapequa Park and the local precinct of the Nassau
County Police Department having jurisdiction of the towing of an
unauthorized parked motor vehicle and the name and address of
the location to which it is towed, together with the telephone
number of such location.
§ 314-11 TENTS § 314-12
310:487
(6) A fee schedule including towing, storage and labor charges for
vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
written approval of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massapequa Park.
(7) No tow car owner shall tow any vehicle located on private property,
public property or public streets and no property owner shall allow
any motor vehicle to be towed from its property without having
fully complied with all of the applicable requirements as set forth in
this chapter.
§ 314-12 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 314-12
310:488
ARTICLE II
Booting
§ 314-13. Legislative finding and intent.
It is hereby found and declared that the practice of "booting" vehicles
parked on private property or private parking lots or public property or
public streets accessible to the public poses a danger to the safety and
welfare of the public because such practice may prevent the removal of
such vehicles, even when such removal may be necessitated by an
emergency. Booting may also cause dangerous confrontations between
owners of vehicles and the person booting their cars. Owners of private
parking lots wishing to maintain parking for rule-abiding customers or
residents are primarily interested in keeping spaces available to legitimate
users; no service is performed, therefore, by immobilizing vehicles and
preventing legitimate use of the space occupied. Private persons should
therefore be prohibited from engaging in the practice of booting.
§ 314-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOOT — The act of placing on a parked motor vehicle a mechanical device
that is designed to be attached to the wheel or tire or other part of such
vehicle so as to prohibit its movement.
PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BOOT VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PARKING
LOTS — No person other than a police officer or a person acting under the
direction of the Police Department, who may, for the purpose of enforcing
any private or public parking rules or regulations, boot or authorize the
booting of a motor vehicle parked on a private parking lot.
PRIVATE PARKING LOT — Any area or areas of private property near or
contiguous to and provided in connection with premises having one or more
stores, business establishments or residences and used by the public as a
means of access to and egress from such stores, businesses and residences
and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers, patrons and residents of
such stores, businesses and residences.
PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PUBLIC STREETS — Any area or areas of public
property or public streets within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park.
§ 314-15. Prohibition of booting.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to immobilize any motor vehicle
parked in the Village by any means, including, but not limited to, what
is commonly referred to as "booting." No property owner or tenant shall
authorize any person to so immobilize any motor vehicle. If so, that person
or entity shall be in violation of this chapter and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
§ 314-13 TENTS § 314-16
310:489
§ 314-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any person, corporation,
partnership or entity violating any terms or provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of
$250, plus that term of imprisonment relating to a conviction of a Class B
misdemeanor.
§ 314-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 314-16 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 314-17
310:490
Chapter 320
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned property — See Ch. 252.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 328.
§ 320-1. Legislative findings.
The Village of Massapequa Park has the duty, responsibility and obligation
to maintain its streets and thoroughfares in a safe and proper fashion.
Derelict, abandoned, unlicensed or immobile vehicles undergoing repair or
maintenance on public streets create hazards to normal road traffic and are
an attractive nuisance to the residents of the village.
§ 320-2. Placement on streets.
No person, persons, corporations or other legal entity shall be allowed to
place or put an inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle on the streets within
the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park. Said inoperable or abandoned
motor vehicle must remain on the residential property of the owner of said
motor vehicle.
§ 320-3. Repair or maintenance in streets.
Any motor vehicle that requires repairs or maintenance to render it capable
of independent locomotion cannot remain on village streets for more than
a continuous period of 24 hours. The owner or lawful user of said motor
vehicle must remove said vehicle in any lawful manner whatsoever off the
village streets for said repair or maintenance. There shall not be allowed
any maintenance of motor vehicles on village streets or any other public
area within the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
§ 320-4. Summons for violation; removal by village; cost.
If a motor vehicle which is either inoperable or abandoned is on the village
streets or any other public area for a period of time exceeding 24 hours,
the Village of Massapequa Park, after having made a reasonable attempt
to ascertain the lawful owner of said motor vehicle, shall have the right
to issue a summons to the owner of laid motor vehicle for a violation of
this chapter. After the issuance of he summons, the village, after 48 hours'
written notice to the lawful owner at his last known address, setting forth
the violation of this chapter, shall have the right to remove and/or tow away
said motor vehicle at the sole cost and expense to the owner of said motor
vehicle or to the lawful user of said motor vehicle. Said owner or lawful user
of said motor vehicle shall be billed for said cost of removal of the same,
§ 314-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 320-4
320:491
and if the bill is not paid within 30 days, the village shall have the right to
assess the cost of the same to the tax bill of said residential owner or lawful
user and use all other appropriate legal remedies to collect the same.
§ 320-5. Notice of removal.
Forty-eight hours' notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service or any other legal means, shall be given by the village to
the lawful owner of said motor vehicle which is inoperable or abandoned
before said motor vehicle, which is either inoperable or abandoned on
residential streets as stated above, shall be removed or towed away by the
village.
§ 320-6. Storage charge; disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
§ 320-7. Safety hazards and attractive nuisances.
In the event that a motor vehicle parked on village streets shall constitute
a safety hazard to the public or an attractive nuisance to the residents of
the village or to other persons, then no notice shall be required to be given
by the village to any person before said motor vehicle is towed away by the
village.
§ 320-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
17-1994]
Any person, persons or party found guilty of violating this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of up to the maximum fine allowed by law and/or 15 days
in jail, in addition to any costs or expenses incurred in the towing of said
motor vehicle by the Village of Massapequa Park.
A. The village shall charge a car owner $25 per day for the storage of said
motor vehicle by the village, plus any other costs incurred by the village
in the storage of said motor vehicle. After said motor vehicle has been
in storage by the village for a period of 30 days, the village shall have
the right, on not less than 10 days' written notice, sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, by the village to said car owner, at his last
known address, to advise him or her that such motor vehicle will be sold
at a public auction for the best price the village can obtain. A general
description in such notice of the property to be sold shall be sufficient.
B. Said sale shall be conducted by the Village Administrator or by an
employee or auctioneer designated by him.
§ 320-4 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 320-8
320:492
Chapter 322
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and motorcycles — See Ch. 84.
Boating — See Ch. 90.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 230.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 252.
Skateboards and roller skates — See Ch. 289.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 306.
Towing — See Ch. 314.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 328.
Vending vehicles — See Ch. 330.
§ 320-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 320-8
320:493

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 322-1. Definitions.
§ 322-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to
make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as the Board of Trustees may deem
necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684
of that law.
§ 322-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article X of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
C. Pursuant to Article 39, §§ 1640, 1640-a, 1641, 1643 and 1644 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, the Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to
enact traffic regulations by resolution, rather than by local laws, for any
§ 322-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-3
320:495
and all of the purposes enumerated in said section of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law. [Added 3-8-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 322-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-3
320:496
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 322-4. Speed limits. [Amended 11-24-1997 by L.L. No. 16-1997]
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along all Village streets or parts
thereof is hereby established at 30 miles per hour, except as set forth in
Schedule X (§ 322-58).
§ 322-5. School speed limits.
§ 322-6. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule II (§ 322-50), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 322-7. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule III (§ 322-51), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 322-8. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule IV (§ 322-52),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 322-9. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V (§ 322-53), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 322-10. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VI (§ 322-54), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 322-11. Truck route system.
A. No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour
in the areas described in Schedule I (§ 322-49), during school days
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement
officer while engaged in the performance of his duties; nor shall the
provisions of this section apply to any Fire Department vehicle
responding to a fire or emergency.
§ 322-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-11
320:497
A. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to
designate from time to time streets from which heavy vehicles shall be
excluded, which said streets shall be conspicuously designated by a
proper sign or signs. This exclusion shall not be construed to prevent
the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other properties along the
street from which such vehicles and combinations are excluded.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a heavy vehicle upon or
along said street or streets.
§ 322-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-11
320:498
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 322-12. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 322-13. Parking prohibited at all times.
§ 322-14. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
where appropriate signs are posted.
§ 322-15. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
where appropriate signs are posted.
§ 322-16. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between limited hours upon any of the
streets or parts of streets where appropriate signs are posted.
§ 322-17. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during limited times upon any of the streets
or parts of streets where appropriate signs are posted.
§ 322-18. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the time limits specified upon any of
the streets or parts of streets where appropriate signs are posted.
§ 322-19. Time limit parking.116
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit specified upon
any of the streets or parts of streets where appropriate signs are posted.
A. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to
designate from time to time streets or portions of streets in the Village
where the parking of any vehicle shall be prohibited, which said streets
or portion of streets shall be designated by a proper sign or signs.
B. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or leave
standing said vehicle in any such streets or portions of streets.
116. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 252, Property, Abandoned, § 252-3, Motor vehicles.
§ 322-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-20
320:499
§ 322-20. Loading zones. [Amended 1-13-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
The locations described in Schedule VII (§ 322-55), attached to and made
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones, and there shall
be no parking, stopping or standing in said loading zones at any time.
§ 322-21. Taxi stands. [Amended 1-13-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
The locations described in Schedule VIII (§ 322-56), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands, and there shall
be no parking, stopping or standing in said taxi stands at any time.
§ 322-22. Bus stops. [Amended 1-13-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
The locations described in Schedule IX (§ 322-57), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops, and there shall be
no parking, stopping or standing in said bus stop zones at any time.
§ 322-22.1. Blocking access to public streets prohibited. [Added
10-21-1996 by L.L. No. 15-1996]
No person, entity, partnership or corporation shall be allowed to park,
place, stand or stop any motor vehicle on any street in the Village of
Massapequa Park or on any other Village property which blocks or obstructs
access to an entrance or exit of any street.
§ 322-20 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-22.1
320:500
ARTICLE IV
Loading and Unloading Permits
§ 322-23. Permit required during certain hours.
No person within the Village shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., load or unload from or upon any truck, dray or other vehicle
or move or remove from or to any place within the Village any heavy or
bulky articles of any sort whatsoever without having first obtained a permit
therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 322-24. Issuance of permit; contents.
The permit required in § 322-23 may be issued by the Board of Trustees
or by the Mayor of the Village, upon written application therefor, which
shall specify the article which it is desired to load, unload or move; the
place where and the time when such loading, unloading or moving is to
take place; and the nature of the truck, dray or other vehicle which is to
transport the same.
§ 322-25. Conditions for issuance.
The permit required in § 322-23 shall only be issued upon its appearing to
the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees or the Mayor, as the case may be,
that such loading, unloading or moving can and shall be conducted without
disturbing the peace and quiet of the Village or of the inhabitants thereof or
of any meeting or assembly therein.
§ 322-26. Responsibility of occupants and managers.
No owner, lessee, tenant or other person in possession of or occupying any
premises within the Village or manager or other head of any business, trade
or other occupation conducted therein shall knowingly allow or permit any
person, whether in his employ or otherwise, to do or perform any act or acts
in violation of the foregoing sections of this article.
§ 322-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-26
320:501

ARTICLE V
Snow Emergencies
§ 322-27. Purpose.
§ 322-28. Declaration of snow emergency; scope. [Amended
7-26-2004 by L.L. No. 10-2004]
A snow emergency will be declared on all Village streets when the National
Weather Service predicts a snowfall of three inches or more, or when the
Mayor declares a snow emergency for the area.
§ 322-29. Parking restrictions.
§ 322-30. Notices of violation.
Notices of violation of this article shall be given to the owner of the vehicle
involved in such violation.
A. This article is being enacted to ensure better service for the residents of
our Village on streets in order to ensure the safe passage for residents
and emergency vehicles during a snow emergency.
B. This article is further being enacted to ensure access to all major
highways and public facilities and to ensure quick plowing and early
widening of our Village streets for snow removal.
A. Parking will only be allowed and permitted on one side of all Village
streets during said snow emergency as follows: [Amended 5-10-2004
by L.L. No. 4-2004]
(1) During a snow emergency occurring in even-numbered years,
parking will be permitted on the even-numbered side of streets.
(2) During a snow emergency occuring in odd-numbered years,
parking will be permitted on the odd-numbered side of streets.
B. One-side parking shall rotate with each year's snow season so that the
burden upon our residents will be equally divided.
§ 322-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-30
320:503

ARTICLE VI
Boats and Vehicle Parking
§ 322-31. Parking restrictions. [Amended 12-8-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014; 5-28-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015117]
A. Public streets.
(1) Only pleasure-passenger motor vehicles not exceeding seven feet
in height with passenger license plates are permitted and allowed
to park on Village public streets except as set forth in Subsection
A(2).
(2) Parking restrictions.
(a) Commercial vehicles shall not be allowed to park on Village
public streets unless said commercial vehicle is actually
engaged in loading or unloading at premises located on said
street, or is being used in connection with construction, repairs
or emergency service relating to the premises located within
said street.
(b) For the purposes of this subsection, buses and cabs shall be
allowed at any time to discharge and take on passengers.
(c) For the purpose of this subsection, a "commercial vehicle" shall
be defined as any vehicle other than pleasure-passenger motor
vehicles with passenger license plates, and a "commercial
vehicle" shall include plow attachments, trailers and towed
storage containers generally capable of use for commercial
purposes and shall further be defined as set forth in the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(d) Any pleasure-passenger motor vehicle with passenger license
plates which has commercial writing or advertising on said
vehicle or truck or which has no windows at all on the side of
the said vehicle or truck shall be considered a commercial
vehicle under this subsection.
(e) This subsection shall be applicable to residential districts as
defined on the Official Zoning Map of the Incorporated Village
of Massapequa Park.
(3) In conjunction with the above provisions and as defined in the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, a "commercial
vehicle," for the purposes of this subsection, is defined as every
type of motor-driven vehicle used for commercial purposes on the
public streets of the Village, such as any commercial service
whatsoever and motor coaches carrying passengers, and including
117. Editor’s Note: This local law also amended the former title of Article VI from Commercial
Vehicle Parking to Boats and Vehicle Parking.
§ 322-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-31
320:505
the use of commercial vehicles for the transportation of passengers
for any business purpose of any kind whatsoever or the use of a
commercial vehicle to a residence in the Village from the place of
employment of the operator and/or owner of said motor vehicle or
for the use to a place of employment from a place of residence in
the Village or from a place of residence in the Village to another
residence. Such commercial vehicles shall include, among other
vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, boats and campers, and any
vehicle which is not a pleasure-passenger motor vehicle with
passenger license plates used for passenger use only shall be
considered a commercial motor vehicle. In addition, for the
purpose of this subsection, a "commercial vehicle" shall be defined
as any vehicle other than pleasure-passenger motor vehicles with
passenger license plates, and a "commercial vehicle" shall include
plow attachments, trailers and towed storage containers generally
capable of use for commercial purposes and shall further be
defined as set forth in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York.
(4) This subsection is being enacted as a reasonable exercise of the
municipal police power and in the best interests, protection, order,
conduct, safety, health and well-being of the residents of the Village
and in the best interests in the enforcement of Village
governmental services for the benefit of its residents. Considering
the local circumstances and community setting, the Village Board
determines that the parking of non-passenger motor vehicles would
be unnecessarily offensive to the visual sensibilities of the average
Village resident and would materially and economically detract
from the Village and community.
B. Private residential property.
(1) Limitations.
(a) Parking restrictions.
[1] Except for Subsection B(1)(a)[2] below, every commercial
vehicle as defined and implied in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York is hereby prohibited and
banned from parking, standing or stopping on or upon
private residential property within the Incorporated
Village of Massapequa Park between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday, inclusive,
and is prohibited from parking, standing or stopping at any
time on Saturday, Sunday or holidays.
[2] Not more than one commercial vehicle which is nine feet
or under in height may be parked or stored in a garage on
residential property within the Village of Massapequa
Park. Whether a structure constitutes a legal garage shall
be determined by the ordinances and local laws of the
§ 322-31 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-31
320:506
§ 322-32. Petition for relief.
Under exceptional circumstances and facts, a person, partnership,
corporation or entity may petition the Board of Trustees, in writing, for
relief or exception from the terms and provisions of § 322-31 of this article,
and the decision of the Board of Trustees, which shall be in writing, shall be
final and conclusive for all parties concerned.
Village of Massapequa Park. Notwithstanding anything in
this Subsection B, one commercial vehicle such as a van
or truck may be stored on the driveway of the premises
provided it is licensed and its height does not exceed seven
feet six inches with fully inflated tires.
[3] Under no circumstances or exceptions shall any
commercial vehicle which is more than nine feet in height
be parked anywhere on any residential property within the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
(2) For the purposes of this subsection, a recreational vehicle is limited
to a camper or other motor vehicle which includes overnight
camping capability with either kitchen facilities and/or sleeping
capacity, a boat, or boat trailer used solely for recreational
purposes exclusively shall not be included as a commercial vehicle
as described in Subsection A(3). A recreational vehicle or a boat or
boat trailer shall only be permitted on the paved or gravel driveway
with an RCA base and secured curbing or beyond the house front
setback. On corner lots, the boat or boat trailer must be behind at
least one front setback with screening to be determined by the
Board of Trustees. A recreational vehicle cannot be a vehicle which
merely stores items used for recreation.
(3) For the purposes of this subsection, commercial vehicles, except
those vehicles described in Subsection B(2), shall be every type of
motor vehicle used for commercial purposes, such as the
transportation of goods, wares, merchandise and motor coaches
carrying passengers, including trailers and semitrailers, vans and
tractors, where used in combination with a trailer and semitrailer
and other commercial vehicles as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, provided that
an owner does not store a commercial vehicle, he or she may store
one trailer on his or her driveway not exceeding seven feet six
inches in height measured with fully inflated tires for the storage of
recreational items only.
(5) Boats shall include jet skis and wave runners when stored on an
open trailer.
§ 322-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-32
320:507

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Parking Fields
§ 322-33. Permit fees. [Amended 11-24-2008 by L.L. No. 8-2008]
§ 322-34. Commuter parking.
An appropriate resident parking permit shall be issued to residents of
the Village, setting forth thereon the following rules and regulations with
respect to commuter parking in municipal fields:
§ 322-35. Shoppers parking area.
The parking of motor vehicles in the shoppers' parking area shall be limited
to a period of two or three hours, and appropriate signs shall be erected to
that effect.
§ 322-36. Parking field restrictions.
A. Resident commuter, merchant, and nonresident commuter.
(1) A fee as determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees shall be
paid upon the issuance of a parking permit which shall cover a
twelve-month period, i.e., June 1 through May 31. Once a parking
permit has been issued, there shall be no refund or partial refund of
the fee paid. A half-year fee shall be applicable as of December 1.
(2) The issuance of all permits is subject to collection of all checks
received.
(3) Each person desiring to replace a lost parking permit for the
municipal parking fields shall pay a fee of $1.
B. One-day resident parking permit. Special one-day permits shall be
available to residents only for $1, but under no circumstances shall
there be any refund for a one-day parking permit once the same has
been issued to the applicant.
A. Parking time limit. Vehicles parked more than 24 consecutive hours in
the commuter area may be ordered removed by the Board of Trustees.
B. Commercial vehicles prohibited. No commercial vehicles will be
permitted to park in the commuter parking area.
C. Separate permits required. Each motor vehicle shall have an individual
parking permit.
D. Designation of parking period. Parking of motor vehicles in the
commuter parking area shall be limited to a period designated by the
Board of Trustees, and such period shall be appropriately posted in the
parking area.
§ 322-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-36
320:509
§ 322-37. Manner of parking.
§ 322-38. Parking or standing in traffic lanes and driveways.
No automobile or other vehicle shall be parked or permitted to stand in any
traffic lane or driveway in any parking field maintained by the Village.
§ 322-39. Parking of trucks or other commercial vehicles restricted.
No truck or other commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park within any
parking field maintained by the Village at any time, except such incidental
parking for the purpose of loading or unloading that is of a temporary
nature during normal business hours.
§ 322-40. Conditions of parking permits. [Amended 11-24-2008 by
L.L. No. 8-2008]
A. Parking in the designated commuter areas of Parking Field Nos. 1 and 2
shall be by permit only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
B. No parking shall be allowed in Parking Field Nos. 3 and 4 from 2:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
A. Any vehicle parked or placed in any parking space shall be parked or
placed within the lines marked upon the surface of the field for such
purpose.
B. All motor vehicles parked within the municipal parking fields shall
utilize head-in parking within the marked stalls, except where parallel
parking within a marked stall is indicated or as otherwise designated.
For the purposes of this subsection, "head-in parking" shall mean that
the front bumper of the motor vehicle shall be adjacent to the traffic
islands and/or the median marking line dividing the head-in parking
lanes.
A. General: resident commuter, merchant and nonresident commuter.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, employee or other
legal entity to park in certain designated areas in the Village of
Massapequa Park without first having obtained a permit from the
Village Administrator of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park.
(2) Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the Village
Administrator on the form provided therefor, and such application
must be signed by the applicant.
(3) Upon receipt of the required application for a parking permit, the
Village Administrator or any other person so empowered shall
inspect said application and, based upon his findings resulting from
§ 322-36 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-40
320:510
such inspection, decide whether to issue a permit or deny the
application.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal
entity receiving or eligible to receive a parking permit from the
Village of Massapequa Park to give, transfer or dispose of said
parking permit in any manner whatsoever to anyone. Said parking
permit is not transferable.
(5) It shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to obtain a
parking permit under false pretenses or make false, fraudulent or
inaccurate statements in any application to obtain said parking
permit or use said parking permit in any unauthorized or illegal
manner.
(6) Receipt by any person of a parking permit issued by the Village of
Massapequa Park shall subject such recipient to the jurisdiction of
the Village Court of Massapequa Park.
(7) Any person violating this article shall have his or her parking
permit revoked for the balance of the particular year in which the
violation occurred, and that person shall be automatically ineligible
to make application for a parking permit for an additional period of
two years thereafter from the last day of the year in which the
violation occurred, and such person or persons shall be liable for a
mandatory minimum fine of $100 for every violation of this article.
B. Merchant parking permits.
(1) Upon receipt of the required application for a parking permit, the
Village Administrator or any other person so empowered shall
inspect said application and place of employment and, based upon
his findings resulting from such inspection, decide whether to issue
a permit or deny the application.
(2) The merchant/employer must notify the Village of Massapequa
Park, in writing, within 10 days after the termination of the
employment of any employee of his firm or establishment who
received a parking permit from the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park and where the expiration date of such parking
permit has not elapsed.
(3) If any merchant/employer fails to notify the Village, in writing, of
the termination of employment of any employee, as set forth in
Subsection B(2), who has terminated his employment, and said
parking permit is utilized by any unauthorized person or persons,
that employer shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall
be subjected to a fine, and the Village of Massapequa Park shall
have the right to confiscate the parking permit of the merchant/
employer, if one was so issued to him, or to take any other action
the Village deems appropriate against said employer.
§ 322-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-40
320:511
(4) Any employee of a merchant or the merchant/employer who
receives a valid parking permit from the Village of Massapequa
Park shall only be allowed to park his motor vehicle in areas
designated for merchants or in areas designated for twelve-hour
parking.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any employee of a merchant, a merchant/
employer or any other person to allow any other person to use his
parking permit, regardless of the fact that said employee/employer
is actively employed at the business premises set forth in the
application to the Village.
(6) To ensure this responsibility, simultaneously with the filing of an
application for a parking permit the merchant/employer and
employee shall execute an affidavit of responsibility. Such affidavit
shall include but not be limited to the permanent addresses of the
merchant/employer and employee where summonses or notices to
be complied with regarding the provisions of this article and all
other applicable laws maybe served upon them.
(7) Areas established as merchant/employee parking areas shall be
located within the municipal parking fields and shall be properly
signed as authorized by the Board of Trustees. Said area shall be
limited to the parking of cars by nonresident employees of
merchants in the Village.
§ 322-40 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-40
320:512
ARTICLE VIII
Public Parking Businesses
§ 322-41. Approval of Board of Trustees required.
No parking place shall be conducted in any business district or on property
in the Village except when owned or controlled by the municipality or its
agents, unless approved by the Board of Trustees as hereinafter provided.
§ 322-42. License application.
An application for a license to conduct a parking place setting forth the
location and area of the proposed business property to be used as a parking
place shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees. The applicant shall
further set forth the maximum number of motor vehicles to be parked on
said property, taking into consideration means of ingress and egress.
§ 322-43. License fee.
No license shall be granted for the purpose of conducting a public parking
place unless a fee for said license in the amount of $10 is paid by the
applicant.
§ 322-44. Duration of license.
A license to conduct a parking place shall permit the applicant therefor
to conduct said business for a period of one year commencing June 1 and
expiring May 31 next following.
§ 322-45. Operation prohibited on residential property.
No public parking place shall be permitted to be operated on any property
which has been zoned residential.
§ 322-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-45
320:513

ARTICLE IX
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 322-46. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 322-47. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Village
Administrator may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable
place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of
the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom
stored of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in
effecting such removal and storage.
§ 322-48. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Village
Administrator.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Village Administrator.
§ 322-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-48
320:515

ARTICLE IXA
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 322-48.1. Parking restrictions.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle as follows:
§ 322-48.2. Safe operation of motor vehicles.
Uninspected vehicles. No motor vehicle shall be operated or parked upon
the public highways of the Village of Massapequa Park unless a certificate
of inspection, as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, is displayed upon the vehicle or affixed to the registration
certificate for the vehicle as may be determined by the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles. Any violation of this section that occurs while a motor
vehicle is parked shall constitute a parking violation. In such event, the
owner of said vehicle shall be deemed the violator.
§ 322-48.3. Unregistered vehicles.
No motor vehicle shall be operated, driven or parked upon the public
highways of the Village of Massapequa Park without first being registered
in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York.
§ 322-48.4. Number plates.
No person shall operate, drive or park a motor vehicle on the public
highways of the Village of Massapequa Park unless such vehicle shall bear
number plates as prescribed by § 402 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, and said plates shall comply with all of the provisions
of that section. The failure to produce a certificate of registration or
registration renewal stub of the vehicle shall be presumptive evidence of
the displaying of the number plates not proper for the vehicle.
A. On a crosswalk.
B. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
C. In front of a private driveway.
D. On a sidewalk.
E. Facing in the opposite direction of authorized traffic movement.
§ 322-48.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-48.4
320:517

ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 322-49. Schedule I: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-5, no person shall drive a vehicle
in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below,
during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Beacon Drive 15 Between Larch Lane and Birch
Lane
Beverly Avenue 15 Between Cartwright Boulevard
and Jones Place
East Lake Avenue 15 Between Nos. 150 and 220
Nassau Street 15 Between Laurel Drive and
Whitewood Drive
Roosevelt Avenue 15 Between Maple Street and
Lindbergh Street
Second Avenue 15 Between Maple Street and
Lindbergh Street
Smith Street 15 Between Second Avenue and
Roosevelt Avenue
§ 322-50. Schedule II: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-6, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Birch Lane Nassau Street
Front Street Between Seventh Avenue and Park Boulevard
Harbor Lane Between Merrick Road and Nassau Street
Park Boulevard Between Clark Boulevard and Front Street
§ 322-51. Schedule III: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-7, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
§ 322-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-51
320:519
Name of Street
Direction
of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Harbor Lane
(easterly spur)
North Left All Merrick Road
Park Boulevard
(westerly spur)
South Left All Merrick Road
Parking Field 5
Exit
West Left All Corner of Park Boulevard and Front
Street
Parking Lot No. 2 [Added 5-8-2000 by L.L. No. 9-2000; repealed 5-10-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
§ 322-52. Schedule IV: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-8, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Broadway [Amended
11-23-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
South Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Carol Drive [Amended
11-23-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
North Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 11-23-1998
by L.L. No. 7-1998]
North Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Cartwright Boulevard West Merrick Road
Clark Boulevard East/West Park Boulevard (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Lakeshore Boulevard
[Added 11-23-1998
by L.L. No. 7-1998]
North Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
L.I.R.R. Parking Field
entrance [Added
11-23-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
South Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Merrick Road West Park Boulevard (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Park Boulevard North/
South
Clark Boulevard (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
§ 322-51 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-52
320:520
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Park Boulevard
[Amended
11-23-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
North/
South
Sunrise Highway (no right on red
when pedestrians are present)
Sunrise Highway West Park Boulevard
§ 322-53. Schedule V: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-9, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Abbey Street Both Brooklyn Avenue
Abbey Street Both Carol Drive
Abbey Street Both Cartwright Boulevard
Abbey Street Both Manhattan Avenue
Abbey Street Both New York Avenue
Abbey Street Both Park Boulevard
Abbey Street West Lake Shore Drive
Arthur Street Both Park Boulevard
Arthur Street East Roosevelt Avenue
Arthur Street West Lake Shore Drive
Aster Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Aster Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Atlantic Avenue [Added
8-27-2001 by L.L. No.
5-2001]
Both Connecticut Avenue
Atlantic Avenue [Added
9-10-2007]
Both Cypress Street
Atlantic Avenue [Added
11-10-2008]
Both Euclid Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Illinois Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Maryland Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Massachusetts Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Michigan Avenue
§ 322-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:521
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Atlantic Avenue [Added
8-9-2004]
Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Both Pittsburg Avenue
Avoca Avenue [Added
10-5-1998 by L.L. No.
5-1998]
Both Brooklyn Avenue
Avoca Avenue [Added
10-5-1998 by L.L. No.
5-1998]
Both Carol Drive
Avoca Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Avoca Avenue Both Manhattan Avenue
Avoca Avenue [Added
6-11-2012]
Both New York Avenue
Avoca Avenue Both Park Boulevard
Balchen Street Both Oakdale Avenue
Balchen Street Both Rockne Avenue
Bannon Place Both Abbey Street
Bannon Place Both Massapequa Avenue
Bannon Place Both St. Regis Drive
Bannon Place North Avoca Avenue
Bannon Place South Kinsella Avenue
Beacon Drive Both Hemlock Lane
Beacon Drive [Added
12-23-2002 by L.L. No.
9-2002]
Both (three-way) Larch Lane
Belvedere Drive Both Massapequa Avenue
Beverly Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Beverly Avenue West Park Boulevard
Birch Lane North Nassau Street
Brendan Avenue Both Bannon Place
Brendan Avenue Both Brooklyn Avenue
Brendan Avenue Both Carol Drive
Brendan Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Brendan Avenue Both Park Boulevard
Brendan Avenue West Lake Shore Drive
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:522
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Broadway [Amended
8-11-2003 by L.L. No.
7-2003]
Both Connecticut Avenue
Broadway Both Cypress Street
Broadway [Added
10-21-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996]
Both Euclid Avenue
Broadway Both Illinois Avenue
Broadway Both Massachusetts Avenue
Broadway Both Michigan Avenue
Broadway [Added
11-14-2011]
Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Broadway Both Pittsburg Avenue
Broadway North Walker Street
Broadway South Front Street
Brooklyn Avenue Both Avoca Avenue
Brooklyn Avenue North Sunrise Highway
Brooklyn Avenue North Sunrise Highway
Brooklyn Avenue South Cartwright Boulevard
Brooklyn Boulevard Both Brendan Avenue
Byrd Street North South Park Drive
Byrd Street South Linden Street
Carol Drive Both Avoca Avenue
Carol Drive Both Harmony Drive
Carol Drive [Added
4-8-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
South Cartwright Boulevard
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 3-11-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
Both Abbey Street
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 9-22-2003 by L.L.
No. 12-2003]
Both Avoca Avenue
Cartwright Boulevard Both Brendan Avenue
Cartwright Boulevard Both Glengariff Road
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 4-8-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
Both Harmony Drive
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:523
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Cartwright Boulevard Both Kinsella Avenue
Cartwright Boulevard Both Massapequa Avenue
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 4-8-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
Both Reiss Avenue
Cartwright Boulevard
[Added 3-11-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
Both St. Regis Drive
Cartwright Boulevard South Brooklyn Avenue
Cashaw Place North South Park Drive
Cashaw Place South Linden Street
Charles Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Charles Avenue Both Connecticut Avenue
Charles Avenue Both Cypress Street
Charles Avenue Both Euclid Avenue
Charles Avenue [Added
5-10-2004]
Both Illinois Avenue
Charles Avenue Both Massachusetts Avenue
Charles Avenue [Added
12-23-1996 by L.L. No.
24-1996]
Both Michigan Avenue
Charles Avenue Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Charles Avenue Both Pittsburg Avenue
Charles Avenue North Colleran Place
Charles Avenue North Maryland Avenue
Charles Avenue South Front Street
Clark Boulevard East Front Street
Clover Drive [Added
11-4-2002 by L.L. No.
8-2002]
East Whitewood Drive
Connecticut Avenue Both Atlantic Avenue
Connecticut Avenue
[Amended 8-11-2003 by
L.L. No. 7-2003]
Both Broadway
Connecticut Avenue Both Charles Avenue
Connecticut Avenue Both Grand Boulevard
Connecticut Avenue Both Ocean Avenue
Connecticut Avenue Both Pacific Street
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:524
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Connecticut Avenue West Second Avenue
Cypress Street Both Atlantic Avenue
Cypress Street Both Broadway
Cypress Street [Added
9-10-2007]
Both Grand Boulevard
Cypress Street Both Pacific Street
Cypress Street [Amended
11-23-2015]
Both Philadelphia Avenue
Cypress Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Cypress Street Both Second Avenue
Cypress Street West Lake Shore Drive
East Lake Avenue Both Connecticut Avenue
East Lake Avenue Both Cypress Street
East Lake Avenue Both Euclid Avenue
East Lake Avenue Both Maryland Avenue
East Lake Avenue Both Massachusetts Avenue
East Lake Avenue Both Pennsylvania Avenue
East Lake Avenue Both Pittsburg Avenue
East Lake Avenue South Front Street
Euclid Avenue Both Atlantic Avenue
Euclid Avenue Both Broadway
Euclid Avenue Both Pacific Street
Euclid Avenue Both Philadelphia Avenue
Euclid Avenue West Second Avenue
Fillmore Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Fillmore Street East Second Avenue
First Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
First Avenue Both Connecticut Avenue
First Avenue Both Cypress Street
First Avenue Both Euclid Avenue
First Avenue Both Illinois Avenue
First Avenue [Added
9-10-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001]
Both Michigan Avenue
First Avenue Both Pennsylvania Avenue
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:525
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
First Avenue [Added
8-14-1995 by L.L. No.
8-1995]
Both Pittsburg Avenue
First Avenue North Walker Street
Fitzmaurice Street Both Mayflower Avenue
Fitzmaurice Street Both Park Boulevard
Fitzmaurice Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Fitzmaurice Street [Added
10-26-2009]
East Third Avenue
Fitzmaurice Street West Lake Shore Drive
Fourth Avenue South Front Street
Franklin Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Franklin Street East Second Avenue
Franklin Street West Lake Shore Drive
Front Street Both Broadway
Front Street Both Park Boulevard
Front Street [Added
12-7-1998 by L.L. No.
9-1998]
East Clark Boulevard
Front Street West Lake Shore Drive
Front Street West Philadelphia Avenue
Fulton Street Both Park Boulevard
Fulton Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Fulton Street East Third Avenue
Fulton Street West Lake Shore Drive
Garfield Street Both Park Boulevard
Garfield Street East Roosevelt Avenue
Garfield Street West Lake Shore Drive
Glengariff Road Both Brooklyn Avenue
Glengariff Road Both Carol Drive
Glengariff Road Both Cartwright Boulevard
Glengariff Road Both Manhattan Avenue
Glengariff Road Both New York Avenue
Glengariff Road Both Park Boulevard
Grand Boulevard Both Clark Boulevard
Grand Boulevard Both Connecticut Avenue
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:526
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Grand Boulevard Both Cypress Street
Grand Boulevard Both Euclid Avenue
Grand Boulevard Both Maryland Avenue
Grand Boulevard Both Massachusetts Avenue
Grand Boulevard Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Grand Boulevard North Hoffman Place
Grand Boulevard South Front Street
Grant Street East Second Avenue
Grant Street West Lake Shore Drive
Greenwich Avenue East Second Avenue
Greenwich Avenue West Roosevelt Avenue
Harbor Lane Both Kings Walk
Harbor Lane Both Nassau Street
Harbor Lane Both Overlea South
Harbor Lane North Merrick Road
Harding Street East Roosevelt Avenue
Harding Street West Park Boulevard
Harmony Drive Both Bannon Place
Harmony Drive Both Brooklyn Avenue
Harmony Drive Both Cartwright Boulevard
Harmony Drive Both New York Avenue
Harmony Drive West Lake Shore Drive
Hawthorn Street East Roosevelt Avenue
Hawthorn Street West Lake Shore Drive
Hayes Street Both Park Boulevard
Hayes Street East Roosevelt Avenue
Hayes Street West Lake Shore Drive
Hemlock Lane Both Kings Walk
Hemlock Lane North Beacon Drive
Henry Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Henry Street East Second Avenue
Henry Street West Lake Shore Drive
Illinois Avenue [Added
6-22-2015]
Both Atlantic Avenue
Illinois Avenue Both Charles Avenue
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:527
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Illinois Avenue Both East Lake Avenue
Illinois Avenue Both First Avenue
Illinois Avenue Both Grand Boulevard
Illinois Avenue Both Ocean Avenue
Jackson Avenue [Added
11-25-1996 by L.L. No.
20-1996]
East Seventh Avenue
Jackson Avenue West Park Boulevard
Jefferson Avenue North Clark Boulevard
Jefferson Avenue South Front Street
Jerusalem Avenue [Added
9-24-2012]
Both Lake Shore Drive
Jerusalem Avenue Both Roosevelt Avenue
Jerusalem Avenue Both Second Avenue
Kings Walk Both Hemlock Lane
Kings Walk [Added
4-13-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998]
West Harbor Lane
Kinsella Avenue Both Cartwriht Boulevard
Kinsella Avenue West Park Boulevard
Koehl Street Both Park Boulevard
Koehl Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Koehl Street West Mayflower Avenue
Lakeshore Boulevard Both Avoca Avenue
Lakeshore Boulevard
[Added 12-29-2008]
Both Brendan Avenue
Lake Shore Drive Both Fillmore Street
Lake Shore Drive
[Amended 9-24-2012]
Both Jerusalem Avenue
Lake Shore Drive Both Smith Street
Lake Shore Drive Both Violet Street
Lake Shore Drive Both Walker Street
Lake Shore Drive North Hawthorn Street
Lake Shore Drive North Maple Street
Lake Shore Drive North Mayflower Avenue
Lake Shore Drive North Park Boulevard
Lake Shore Drive North Von Huenfeld Street
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:528
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Lake Shore Drive South Front Street
Lake Shore Drive South Linden Street
Larch Lane North Whitewood Drive
Laurel Drive North Nassau Street
Lilac Street South Massapequa Avenue
Lincoln Avenue North Clark Boulevard
Lincoln Avenue South Front Street
Lindbergh Street Both Park Boulevard
Lindbergh Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Lindbergh Street West Lake Shore Drive
Linden Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Linden Street Both Oakdale Avenue
Linden Street Both Rockne Street
Linden Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Linden Street West West Street
Manhatten Avenue [Added
10-15-2001 by L.L. No.
12-2001]
Both Glengariff Road
Manhattan Avenue North Sunrise Highway
Manhattan Avenue South Cartwright Boulevard
Maple Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Maple Street East Second Avenue
Maple Street West Lake Shore Drive
Martin Place Both Philadelphia Avenue
Maryland Avenue Both Atlantic Avenue
Maryland Avenue Both Pacific Street
Maryland Avenue Both Philadelphia Avenue
Maryland Avenue West Charles Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue Both Charles Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue Both East Lake Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue Both First Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue Both Grand Boulevard
Massachusetts Avenue Both Ocean Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue West Second Avenue
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:529
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Massapequa Avenue
[Added 9-10-2001 by L.L.
No. 10-2001]
Both Belvedere Drive
Massapequa Avenue Both Park Boulevard
Massapequa Avenue [Added 9-10-2001 by L.L. No. 9-2001; repealed
1-7-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Massapequa Avenue East Cartwright Boulevard
Massapequa Avenue West Lakeshore Boulevard
May Place Both Massapequa Avenue
May Place North St. Regis Drive
Mayflower Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Mayflower Avenue Both Fulton Street
Mayflower Avenue North Lake Shore Drive
Mayflower Avenue South Front Street
McKinley Street Both Mayflower Avenue
McKinley Street Both Park Boulevard
McKinley Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
McKinley Street West Lake Shore Drive
Michigan Avenue [Added
9-24-2001 by L.L. No.
11-2001]
Both Atlantic Avenue
Michigan Avenue Both Charles Avenue
Michigan Avenue Both East Lake Avenue
Michigan Avenue Both First Avenue
Michigan Avenue Both Grand Boulevard
Michigan Avenue Both Ocean Avenue
Michigan Avenue [Added
6-9-2003 by L.L. No.
3-2003]
Both Second Avenue
Michigan Avenue [Repealed 10-26-2009]
Monroe Street Both Mayflower Avenue
Monroe Street Both Park Boulevard
Monroe Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Monroe Street East Third Avenue
Monroe Street West Lake Shore Drive
Moore Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Moore Avenue West Park Boulevard
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:530
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Municipal Parking Field 1,
Lane 2
South Front Street
Municipal Parking Field 1,
Lane 4
South Front Street
Municipal Parking Field 1,
Lane 4
West Field 1
Municipal Parking Field 1,
Lane 6
West Field 1
Municipal Parking Field 2 East Seventh Avenue
Municipal Parking Field 2 North Taylor Avenue
Municipal Parking Field 3 West Cartwright Boulevard
Municipal Parking Field 4 East Cartwright Boulevard
Municipal Parking Field 4 North Beverly Avenue
Municipal Parking Field 5 West Park Boulevard
Nassau Street Both Harbour Lane
Nassau Street East Whitewood Drive
New York Avenue Both Avoca Avenue
New York Avenue [Added
1-13-2014]
Both Brendan Avenue
New York Avenue North Sunrise Highway
New York Avenue [Added
9-10-2001 by L.L. No.
6-2001]
South Massapequa Avenue
Oak Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Oak Street East Second Avenue
Oak Street West Lake Shore Drive
Oakdale Avenue Both Aster Street
Oakdale Avenue Both Linden Street
Oakdale Avenue Both Rose Street
Oakdale Avenue South Walker Street
Ocean Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Ocean Avenue Both Connecticut Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both Cypress Street
Ocean Avenue Both Euclid Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
9-22-2003 by L.L. No.
11-2003]
Both Illinois Avenue
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:531
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ocean Avenue Both Maryland Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both Massachusetts Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
7-12-2004]
Both Michigan Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Ocean Avenue North Martin Place
Ocean Avenue South Front Street
O'Connell Street Both Lake Shore Drive
O'Connell Street Both Oakdale Avenue
O'Connell Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Pacific Street Both Clark Boulevard
Pacific Street [Added
7-23-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001]
Both Connecticut Avenue
Pacific Street [Added
11-22-2004]
Both Cypress Street
Pacific Street Both Illinois Avenue
Pacific Street [Added
9-30-1996 by L.L. No.
12-1996]
Both Maryland Avenue
Pacific Street Both Massachusetts Avenue
Pacific Street Both Michigan Avenue
Pacific Street [Added
8-23-2004]
Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Pacific Street Both Pittsburg Avenue
Pacific Street South Front Street
Park Boulevard Both Smith Street
Park Boulevard North Lake Shore Drive
Park Boulevard South Merrick Road
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Atlantic Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Broadway
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Pacific Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Philadelphia Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Second Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue West Third Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue
[Added 11-23-2015]
Both Cypress Street
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:532
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Philadelphia Avenue Both Illinois Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue
[Added 11-14-2005]
Both Maryland Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue Both Michigan Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue Both Pittsburg Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue North Connecticut Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue South Clark Boulevard
Philadelphia Avenue South Front Street
Philadelphia Avenue South Massachusetts Avenue
Pine Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Pine Street East Second Avenue
Pine Street West Lake Shore Drive
Pittsburg Avenue [Added
9-23-2002 by L.L. No.
6-2002]
Both Atlantic Avenue
Pittsburg Avenue [Added
10-15-2007]
Both Broadway
Pittsburg Avenue Both Charles Avenue
Pittsburg Avenue
[6-8-2015]
Both East Lake Avenue
Pittsburg Avenue Both First Avenue
Pittsburg Avenue Both Grand Boulevard
Pittsburg Avenue Both Ocean Avenue
Pittsburg Avenue [Added
5-10-2004]
Both Pacific Street
Pittsburg Avenue West Second Avenue
Primrose Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Primrose Avenue West Park Boulevard
Railroad Parking Lot North Front Street at Roosevelt
Avenue
Rainbow Road North Beacon Drive
Reiss Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Reiss Avenue West Park Boulevard
Rockne Avenue [Added
5-13-2014]
Both Linden Street
Rockne Avenue Both Violet Street
Rockne Avenue North South Park Drive
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:533
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Rockne Avenue South Walker Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Grant Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Jerusalem Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue Both Smith Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Spruce Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Van Buren Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Violet Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Walker Street
Roosevelt Avenue South Front Street
Roosevelt Avenue South Linden Street
Rose Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Rose Street Both Oakdale Avenue
Rose Street Both Rockne Avenue
Rose Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Second Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Second Avenue Both Cypress Street
Second Avenue Both Illinois Avenue
Second Avenue Both Massachusetts Avenue
Second Avenue [Amended
6-9-2003 by L.L. No.
3-2003]
Both Michigan Avenue
Second Avenue Both Smith Street
Second Avenue [Added
9-9-1996 by L.L. No.
11-1996]
Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Second Avenue [Added
11-18-1996 by L.L. No.
19-1996]
North Euclid Avenue
Second Avenue North Pittsburg Avenue
Second Avenue North Walker Street
Second Avenue South Jerusalem Avenue
Second Avenue South Spruce Street
Seventh Avenue South Front Street
Sixth Avenue South Front Street
Skylark Drive Both Whitewood Drive
Skylark Drive North Kings Walk
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:534
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Skylark Road Both Williams Drive
Smith Street Both Park Boulevard
Smith Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Smith Street East Second Avenue
Smith Street West Lake Shore Drive
South Park Drive Both Lake Shore Drive
South Park Drive Both Oakdale Avenue
South Park Drive Both Roosevelt Avenue
Southgate Circle West and South Southgate Condominiums
Southgate Crescent West Southgate Drive
Spruce Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Spruce Street East Second Avenue
Spruce Street West Lake Shore Drive
St. Regis Drive Both Brooklyn Avenue
St. Regis Drive Both Park Boulevard
St. Regis Drive East Carol Drive
St. Regis Drive [Added
10-2-1995 by L.L. No.
10-1995; amended
3-11-2002 by L.L. No.
2-2002]
Both Cartwright Boulevard
St. Regis Drive West Cartwright Boulevard
Taylor Avenue East Seventh Avenue
Taylor Avenue West Park Boulevard
Third Avenue Both Clark Boulevard
Third Avenue [Amended
10-26-2009]
Both Fitzmaurice Street
Third Avenue South Front Street
Tiffany Drive North Brendan Avenue
Tiffany Drive [Added
9-10-2001 by L.L. No.
9-2001]
South Massapequa Avenue
Tyrconnell Avenue Both Brooklyn Avenue
Tyrconnell Avenue Both Carol Drive
Tyrconnell Avenue Both Cartwright Boulevard
Tyrconnell Avenue Both Manhattan Avenue
Tyrconnell Avenue Both New York Avenue
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-53
320:535
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Tyrconnell Avenue Both Park Boulevard
Tyrconnell Avenue North Front Street at Seventh
Avenue
Tyrconnell Avenue West Lake Shore Drive
Van Buren Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Van Buren Street Both Mayflower Avenue
Van Buren Street Both Park Boulevard
Van Buren Street [Added
5-10-2004]
Both Roosevelt Avenue
Violet Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Violet Street Both Oakdale Avenue
Violet Street Both Rockne Avenue
Violet Street Both Roosevelt Street
Von Huenfeld Street Both Park Boulevard
Von Huenfeld Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Von Huenfeld Street West Lake Shore Drive
Walker Street Both Lake Shore Drive
Walker Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Walker Street East Charles Avenue
Walker Street [Added
11-23-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
East Second Avenue
Walker Street [Added
11-23-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
West Oakdale Avenue
Walnut Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Walnut Street East Second Avenue
Walnut Street West Lake Shore Drive
Wenwood Drive North Whitewoood Drive
West Street South Linden Street
Whitewood Drive Both Kings Walk
Whitewood Drive [Added
1-8-2007]
Both Nassau Street
Whitewood Drive Both Skylark Drive
Whitewood Drive Both Williams Drive
§ 322-53 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-53
320:536
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Whitewood Drive [Added
11-4-2002 by L.L. No.
8-2002]
South Clover Drive
Whitewood Drive West Chapman Drive
Willow Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Willow Street East Second Avenue
Willow Street West Lake Shore Drive
Wilson Street Both Mayflower Avenue
Wilson Street Both Park Boulevard
Wilson Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Wilson Street West Lake Shore Drive
§ 322-54. Schedule VI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-10, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Carol Street [Repealed 4-8-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Fourth Avenue North Clark Boulevard
Jackson Avenue [Added
10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 7-2002]
Both Pedestrian crosswalks
Jackson Avenue [Repealed 11-25-1996 by L.L. No. 20-1996]
Larch Lane South Kings Walk
Park Boulevard [Added
10-21-2002 by L.L.
No. 7-2002]
Both Taylor Avenue
St. Regis Drive [Repealed 10-2-1995 by L.L. No. 10-1995]
Seventh Avenue North Clark Boulevard
Sixth Avenue North Clark Boulevard
Wenwood Drive South Kings Walk
§ 322-55. Schedule VII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-20, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
§ 322-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-55
320:537
Name of Street Side Location
Parking Field No. 2 West Behind 1013 Park Boulevard
Parking Field No. 4 South Behind 4881 Merrick Road
§ 322-56. Schedule VIII Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-21, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street South At Long Island Railroad Station on east
side of Park Boulevard
§ 322-57. Schedule IX: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-22, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Merrick Road North West curbline of Cartwright Boulevard
Merrick Road South From a point opposite the east curbline of
Cartwright Boulevard east for a distance of
60 feet
Sunrise Highway North West curbline of Park Boulevard
Sunrise Highway South East curbline of Park Boulevard
§ 322-58. Schedule X: Speed Limits. [Added 11-24-1997 by L.L. No.
16-1997]
In accordance with the provisions of § 322-4, Speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Front Street [Added
2-14-2005 by L.L.
No. 2-2005]
25 Between Seventh Avenue and
Mayflower Avenue
Park Boulevard
[Amended
1-10-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
25 Between Clark Boulevard and Front
Street
§ 322-59. Schedule XI: Lane Use Restrictions. [Added 12-27-2004 by
L.L. No. 14-2004]
Lane use restrictions shall be as follows:
§ 322-55 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 322-59
320:538
Name of Street Restriction Location
Railroad parking lot
exit
Right turn only, 5:00
p.m. to 7:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Front Street at the
intersection of Seventh
Avenue
§ 322-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-59
320:539
Chapter 328
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 320. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
§ 328-1. Legislative declaration and findings.
A. For the purpose of maintaining and promoting a clean, wholesome and
attractive environment, it is declared to be of importance to the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village to safeguard their
material rights against unwarranted invasion. Such an environment is
deemed essential to the maintenance and continued development of the
economy of the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The unrestrained accumulation of unregistered motor vehicles is a
hazard to such health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village,
necessitating the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof. This
chapter is enacted in recognition of the fact that even a single
unregistered motor vehicle, abandoned or stored on private or public
property:
(1) Can constitute both a public and private nuisance.
(2) Is a source of potential hurt to children and others who find them
an attractive nuisance.
(3) Is often replete with broken glass, sharp torn metal edges and
points, gasoline remaining in tanks of a highly combustible and
explosive nature and hurtful acids in batteries, to mention a few of
the obvious sources of physical hurt found in junk vehicles.
(4) Constitutes a blight on the Village of Massapequa Park landscape.
(5) Destroys the aesthetic qualities of the village and is generally
unsightly.
(6) Tends to depreciate not only the property on which it is located, but
also the property of other persons in the neighborhood and the
village generally.
(7) Makes the village a less safe and pleasant place in which to live and
to do business.
(8) Damages the welfare of the village as a whole.
(9) Tends to result in the uncontrolled growth of grass and weeds.
(10) Tends to result in the uncontrolled collection of debris.
§ 322-59 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 328-1
328:540
§ 328-2. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Village of Massapequa Park
unregistered Motor Vehicle Local Law."
§ 328-3. Definitions; word usage.
(11) Tends to be a breeding ground for insects, rodents and similar
harmful creatures.
A. Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense
include the future, and the singular includes the plural when used
herein. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTIQUE MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 25 years prior to the current year,
which has been maintained and/or restored to a condition which is
substantially in conformance with the manufacturer's specifications
and appearance.
CLASSIC MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 10 years prior to the current year and
which, because of discontinued production and limited availability, is
considered to be a model or make of significant value to collectors or
exhibitors and which has been maintained in or restored to a condition
which is substantially in conformity with the manufacturer's
specifications and appearance.
OPEN STORAGE — Storage other than in a completely enclosed
structure, such as a garage, and such structure shall be constructed of
wood, masonry or metal.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, whether
automobile, bus, van or truck, originally intended for travel on the
public highways, which is abandoned, stored, left or placed by its owner
or any other person or is permitted or condoned to be abandoned,
stored left or placed by its owner or any other person on public or
private premises in the Village of Massapequa Park, which vehicle:
Is not currently registered by the State of New York or any other
state for operation on public highways and has not been registered
during the preceding 30 days, except when any vehicle as
designated above is not required to be registered by the laws of the
State of New York or any other state; or
(1)
§ 328-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 328-3
328:541
§ 328-4. Open storage.
§ 328-5. Notice of violation; methods of compliance.
VILLAGE — Includes all areas within the Village of Massapequa Park,
both publicly and privately owned.
Is being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts
therefrom or for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of
the materials therein or for the purpose of disposing of the same.
(2)
A. No unregistered motor vehicle shall be openly stored or be allowed to
be openly stored by the owner of the real property thereof or by any
other person on public or private property, and the same will constitute
a violation of this chapter, except as permitted by the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle which comes under the
definitions of "antique motor vehicles" and "classic motor vehicles" of
§ 328-3 of this chapter.
A. When the Village of Massapequa Park determines that a motor vehicle
within the village has been unregistered for a period of 30 days and
violates any of the subsections of § 328-1, the Village of Massapequa
Park shall give written notice by certified mail to the owner of the real
property where the unregistered motor vehicle is situated or to any
person who may have an interest in said real property or in said motor
vehicle that there is a violation of this chapter. Said notice shall direct
the person so served by certified mail, regardless of the ownership of
the motor vehicle, if the property owner or tenant is served, to
terminate the open storage of such motor vehicle within the village
within 30 days of said written notification served upon him by the
village.
B. The written notice set forth in Subsection A above shall state that said
individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall have 30 days
from the date of the written notification to comply with one of the
following requirements of this chapter:
(1) To register said motor vehicle pursuant to the laws of the State of
New York or any other state.
(2) To store said motor vehicle in a completely enclosed structure, such
as a garage, pursuant to the local laws, rules and regulations of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park.
(3) To remove said motor vehicle from the premises or real property
thereof.
(4) To apply to the Village of Massapequa Park for a permit for an
exception to this chapter, which application shall be in writing by
the applicant to the Village Administrator or his designated agent.
§ 328-3 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 328-6
328:542
§ 328-6. Permit.
§ 328-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
18-1994]
The violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to the
maximum fine allowed by law, with a minimum mandatory fine of $50.
Each week that such separate violation shall continue or be carried on
shall constitute an additional separate violation of this chapter, and each
separate violation shall be punishable by a minimum mandatory fine of $50
and may be punishable by a fine of up to the maximum fine allowed by law
per violation and/or by imprisonment for up to 15 days.
Chapter 330
VEHICLES, VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Noise — See Ch. 218.
Parades and public assemblages — See Ch.
226.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 240.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 322.
A. Any individual or party may apply to the Village Administrator or his
designated agent for a permit to leave on his or her real property an
unregistered motor vehicle that violates any of the subsections of
§ 328-1, and the granting or denial of the issuance of the permit shall be
the decision of the Village Administrator or his designated agent.
B. Any permit or renewal permit may be issued by the Village
Administrator or his designated agent as set forth above and shall be
for a six-month period, except that the Village Administrator or his
designated agent may at any time during said six-month period revoke
and annul said permit or renewal permit if it is determined by the
Village Administrator or his designated agent that the recipient of the
permit or the renewal permit has not complied with the intent of this
chapter or the rules and regulations of the village relating to the same.
Said revocation or annulling of the permit or renewal permit shall be by
certified mail to the recipient of the permit or renewal permit, and upon
said service by certified mail, the permit or renewal permit shall be
revoked and annulled effective immediately.
C. Said permit may be renewed for an additional six-month period, subject
to the decision of the Village Administrator or his designated agent.
§ 328-6 VEHICLES, VENDING § 330-1
330:543
§ 330-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ICE CREAM TRUCKS — Every motor vehicle in which ice cream, ice milk
and other frozen dairy products, as approved by the Nassau County
Department of Health, are carried for the purpose of retail sales on streets
of the village.
STREET VENDING VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is used to sell a
commodity or provide a service which tends to attract children and travels
the roadways within the village making frequent, intermittent and
unscheduled stops on roadways or shoulders of the roadways in order to sell
said commodities and/or provide such services.
§ 330-2. Equipment.
In addition to equipment required by law, every street vending vehicle
operating within the village shall be further equipped with:
§ 330-3. Use of equipment.
A. In addition to the other equipment required by law, every street
vending vehicle shall be equipped with a swing arm that can be
extended horizontally from the left side of the vehicle. That part of the
swing arm that is attached to the vehicle itself shall be 7 3/16 inches in
height and, when extended outward and to the side of the vehicle, shall
extend a length of 18 inches and be flared to a height of 18 inches.
Located at the upper and lower corners of the eighteen-inch side will be
flashing red lights visible from the front and rear. These lights shall be
four inches in diameter and shall flash simultaneously. The background
of the sign shall be painted red and shall be reflective. The lettering
shall be painted white. In the middle, in letters seven inches in height,
shall be painted the word "STOP." The sign shall be lettered and painted
on both sides so that it will be visible from both front and rear. The
bottom of said sign shall be at a height of not less than 42 inches above
the level of the street. [Amended 10-17-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005]
B. Convex mirrors mounted on the front and rear so that the driver, in his
normal seated position, can see the area in front of the truck obscured
by the hood and an area in the rear extending across the truck and four
feet to the rear of the bumper.
C. Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five to seven
inches in diameter and shall display two simultaneously flashing yellow
lights to the front and two simultaneously flashing red lights to the rear,
both of which are visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight upon a straight,
level road.
§ 330-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 330-3
330:544
§ 330-4. Stop required before passing vending vehicle.
The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a vending vehicle stopped on
a roadway shall stop before reaching the vehicle when the flashing lights
aforementioned and stop signal arms described are in use. After stopping,
a driver may proceed at a reasonable and prudent speed not exceeding
10 miles per hour and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian who
crosses the roadway.
§ 330-5. Vending restrictions.
§ 330-6. Other restrictions.
A. The driver of a street vending vehicle stopped on the highway for the
purpose of selling or offering for sale his commodity or service shall
actuate the special flashing lights and extend the swing arm required
by § 330-2A and shown on the attached sketches.118
B. These lights and the swing arm shall not be used when the vending
vehicle is in motion nor at any time the vending vehicle is stopped for
any purpose other than vending.
A. A vendor shall vend only when the vending vehicle is lawfully and
legally parked or stopped.
B. A vendor shall vend only from the side or rear of the vehicle, away from
moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the
roadway.
C. A vendor shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway.
D. There shall be no soliciting of business within 200 feet of a school
during school hours.
E. Vehicles shall not be parked for the solicitation of business in the
vicinity of the shopping districts.
A. The driver of a street vending vehicle shall not back the same to make
or attempt a sale.
B. The driver of a street vending vehicle shall not permit any person under
16 years of age nor any unauthorized person to ride in or on the vehicle.
C. The driver of a vending vehicle shall not stop or stand for the purpose of
vending within 50 feet of any intersection.
D. The operator of any vending vehicle shall not use more than one bell,
loudspeaker or other advertising device, and said bell, loudspeaker or
advertising device shall not have the capability or capacity to emit a
signal louder than 50 decibels at full volume measured at any distance
118. Editor's Note: The sketches are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where they can be
inspected during normal business hours.
§ 330-3 VEHICLES, VENDING § 330-6
330:545
§ 330-7. Inspection.
Every ice cream truck shall be inspected by the appropriate inspection
agency or Police Department once each year prior to its use in the village
for the purpose of retail sales of frozen dairy products. The appropriate
department shall inspect each ice cream truck to determine whether it
complies with this chapter of the Village of Massapequa Park and other
state and local laws.
§ 330-8. Certificate of insurance.
A certificate of insurance in an amount as specified by the Village
Administrator on each vehicle operating in the village shall be submitted.
§ 330-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
19-1994]
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of up to the maximum fine allowed by law.
Chapter 332
from said device for the purpose of advertising. Operation of the bell or
other device shall be only at the time of stopping.
E. It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vending vehicle
from and at which ice cream, frozen dairy products or ice milk is being
vended to use any loudspeaker, bell or other device giving audible
signal to advertise said products or the presence of the vehicle while
the vehicle is in motion.
F. A person operating a vending vehicle shall not stop within any
congested area where such stopping or standing may impede or
inconvenience pedestrian or vehicular traffic or within 200 feet of any
public or private school at any time.
G. A person operating a vending vehicle shall not stop for the purpose of
vending in one location in any public place or street in the village for
more than 10 minutes or in front of any premises for any time if the
owner or lessee of such premises objects.
H. Time. It shall be unlawful to engage in selling or offering for sale any ice
cream or related products from and at a motor vehicle between 9:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
I. The driver shall be no less than 18 years of age.
J. The driver shall have an acceptable driving record over the past three
years. If the license has been in effect for a lesser period, then it shall
be for the total period of license possession, but in no event less than
one year.
§ 330-6 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 330-9
332:546
VILLAGE HALL
§ 332-1. Use of meeting rooms.
Any person, entity, corporation or partnership using Village Hall meeting
rooms must first obtain leave and permission from the Village Board of
Trustees and will be charged the actual cost incurred by the village in
having such rooms available for use by outside persons or organizations
based upon the actual cost per hour, as determined by the Village of
Massapequa Park. Said costs shall be determined annually by the Village of
Massapequa Park.
Chapter 345
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 42.
Business Improvement District — See Ch. 97.
Cesspools and septic tanks — See Ch. 100.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 128.
Fire detectors — See Ch. 148, Art. II.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 154.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Enclosed garages — See Ch. 170.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 178.
Plumbing and drainage — See Ch. 248.
Wireless communications towers and
antennas — See Ch. 272.
Signs — See Ch. 286.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 294.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 298.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Fees — See Ch. A350.
§ 330-9 VILLAGE HALL § 332-1
332:547

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 345-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Massapequa
Park Building Zone Ordinance."
§ 345-2. Purposes.
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been made in
accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. They have
been designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from
fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent
overcrowding of the land, to avoid undue concentration of population and
to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land throughout the Village.
§ 345-3. Interpretation.
§ 345-4. Conflict with other provisions.
Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other adopted rules, regulations, codes or ordinances,
the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
§ 345-5. Definitions; word usage.
A. Generally. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare.
B. Lot, open space and yard areas. The lot, open space or yard areas
required by this chapter for a particular building shall not be
diminished and shall not be included as a part of the required lot, open
space or yard area of any other building. If the lot, open space or yard
areas required by this chapter for a particular building are diminished,
the continued existence of such building shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. The lot, open space or yard areas of buildings existing on
June 29, 1937, shall not be diminished below the requirements herein
provided for buildings hereafter erected, and such required areas shall
not be included as a part of the required areas of any building hereafter
erected.
§ 345-1 VILLAGE HALL § 345-5
332:549
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural; the word "lot" includes the word "plot."
B. Certain words in this chapter are defined for the purpose thereof as
follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building customarily incidental to the
principal building and located on the same lot as such principal
building.[Added 3-14-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use or building.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied by three or more families living independently of each
other.
BUILDING — Any structure other than a boundary wall or fence.
CELLAR — The entire space under the ground floor and within the
foundation walls of the main building and which shall have a headroom
under floor beams of not less than seven feet six inches.
ESTABLISHED GRADE — The elevation of the street grade as fixed by
the Village.
FAMILY[Added 6-24-1974 by L.L. No. 5-1974; 10-17-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016] —
One of the following:
A group of people related by blood, marriage or legal adoption,
living together in a dwelling unit, constituting a natural family;
or
(a)
No more than three unrelated persons living together in a
dwelling unit; or
(b)
Four or more persons living together in a dwelling unit who
are not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, who have
overcome a presumption that they do not constitute a family
by a determination that they are the functional equivalent of a
natural family.
(c)
(1)
In determining whether a group of individuals is living together as
the functional equivalent of a natural family, the following criteria
must be present:
The group is one which, in appearance, structure and function,
resembles a natural family.
(a)
The group must share the entire dwelling unit, including the
cooking facilities, as a single housekeeping unit, use all rooms
and housekeeping facilities in common and have access to all
parts of the dwelling unit.
(b)
(2)
§ 345-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-5
332:550
FILLING STATION — A building or premises or portion thereof
arranged, intended or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline or
other motor vehicle, motorboat or airplane fuel.
FRONT YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, between the front line of the building and the front line of the
lot.
GARAGE — A building or portion of a building arranged, intended or
designed to be used for the storage of motor vehicles.
HALF STORY — An attic with sufficient height to allow construction
therein of a room or rooms suitable for occupancy.
HEIGHT OF A BUILDING OR PORTION OF A BUILDING — Shall be
measured from the average established grade at the street lot line or
from the average natural ground level, if higher, or, if no street grade
has been established, to the highest level of the roof thereof. Where
no roof exists or where there are structures wholly or partly above the
roof, the height shall be measured to the highest point of such building
or structure.[Amended 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or designed to be occupied by one
building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it,
including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be used in
connection with such building. A lot may or may not be the land shown
as the lot on a duly recorded plot.
LOT COVERAGE — The aggregate of the entire horizontal-crosssectional
area, including projections of the main building and any
accessory structures on the lot, except for pools. All uncovered porches,
patios and decks where the maximum height above grade is less than
18 inches are excluded.[Added 3-14-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005;
amended 2-11-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such
permanency and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly
resident in the household who are enrolled in local
schools;
[1]
Members of the group have the same address for purposes
of voter registration, driver's license, motor vehicle
registration and filing taxes;
[2]
[3] Members of the group are employed in the area; and
The group has been living together in the current dwelling
unit, or elsewhere, for a continuous period of one year or
more.
[4]
(c)
Any other factors which may be determinative of whether or
not the group is the functional equivalent of a natural family.
(d)
§ 345-5 VILLAGE HALL § 345-5
332:551
§ 345-6. Compliance required.
Zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are hereby established
and approved. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations
herein prescribed.
§ 345-7. Zoning districts enumerated; Zoning Map.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building or portion of a building
arranged, intended or designed to be used for making repairs to motor
vehicles, motorboats or airplanes.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling occupied by no more than
one family and shall exclude lodgers, boarders, fraternities or multiple
families.[Added 6-8-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
OPEN SPACE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building.
OPERATING AS A SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Interpreted by
the court as having no doors within the housekeeping unit. The
applicant must file a notarized statement indicating the chain of
relationship and appear before the Zoning Board of Appeals for
approval. The Zoning Board will determine if it wants legal publication;
if so, then the charge for publication can be transferred to
applicant.[Added 6-8-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981; amended 1-7-1991
by L.L. No. 1-1991]
REAR YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the
lot.
SIDE YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending through from the street or from the front yard to the rear
yard or to the rear yard line of the lot. Any line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building arranged, intended or
designed for residence use only and for occupancy by one family only.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building arranged, intended or designed
for residence use only and for occupancy by two families only, living
independently of each other.
TWO-STORY BUILDING — Consists of two stories, the second of which
shall have an attic on top and shall have full headroom space of not
less than 75% of the minimum ground floor area prescribed in the
respective zones for such building.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Village is hereby divided into:
Residential A District, which is the residential area north of Merrick
§ 345-5 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-7
332:552
§ 345-8. Interpretation of district boundaries; variations between
map and street layout.
Road; Residential AA District, which is the residential area south of
Merrick Road; Business G District; and Business GG District.
B. The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon the map which
is designated as the "Zoning Map of the Village of Massapequa Park,
New York, as amended." Said Map and all notices, references and other
things shown thereon and therein are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference and shall be and are as much a part of this chapter as if the
matters and things shown on and by said map were all fully described
herein.119
A. District boundaries. When definite distances in feet are not shown on
the Zoning Map, the district boundaries on the Zoning Map are
intended to be along existing streets, alleys or property lines or
extensions of or from the same. When district boundaries are not on
street or lot lines but are indicated as being a given distance from a
certain street line, they shall be parallel to the street line or extension
thereof from which the distance is given, unless otherwise indicated.
When a district boundary is shown as being in any body of water, said
boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the
Village, unless otherwise indicated. When the location of a district
boundary line is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by
the scale of the map measured from a given line.
B. Street layout. Where the street layout actually on the ground varies
from the street layout as shown on the Zoning Map, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may apply the designation shown on the mapped streets in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the
particular area in question.
119. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where it can be
examined during regular office hours.
§ 345-7 VILLAGE HALL § 345-8
332:553

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 345-9. Enforcement; additional rules and regulations.
This chapter shall be enforced on behalf of the Board of Trustees by the
Building Inspector. Said officer shall carry out the procedure as set forth
in Chapter 154 of this Code. The Board of Trustees may make and adopt
such further rules and regulations as are deemed necessary for the proper
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
§ 345-10. Zoning Board of Appeals.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five members
appointed by the Board of Trustees. Said Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have the powers granted and be controlled by the provisions of the Village
Law and this chapter. Consistent with said Village Law, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall determine its own rules and procedure, the manner in
which appeals shall be brought before it and what notice must be given of
proceedings before it.
§ 345-10.1. Alternate members to Zoning Board of Appeals. [Added
3-27-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. Short title and applicability; alternate Zoning Board of Appeals
members act. This section shall apply to the appointments, terms,
functions and powers of alternate members appointed to serve on the
Zoning Board of Appeals in the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. Declaration of policy. It is sometimes difficult to maintain a quorum on
the Zoning Board of Appeals because members are ill, on extended
vacation or find they have a conflict of interest situation on a specific
matter before such Board. In such instances, official business cannot be
conducted, which may delay or impede adherence to required time
lines and which may delay the appropriate process for residents and
taxpayers. The use of alternate members in such instances is hereby
authorized pursuant to the provisions of this section.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Board of Trustees to serve on the Village Zoning
Board of Appeals when a regular member is unable to participate on an
application or matter before the Board, as provided herein.
MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the Board of Trustees to serve on the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to the provision of the local law or ordinance which
first established such Zoning Board of Appeals and any amendments
thereto.
§ 345-9 VILLAGE HALL § 345-10.1
332:555
§ 345-11. Variances.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Village of Massapequa Park as established by the Village Board of
Trustees by local law or ordinance pursuant to the provisions of § 7-712
of the Village Law.
D. Authorization; effect.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees of Massapequa Park hereby enacts
this section to provide a process for appointing alternate members
of the Zoning Board of Appeals. These individuals would serve
when members are absent or unable to participate on an
application or matter before the Board, but shall be given notice of
and shall be encouraged to attend all meetings of such Board.
(2) Alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees for a term of one year. A maximum of three alternate
members may be appointed. Each alternate member shall be
designated as either "First Alternate," "Second Alternate" or "Third
Alternate," and each shall be called upon to serve on a rotation
basis. If an alternate member is not available to serve on a date
when such alternate member is called to serve, then the next
alternate member shall serve. The alternate member not able to
serve shall next serve when that alternate's time comes on the
rotation. [Amended 7-8-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
(3) The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall immediately
designate an alternate to substitute for a member when such
member is unable to participate on an application or matter before
the Board. Alternates shall be designated in order of priority. When
so designated, the alternate member shall possess all the powers
and responsibilities of such member of the Board. Such designation
shall be entered into the minutes of the initial Zoning Board of
Appeals meeting at which the substitution is made.
(4) All provisions of state law relating to Zoning Board of Appeals
member eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of
office and service on other boards, as well as any education,
compensation and attendance, shall also apply to alternate
members.
E. Supersession of Village Law. This section is hereby adopted pursuant to
the provisions of § 10 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law
and § 10 of the New York State Statute of Local Governments. It is the
intent of the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 10 of the New York State
Municipal Home Rule Law to supersede the provisions of § 7-712 et seq.
of the Village Law relating to the appointment of members to the
Village Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 345-10.1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-11
332:556
A. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of these regulations, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall have the power to vary or modify the application
of such regulations so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed,
public welfare and safety secured and substantial justice done.
B. Special exceptions. When in its judgment the public convenience and
welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the
neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in a specific case, after public notice
and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards,
authorize special exceptions to the regulations as provided in the
Village Law and as follows:
(1) Permit in any district such modification of the requirements of
these regulations as said Board may deem necessary to secure an
appropriate development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on two
or more sides there are buildings that do not conform to these
regulations.
(2) Permit such modification of the yard, open space, lot area or width
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate
improvement of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately
owned on June 29, 1937, and is of such restricted area or
exceptional topography that it cannot be appropriately improved
without such modification.
(3) Permit the location of a special permit use as listed in Article VI of
this chapter in any part of a Business G District.
(4) Permit the reconstruction of a building wholly or partly destroyed
by fire, the public enemy or act of God.
(5) Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted
district immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than 50 feet
beyond the boundary line of the district in which such building or
use is authorized.
(6) Permit the use in a residence district of any use authorized in a
Business G District; in case, however, of a protest against such
change signed by 20% or more of the owners of all lands within
such districts as the said Board shall have determined to be
specifically affected by such proposed use or structure, such
change shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of all
the members of said Board.
(7) Permit the erection of a building or portion of a building covering
not more than 20% of the area of the lot to a height of not more
than 50 feet in excess of the limits prescribed in Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 345-11 VILLAGE HALL § 345-11
332:557
§ 345-12. Application for variances; fees.
§ 345-13. Effect of provisions on existing buildings and permits.
C. Duration of variance. On all variances granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the applicant shall obtain his building permit and start
construction within 60 days from the date on which the variance was
granted, otherwise it shall be null and void.
A. Form. Applications for a variance shall be made on a form approved by
the Board of Trustees of the Village, which form shall be obtained from
the Building Department of said Village.
B. All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by the following
processing filing fee: [Amended 11-26-1984 by L.L. No. 11-1984;
4-25-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(1) All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
(2) All applications for a mother/daughter usage shall be accompanied
by a filing fee as provided in Chapter 350, Fees, and be subject to a
renewal fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
(3) All applications for fence variances shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as provided in Chapter A350, Fees.
C. Plot size; documents required. All applications for a variance to build on
a plot less than the plot size required by this chapter shall be supported
by the following documents:
(1) A survey of the property upon which the variance is requested,
showing property a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the subject
property and the location of buildings thereon.
(2) An abstract of title from a recognized title company or abstract
company showing ownership of the property from 1937 to date,
and accompanied by an affidavit attesting to the facts of ownership
for said period.
(3) A metes and bounds description of the property for which a
variance is sought.
D. Construction fee. All applications for construction of garages, additions
to existing buildings, flat roofs or any variance with respect to
construction of an alteration shall be accompanied by a fee as provided
in Chapter A350, Fees, together with plans setting forth the proposed
construction. [Amended 7-9-1979 by L.L. No. 10-1979; 1-7-1991 by
L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. Authority. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building actually under
construction on June 29, 1937, and which entire building shall be
§ 345-11 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-13
332:558
§ 345-14. Planning Commission. [Amended 8-22-1983 by L.L. No.
25-1983]
§ 345-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-8-1986 by L.L. No.
10-1986; 11-28-1988 by L.L. No. 9-1988; 6-13-1994 by L.L. No.
20-1994]
completed within one year from said date. Nothing herein contained
shall require any change in plan, construction or designated use of a
building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and
which entire building shall be completed within one year from June 29,
1937.
B. Effect of zoning amendment. If an amendment to this chapter is
hereafter adopted changing the boundaries of districts, the provisions
of this chapter with regard to buildings or premises existing or
buildings under construction or building permits issued on June 29,
1937, shall apply to buildings or premises existing or buildings under
construction or building permits issued in the area affected by such
amendment.
A. Modification for subdivisions. If at any time there shall be established a
Planning Commission empowered to approve subdivision plans or plats,
as provided in § 179 of the Village Law,120 said Planning Commission
shall also have the power to modify these zoning regulations for such
subdivision.
B. Recommendations. Said Planning Commission shall study the
application of this chapter and shall from time to time recommend to
the Board of Trustees such changes in the chapter and in the
boundaries of the various districts as it shall deem desirable in the
public interest.
A. Enforcement and penalty shall be in accordance with Article I of
Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Code of the Village of Massapequa
Park, except that a violation of any zoning ordinance adopted prior to
September 1, 1974, is hereby declared to be an offense punishable by a
fine of up to the maximum fine allowed by law or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction of a first offense;
for conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within
a period of five years, punishable by a fine of not less than $350 or up to
the maximum fine allowed by law or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent
offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine of not less than $350 or up to the maximum fine
allowed by law or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both.
120. Editor's Note: See now § 7-708 of the Village Law.
§ 345-13 VILLAGE HALL § 345-15
332:559
B. However, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of such zoning ordinances shall be
deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 345-15 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-15
332:560
ARTICLE III
General Use Regulations
§ 345-16. Uses permitted in residential districts.
In any residence district, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
§ 345-17. Accessory uses in residential districts.
In any residential district, the following uses shall be permitted, provided
that they are accessory to an authorized use:
§ 345-18. Use of part of dwelling as place of business.
It shall be unlawful to erect, alter or use any part or portion of a one-family
dwelling as a store or place of business, and such use therein is hereby
prohibited, except that a legally recognized professional occupation may
be pursued therein by a person residing on the premises, as provided in
§ 345-17.
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Church or school.
C. Philanthropic institution, other than a penal or corrective institution, or
hospital.
A. Garage, subject to the limitations of § 345-33.
B. An announcement sign as accessory to the following uses only and
subject to the following limitations: [Amended 1-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
(1) In connection with an authorized professional or customary home
occupation carried on by a person residing on the premises, there
may be displayed a small nameplate with a simple statement of the
profession or of the nature of the occupation.
C. A temporary sales office as an accessory to a real estate subdivision or
development.
D. Office of a physician, surgeon, dentist or other professional person,
provided that such office is located in the dwelling or apartment used
by such professional person as a private residence.
E. Any customary home occupation, provided that the same is carried on
in the dwelling or apartment occupied as a private residence by the
person carrying on such home occupation, and provided further that
approval therefor is obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals at a
public hearing.
§ 345-16 VILLAGE HALL § 345-19
332:561
§ 345-19. Toilet room required on business premises. [Added
9-22-1986 by L.L. No. 6-1986]
§ 345-20. Uses permitted in business districts. [Amended
12-27-1982 by L.L. No. 18-1982]
In any business district, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used for other than one or more of the uses permitted in
the district in which said building or premises is located. The uses permitted
in each business district shall be as follows:
A. Any premises or any portion thereof that is used for business of any
nature whatsoever requires that a toilet room be made accessible,
available and operable on said premises or in any portion thereof for
any person or persons occupying said premises or any portion thereof
as set forth in this section.
B. The supplying and furnishing of a toilet room must be made accessible,
available and operable at all times to any person or persons occupying
said premises, with the expressed or implied consent of the owner,
landlord or tenant thereof, only when said person or persons occupying
said premises or any portion thereof are not the owner, landlord or
tenant of said business premises or any portion thereof.
C. The violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $250,
with a minimum mandatory fine of $100, and/or imprisonment for up to
15 days of the owner, landlord or tenant thereof, and the violation of
this section may result in the suspension or termination of the business
certificate of occupancy for said premises.
A. Store for retail trade.
B. Bank, office or studio.
C. Restaurant.
D. Railway or bus passenger station, post office, telegraph office or
express office.
E. Theater, moving-picture house, assembly hall, billiard or pool room,
bowling alley or athletic field.
F. Motor vehicle salesroom.
G. Printing plant.
H. Mortuary.
I. Hand laundry.
J. Wholesale business, storage in bulk or warehouse for such material as
building material, contractor's equipment, clothing, cotton, drugs, dry
§ 345-19 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-20
332:562
§ 345-21. Accessory uses in Business G Districts.
§ 345-22. Special permit uses in Business G Districts.
goods, feed, food, furniture, hardware, ice, machinery, metals, paint
and paint materials, pipe, rubber, shop supplies, tobacco and wool.
A. Permitted. In Business G District, a use accessory to an authorized use
shall be permitted.
B. Prohibited. A use specified in § 345-22 shall not be permitted as an
accessory use.
A. In Business G District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used for any of the following uses except on
special permit as provided in § 345-11B(3):
(1) Fairgrounds or circus grounds.
(2) Penal correctional institution, hospital or sanatorium for the insane
or feebleminded or for liquor or drug addicts.
(3) Commercial billboards or large business or advertising signs.
(4) Cold storage plant, ice manufacture, creamery, ice cream
manufacture, bottling works, milk bottling or central distributing
station or baking plant.
(5) Dyeing or cleaning plant or power laundry.
(6) Stable or wagon shed, veterinary hospital or blacksmith or
horseshoeing shop.
(7) Streetcar barn, streetcar repair shop, freight terminal, grain
elevator or railroad yard.
(8) Coal, coke or wood yard or lumber yard.
(9) Storage of live poultry or poultry killing or dressing for sale at retail
on the premises.
(10) Commercial greenhouse or dairy.
(11) Foundry.
(12) Stonecutting or monument works.
(13) Central electric light or power generating plant or central steam
plant.
(14) Bag cleaning or carpet cleaning.
(15) Brewing or distilling of beverages.
§ 345-20 VILLAGE HALL § 345-22
332:563
(16) Dextrine, glucose or starch manufacture.
(17) Grain drying, poultry feed manufacture from refuse mash or refuse
grain or flour or feed mill.
(18) Poultry slaughterhouse.
(19) Gas manufacture from coal, coke or petroleum or the storage
thereof, carbon or lampblack manufacture or petroleum storage in
quantities other than tank car lots.
(20) Power forge structural iron or pipe works, rock crusher or railroad
roundhouse or shop.
(21) Acetylene gas manufacture or oxygen manufacture.
(22) Celluloid manufacture.
(23) Paper manufacture or plaster manufacture.
(24) Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.
(25) Asphalt manufacture or refining, coal distillation or tar distillation.
(26) Pickle, sauerkraut or vinegar manufacture or soap manufacture.
(27)Rawhides or skins, curing or tanning or wood scouring.
(28) Small arms ammunition or fireworks manufacture.
(29) Abattoir or meat-packing.
(30) Scrap iron or junk storage, automobile wrecking yard, scrap paper
or rag storage, sorting or baling.
(31) Brick, tile or terra-cotta manufacture or sand or gravel pit.
(32) Any process or business emitting dust, odor, gas fumes, noise or
vibration comparable in character or in aggregate amount to that
of any use specified in Subsection A(1) through (31) inclusive.
(33) The reclaiming, distilling or refining of hydrocarbon material
collected from oil separators.
(34) Manufacturing or industrial operation of any kind not heretofore
listed in this section and exclusive of prohibited uses listed in
§ 345-25.
(35) Wholesale business, storage in bulk or warehouse for such material
as building material, contractor's equipment, clothing, cotton,
drugs, dry goods, feed, food, furniture, hardware, ice, machinery,
metals, paint and paint materials, pipe, rubber, shop supplies,
tobacco or wool. [Added 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 345-22 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-23
332:564
§ 345-23. Business GG Districts.
The provisions and limitations applying to the Business GG District shall be
the same as for the Business G District, except that permits for construction
in the Business GG District shall be issued pursuant to the following
conditions:
§ 345-24. Cluster development in Business GG Districts. [Added
12-19-1977 by L.L. No. 14-1977]
A. Roofs. Flat-roof buildings shall be permitted.
B. Storage of trash. Any and all buildings erected or constructed shall
make provisions for the storing of rubbish, wastepaper, garbage, etc.,
within the building.
C. Merchandise delivery. No front door delivery of merchandise shall be
permitted.
D. Parking: to be in conformance with § 345-35. [Amended 1-7-1991 by
L.L. No. 1-1991]
E. Drainage of parking facilities. At the time of construction or installation
of parking facilities, the owner and/or builder shall erect same pursuant
to specifications submitted by the Village Engineer in order to ensure
adequate drainage.
A. Purpose.
(1) It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to establish a conditionally
permitted use in the Business GG District.
(2) It is the intendment of this section that a viable cluster
development, constructed and maintained pursuant to the
requirements of this section, will promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the community.
B. General regulations and conditions for cluster development.
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this
chapter of the Code of the Village of Massapequa Park, the following
regulations shall pertain to cluster development:
(1) Cluster development of single-family dwellings in detached,
semidetached or attached structures in a Business GG District shall
be conditionally permitted on any site containing at least 15 acres
of contiguous property not divided by an existing public or private
street or right-of-way.
(2) Notwithstanding anything set forth in § 345-17 to the contrary, no
professional or customary home occupation or school shall be
permitted in such cluster development.
(3) Density and building area.
§ 345-23 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:565
(a) The density of occupancy of said site shall not exceed 10
single-family dwelling units per acre, and the total building
area of all buildings on the site shall not exceed more than 25%
of the total area of the site.
(b) For the purposes of this Subsection B(3), "building area" shall
be defined as the area of the maximum horizontal cross section
of the buildings on the site, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters
or chimneys projecting not more than 24 inches.
(4) Height. No building shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet. No more
than 60% of the dwelling units constructed on the site shall exceed
one story or 25 feet.
(5) Habitable floor area.
(a) No single-family dwelling unit shall be erected unless it has a
habitable floor area of at least 800 square feet.
(b) For the purposes of this subsection, "habitable floor area" shall
be defined as the rooms occupied by one or more persons for
living, eating and/or sleeping, but does not include attached or
built-in garages, open porches or open terraces or rooms below
grade. On the first floor, it shall be construed to mean all
finished floor area having a clear headroom of 7 1/2 feet or
over, including stairwells; on the second floor, all finished or
unfinished floor area having a clear headroom of 7 1/2 feet or
over for a minimum horizontal measurement of six feet, with
side walls not less than 5 1/2 feet in height.
(6) Front yards.
(a) Each building shall have a minimum front yard depth of 22 feet
on all interior streets. On a corner lot, a front yard shall be
required on each interior street. The front yard on the
narrower street frontage shall be a minimum of 15 feet; the
other street frontage shall be a minimum of 22 feet. Such front
yards shall be measured to the face of the curb. No building
shall front on an exterior street.
(b) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if no
driveway or other parking area is provided in front of a unit or
if a driveway of no more than 28 feet in length and no less than
22 feet in length is provided in conjunction with a carport, the
minimum front yard depth for such unit shall be 15 feet.
However, no more than two units on the same street, each
having a front yard depth of less than 22 feet, including units
on corner lots with permissible fifteen-foot front yards, may be
situated within 100 feet of each other, and both of such units
shall be situated at least 100 feet from any other unit on the
same street having a front yard depth of less than 22 feet. Said
one-hundred-foot distance shall be measured along the center
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:566
line of such street between two perpendicular lines, one each
drawn from such street to the point on the perimeter wall
of each such unit closest to the other unit from which the
hundred-foot distance must be maintained.
(7) Rear yards and side yards. Each building shall have a minimum
rear yard of 15 feet and a minimum side yard of 12 1/2 feet. The
rear and side yards for buildings abutting exterior streets shall be
measured from the building to the property line and shall not
include the Village right-of-way. Notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, when any such rear or side yard adjoins land in a
business district not used for cluster development as provided
herein, such rear or side yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet, and
when any such rear or side yard adjoins a structure, including a
fence, used for recreational purposes in a cluster development,
such rear or side yard shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet.
(8) Minimum distance to business buildings. Each building shall have a
minimum distance of 60 feet from business buildings; for the
purpose of this Subsection B(8), a loading platform shall not be
deemed a part of a business building.
(9) Minimum distance to commercial lots and roadways. Each building
shall have a minimum distance of 30 feet from commercial parking
lots and commercial roadways. Landscaped buffer areas in
commercial parking lots and along commercial roadways may be
included in said 30 feet.
(10) Maximum length. No building shall exceed 300 feet in length
unless the rear yard of such building abuts an exterior street, in
which case such building may exceed 300 feet in length, but in no
event shall it exceed 335 feet in length. However, there shall be no
more than one such building in excess of 300 feet in length for the
first 15 acres of site area and one additional such building for each
additional 15 acres of site area or any lesser portion thereof. No
more than four contiguous units shall be placed so that the
foundation line is in a straight-line extension.
(11)Walkways. No common area or public passageway through a
building shall be less than 25 feet in width.
(12) Minimum distance. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet
between buildings.
(13) Access. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a street, court or
walkway.
(14) Parking. There shall be provided on the site at least 2.25 off-street
parking spaces for each dwelling unit on the site. All such parking
spaces shall be restricted to the parking of private passenger cars.
No parking area for the parking of four or more vehicles shall be
constructed within 15 feet of the closest wall of any dwelling unit
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:567
unless such wall contains no doors or windows on the first floor, in
which case such distance may be less than 15 feet, but in no event
shall such distance be less than 10 feet.
(15) Streets, curbs and sidewalks.
(a) All streets, curbs and sidewalks provided on the site plan shall
be constructed at the cost of the applicant, pursuant to the
minimum standards set forth in Chapter 300, Articles II and III.
Street width shall be a minimum of 30 feet between the
curblines. Simultaneously with the approval of the conditional
use permit, the applicant and owner shall execute, in form
satisfactory to the Village Attorney, an irrevocable offer of
dedication to all streets, together with a ten-foot right-of-way
along each side of such street.
(b) In the alternative, in the event that the applicant desires to
maintain all interior streets as private streets, the applicant
shall submit to the Board of Trustees covenants and
restrictions, in such recordable form as shall be approved by
the Village Attorney, providing that:
[1] The owners of the site shall maintain, repair, clean and
remove snow from such private streets and perform such
other work as shall be required, including the erection and
maintenance of street and safety signs and lighting.
[2] In the event of a breach of such covenants and restrictions,
the Village shall have the right to enter upon such private
roads and to perform such maintenance and repair as may
be necessary and proper to ensure the safe passage
thereover and to levy a special assessment against all of
the land served by such private roads for reimbursement
of all of the costs incurred therein.
[3] There shall be no parking allowed on either side of any
such street; parking may be allowed on one side of any
street which shall have a minimum width of at least 30
feet, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees; and
no parking shall be allowed on any street less than 30 feet
in width. The Village shall have the right to enforce such
traffic regulation in order to protect the safety and welfare
of the residents of the site.
[4] Said covenants and restrictions shall run to and inure to
the benefit of the Village and shall not be amended,
modified or extinguished except with the consent of the
Board of Trustees.
(c) Upon the filing of such covenants and restrictions, the width of
such said private streets which are dead ends and which do not
exceed 300 feet in length, measured from the intersecting
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:568
street nearest the dead end, may be reduced from 30 feet to
a width which is not less than 24 feet between the dead end
and such intersecting street. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
if two such private streets would be dead ends except for the
fact that they are connected by a third street and such third
street is less than 200 feet in length, does not intersect with
any other street and intersects with both of such streets within
100 feet from their dead end, then and in that event all three
of said streets may be reduced from 30 feet to a width which is
not less than 24 feet. In no event, however, shall any dwelling
unit be more than 300 feet along the roadway from an interior
street at least 30 feet in width; and in no event shall more
than 30% of the total roadbeds of all the interior streets have a
width of less than 30 feet.
(16) Recreation and parks.
(a) Adequate and suitable area shall be provided for public
recreation and parks. The minimum area to be dedicated to the
Village for such purposes shall not be less than 5% of the entire
area as shown on the site plan for which the conditional use
permit is sought. The minimum area to be dedicated to the
Village shall not include any recreation or park area not open
to the public.
(b) If the Board of Trustees determines that a suitable park or
parks of adequate size cannot be properly located within the
subject area or is otherwise not practical, the Board of
Trustees may require as a condition to approval of any
conditional use permit a payment to the Village of a sum to be
determined by the Board of Trustees after consultation with an
appraiser appointed to determine such sum by the Board of
Trustees, which sum shall constitute a trust fund to be used by
the Board of Trustees exclusively for neighborhood park,
playground or recreation purposes, including the acquisition of
land.
(c) At the option of the applicant, the applicant may, in lieu of
paying said sum, simultaneously with the approval of a
conditional use permit, post a bond in a form approved by the
Village Attorney to ensure the payment of said sum or such
lesser sum as may be finally determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction if the sum determined by the Board of
Trustees is challenged in a New York State court of competent
jurisdiction within 30 days from the date the conditional use
permit is granted.
C. Accessory structures and uses.
(1) All outdoor pools shall comply with the following:
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:569
(a) There shall be no more than one swimming pool and one
wading pool, which shall be of below-ground type and
constructed in accordance with § 345-41 of the Code of the
Village; such pools shall comply with all rules and regulations
of the Department of Health of the County of Nassau for public
pools.
(b) Such swimming pools or wading pools and any and all
decorative pools, including drainage pools, shall be shown on
the site plan and shall be permitted by the Board of Trustees
upon a finding that such pools and ancillary equipment
facilities will:
[1] Not adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
[2] Be limited to use by members and guests of the cluster
development.
[3] Not depreciate the value of the property in the area
immediately adjoining the land being so used.
[4] Not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
[5] Not be located so as to be visible from adjoining
residential properties nor interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties.
(c) For the purposes of this Subsection C, lakes, ponds and sumps
shall not be considered "outdoor pools."
(2) Outdoor tennis courts shall be considered accessory structures and
subject to the following requirements:
(a) There shall be no more than one tennis court provided for the
first 100 dwelling units and one additional tennis court for
each additional 100 dwelling units or any lesser portion
thereof.
(b) No lighting shall be installed in connection therewith which
shall direct any rays beyond the tennis court or any
surrounding recreational or parking area.
(c) All tennis courts shall be completely enclosed with a chain link
fence which shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following specifications so long as the
tennis courts remain in existence:
[1] Height shall be not less than 10 feet nor more than 12 feet
above the playing surface.
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:570
[2] Fabric shall be not less than No. 9 gauge steel, having a
uniform square mesh with two inches between parallel
sides, and the mesh shall have a green plastic coating.
[3] End and corner posts shall be two-and-one-half-inch 1D
galvanized pipe with a wall of thickness of 0.203 of an
inch.
[4] Line posts shall be two-inch 1D galvanized pipe with a wall
thickness of 0.154 of an inch.
[5] Horizontal lines. There shall be three horizontal rails
running between the vertical posts, situated at the top,
center and bottom of the chain link fabric. These rails shall
be one-and-one-fourth-inch 1D galvanized pipe having a
wall thickness of 0.14 of an inch.
[6] Distance between posts shall be not more than 10 feet.
(d) All tennis courts and the fencing surrounding the same shall be
completely screened from adjoining properties by a living
screen of coniferous trees. Said trees shall be at least eight feet
in height when planted and shall be planted five feet on center
along and four feet from the fence surrounding the court on all
sides of the court not immediately adjoining other tennis courts
on the same lot. Said coniferous screening shall consist of
Canadian hemlock on or alternate approved by the Board of
Trustees and shall be maintained so long as the tennis court
remains in existence.
(e) The height of the playing surface of the tennis court shall not
be above the existing mean level of the ground immediately
surrounding the court area prior to construction of the court.
(f) No tennis court shall be constructed or maintained so as to
permit any drainage water to flow onto adjacent properties or
public streets.
(3) Swimming pools, wading pools and tennis courts shall be used only
at such hours as will not interfere by reason of lighting or noise
with the neighbors' reasonable use of their premises.
D. Application requirements.
(1) An application (10 copies) for a conditional use permit for a cluster
development in the Business GG District shall be in writing and
filed with the Village Administrator and shall be accompanied by a
plan (10 copies) which shall conform to the regulations and
procedures of this section. In addition to any other requirements,
the application shall be made and verified by either all of the fee
owners, all of the contract vendees or all of the lessees of all
premises described in the application. If made by all of the contract
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:571
vendees or lessees, the consent of the owners of the fee shall
accompany the application, all of which shall be duly acknowledged
before a notary public, consenting to and adjoining in the request
for approval of the application. An affidavit of title to all the
property included in the application shall be submitted, showing
the owners, lessees, mortgagees and vendees and any
encumbrances or limitations thereon. The application shall also
contain a written statement which sets forth the proposed
treatment of any open land section of the site, the proposed method
or type of ownership thereof and the designation of responsibility
for its maintenance.
(2) The application shall also contain the projected initiation and
completion dates for the proposed construction, as well as
information describing the applicant's past performance and
financial ability to complete said construction within such period of
time.
(3) The application shall fully set forth a complete plan and schedule
for developing the overall project.
(4) Upon the filing of an application, there shall be deposited with the
Village Administrator a sum of not less than 1/10 of 1% of the
estimated cost of the buildings, improvements and facilities shown
on the site plan, to be applied by the Village to the expense
incurred by the Village in connection with the processing and
review of the application, including prior informal submissions and
reviews, which shall include items such as but not necessarily
limited to: planning, legal, advertising and public notices (by both
publication and mail), architectural costs, engineering costs,
stenographer minutes, inspection fees and recording fees, changes
in maps and other similar expenses of the Village or any of its
commissions, boards, agencies or employees. The fee may be used
in part to cover the cost of planning and environmental reviews
under local, county or state law. Any excess after payment of such
expenses by the Village shall be refunded to the applicant. In the
event that such sum is insufficient to cover said expenses, the
additional sum required shall be paid by the applicant to the Village
Administrator before authorization is given for the public hearing.
In no event, however, shall the applicant be required to deposit
with the Village a sum in excess of 1/2 of 1% of the estimated cost
of the buildings, improvements and facilities shown on the site
plan.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by a general site plan, in
triplicate, providing sufficient information to allow the Board of
Trustees to meet the review requirements of this section. Said site
plan shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet, with supporting maps at such scales as necessary to
clearly indicate the following:
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:572
(a) The topography of the site, existing major trees and landscape
and environmental features and any existing structures.
(b) Existing property boundary lines, setbacks and location of
proposed structures.
(c) The outline of typical unit perimeters, including elevation of
basement and cellar areas at doorway openings, first floor
elevations and roof elevations.
(d) The proposed topography, including elevations at corners of
buildings, parking areas and grades of other significant
construction areas.
(e) The height of typical buildings and structures.
(f) The location, nature and ownership of all proposed streets and
parking areas.
(g) Designated parking spaces.
(h) Adjoining streets, access roads and walkways.
(i) The method of vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress,
including necessary off-site improvements and emergency
access.
(j) Proposed landscaping, including type and size of trees,
recreation facilities, fencing and exterior lighting.
(k) The proposed grading of the plot, to include the disposal of
surface water drainage and to indicate by report or map the
effect of development on surrounding area drainage patterns.
(l) Specifications of pavement, including the subbase and curbing.
(m) A table showing the following data, both required and
proposed: site size, number of units, land area, parking spaces,
area coverage, height and common facilities.
(n) General methods of providing for collection and disposal of
stormwater runoff and for handling sanitary sewage, refuse
and other waste.
(o) Locations and plans for individual unit retention and storage of
garbage, waste and refuse in conformity with Chapter 174,
Article III.
(6) If the applicant determines to construct the proposed units in two
or more sections, the applicant shall submit detailed site plans for
each section, including on such site plans the information set forth
in Subsection D(5) hereinabove, as well as temporary traffic routes
and culs-de-sac, if necessary, and such other information as the
Planning Commission or Board of Trustees may require.
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:573
(7) In addition, the general site plan shall be accompanied by sketches
showing proposed architectural treatment, single-line floor plans
showing layout of all typical units and the substance of all proposed
restrictions and the text of all filed restrictions on the use of the
land and buildings.
(8) If a cooperative, condominium or other form of development is
proposed which would entail any form of common association or
corporate ownership of common areas, the applicant shall submit a
detailed statement outlining the structure of the proposed
corporation or association, including a description of the proposed
management and ownership of the various elements, including
dwelling units, common areas, recreational facilities, parking
facilities, streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, street,
recreational and common area lighting; ground, building and
facility maintenance; and recharge basin, sump or other waterholding
area, as well as copies of all proposed and actual
prospectuses offering statements, declarations, bylaws and other
papers prepared pursuant to Real Property Law Article 9-B or any
successor statute thereto.
(9) The applicant shall submit any other information deemed by the
Board of Trustees or the Planning Commission in its discretion to
be necessary to a reasonable determination of the application or
verification by independent professionals, such as but not limited to
planners, engineers or architects, including plans for the location,
maintenance and repair of all common facilities. The provision of
such information shall be at the cost of the applicant.
(10) The applicant shall also submit a radius map extending a distance
of 300 feet from the site, showing all buildings within said radius,
present owners, present uses and present zoning.
E. Application procedure.
(1) Upon receipt of the application for the conditional use permit, the
Board of Trustees shall refer such application to the Planning
Commission of the Village for its consideration. The Planning
Commission shall consider all the requirements hereinabove
provided for by this section and, in addition thereto, the following:
(a) Whether the proposed development is of such character, size,
shape, location, design and site layout:
[1] To be appropriate to and in harmony with the surrounding
properties;
[2] Will provide, to the maximum extent practicable,
consistent with economic and other essential
considerations of Village policy, the most desirable
residential environment; and
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:574
[3] Will ensure, to the extent practicable, by street design, onstreet
parking and sidewalk construction and the size, type
and location of off-street parking facilities, fences, walls,
landscaping and other screening, lights and mechanical
equipment, the safety, health and welfare of the residents
of the district, the residents of the Village and the public at
large.
(b) Whether the proposed development will be hazardous to or in
conflict with the immediate neighborhood by reason of traffic,
congregation of people, noise, lights, vibration or other factors
of impact, inadequate off-street parking facilities or
overburdening of existing sanitary or stormwater sewers or
other utilities.
(c) Whether the proposed development, to the maximum extent
practicable, consistent with social, economic and other
essential consideration of state policy, minimizes or avoids
adverse environmental effects.
(2) The Planning Commission, within 14 days after the date the
application is referred to it by the Board of Trustees, shall notify
the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, that it is in
receipt of the application and that either the application is
complete or the application is incomplete, specifying the additional
information needed in order for the application to be deemed
complete. If the application is deemed incomplete and the
submission of further information is thereby required, the Planning
Commission, within 14 days after the date each further submission
is filed with the Village Administrator, shall notify the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that it is in receipt of such
submission and whether or not such submission completes the
application, and if not, specifying the additional information
needed. In the event that the Planning Commission fails to notify
the applicant within 14 days after the application is referred to it or
within 14 days after any further submission is filed with the Village
Administrator that the application is or still is incomplete, then and
in the event the application shall be deemed complete as of the date
of the referral or the last submission, as the case may be. Within 60
days after the date the Planning Commission receives a complete
application, including a complete general site plan and any and all
other information required pursuant to Subsection D(6) through (9)
for site plan review, in writing, it shall report to the Board of
Trustees, making recommendations for the approval, approval with
modification or disapproval of the site plan. The time within which
the Planning Commission must render its report may be modified
by the Board of Trustees.
(3) Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission,
the Board of Trustees shall fix a time within 20 days after its receipt
of such recommendations for a public hearing on the application
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-24
332:575
and shall deny or grant said application with such further
modification as the Board of Trustees shall deem necessary and
proper within 10 days after the closing of the public hearing.
Upon the granting of such application, the Building Inspector shall
accept and pass upon an application for building permits in
conformity therewith. However, no building permits shall be issued
for any residential building, except models, until all recreational
areas (swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other
recreational structures), parks and other amenities as shown on
the site plan have been completed and until all utilities for such
building have been installed and until a base of a road and curbs
leading from the proposed building to an exterior street shall have
been completed.
F. Bonding. Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to a
conditional use permit granted under this section, the applicant shall
file with the Village Administrator a labor, material and performance
bond in such amount and in such form as shall be approved by the
Village Attorney to ensure the completion of all roads, sidewalks,
stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage transmission and disposal,
electricity, gas, lights and telephone services and equipment and other
utilities and all recreation areas, parks and other amenities as set forth
in the site plan, within three years from the issuance of said bond,
together with an easement in such form as shall be approved by the
Village Attorney, granting permission to the Village to enter upon the
subject property to complete such work. Said three-year period may be
extended by resolution of the Board of Trustees with the consent of the
bonding company.
G. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any unit
authorized pursuant to this section until all roads, sidewalks,
stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage transmission and disposal,
electricity, gas, lighting and telephone services and equipment and
other utilities to that entire building have been installed, completed
and operative and all Health Department and other municipal
agency and district approvals have been submitted to the Village,
in writing, and all recreation areas, parks and other amenities have
been completed as set forth in the site plan.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 154-30, no temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector
unless the developer deposits 5% of the selling price of the unit
with an attorney or lending institution designated by the purchaser
and approved by the developer as security that a final certificate of
occupancy shall be obtained by the developer within six months
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy.
If within six months from the date of issuance of the temporary
certificate of occupancy the final certificate of occupancy is not
issued, said escrow shall be used for the benefit of the purchaser to
§ 345-24 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-24
332:576
§ 345-25. Prohibited uses.
obtain a final certificate of occupancy. The balance of such escrow,
if any, after obtaining the final certificate of occupancy, shall be
returned to the developer. No temporary certificate of occupancy
shall be valid for a period in excess of six months, and no temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be renewed without the approval of
the Board of Trustees.
H. Conditions. In approving any application for a conditional use permit
under this section, the Board of Trustees shall impose such reasonable
conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the cluster development
approved by it is completed expeditiously and in accordance with the
approved site plan and in such manner as will not cause an undue
burden on Village facilities or a nuisance to Village residents.
I. Reservation of power. In order to protect the interests of the Village in
implementing a cluster development, the Board of Trustees reserves to
itself the power to modify specific requirements of this section or any
other provisions of the Village ordinances to promote the viability or
aesthetic appearance of the development in furtherance of the purpose
of this action.
J. Public hearing.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing prior to its grant,
denial or modification of any application for a conditional use
permit under this section or of any request for a modification of the
specific requirements of this section or of any other provisions of
the Village ordinances with regard to a past, present or future
application under this section.
(2) At least 10 days prior to such hearing, the Village Administrator
shall, at the applicant's expense:
(a) Give public notice of the hearing in the official newspaper of
the Village, if any, or if none, in a newspaper having general
circulation within the Village.
(b) Supply public notices of the hearing to the Highway
Department for posting in designated places within the Village.
(c) Mail a notice of the hearing to each of the owners of property
within a radius of 300 feet of the site. A list of the names and
mailing addresses of such property owners, together with a
designation, by reference to the section, block and lot on the
Nassau County Land and Tax Map, of the property owned by
such persons, shall be provided by the applicant to the Village
Administrator at least four business days prior to the required
date for mailing.
§ 345-24 VILLAGE HALL § 345-25
332:577
A. In any district, no building or premises shall be used and no building
shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any of the following uses:
(1) Manufacture of explosives, storage of explosives in bulk.
(2) Chlorine or hydrochloric acid, nitric, picric or sulfuric acid
manufacture; smelting of copper, tin, zinc, lead or iron ore.
(3) Ammonia, bleaching powder or other chemical plants emitting
corrosive or toxic fumes carrying beyond the limits of the premises.
(4) Petroleum or kerosene refining or distillation or derivation of byproducts.
(5) Distillation of bones; fat rendering and manufacturing of tallow,
grease or oils; offal or dead animal reduction; stockyards; fertilizer
manufacture; or hair manufacture.
(6) Glue, size or gelatin manufacture where the process includes the
refining or recovering of products from fish, animal refuse or offal.
(7) Boilermaking; locomotive manufacture; railway car manufacture;
steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
(8) Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
(9) Garages (other than residential use), gasoline or filling stations and
motor vehicle repair shops in residential districts.
(10) Any manufacturing or industrial process emitting dust, odor, gas
fumes, noise or vibration comparable in character or in aggregate
amount to that of any use specified in Subsection A(1) through (8).
(11) Coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment, meaning the cleaning of
textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles by the use of any
solvent other than water in a dry-cleaning machine designed to be
used or used by the general public. For the purpose of this
definition, the term "used by the general public" shall be deemed to
refer to the insertion of such textiles, fabrics, garments or other
articles into a dry-cleaning machine or the removal of the same
from such unit by a person other than an employee of the business
or person owning and operating such establishment.
(12) Coin-operated dry-cleaning machine, meaning the machinery, unit
or equipment in which the business of coin-operated dry cleaning
shall be conducted.
(13) The sale of marijuana is expressly prohibited in any business
establishments in the Village. This prohibition shall include medical
marijuana distribution facilities licensed through the New York
State Department of Health. [Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
§ 345-25 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-25
332:578
§ 345-26. Nonconforming uses.
(14) Establishment, facility, shop, office, parlor, business or other
nonresidential premises, the primary or ancillary use of which
includes or is intended to include smoking of substances through
one or more hookah pipes (also commonly referred to as "hookah,"
"water pipe," "shisha," "narghile," or "bong") or any other similar
equipment or device. [Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
B. The erection of playhouses or similar structures shall be prohibited in
residential districts.
A. Scope of term. Any use of property existing on June 29, 1937, that does
not conform to the regulations prescribed in the preceding sections of
this article shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
B. Continuance. A nonconforming use may be continued, subject to such
regulations as to the maintenance of premises and conditions of
operation as may in the judgment of the Zoning Board of Appeals be
reasonably required for the protection of adjacent property.
C. Extension. A nonconforming use shall not be extended by the extension
of a use to any portion of a building, which portion was not arranged or
designed for such nonconforming use on June 29, 1937.
D. Reconstruction or alteration of building. A building arranged, designed
or devoted to a nonconforming use on June 29, 1937, may not be
reconstructed or structurally altered to an extent exceeding in cost 25%
of the fair value of the building unless the building is changed to a
conforming use.
E. Nonconforming billboard. A nonconforming billboard which is damaged
by the elements to such an extent that its supporting members are
broken shall be deemed to have been destroyed and shall not be
reconstructed.
F. Nonconforming filling station. A nonconforming filling station shall not
be extended by the installation of additional pumps or other devices for
dispensing fuel.
G. Change of nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be
changed except to a conforming use. A nonconforming use, if changed
to a conforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use.
§ 345-25 VILLAGE HALL § 345-26
332:579

ARTICLE IV
Height and Area Regulations
§ 345-27. Height.
§ 345-28. Lot and building area; windows and courts.
A. No building in any district shall be erected to a height in excess of 30
feet. [Amended 7-28-1997 by L.L. No. 10-1997]
B. In any residential district, no main building hereafter erected shall be of
a height less than the equivalent of a one-and-a-half-story building.
C. A detached garage erected as an accessory structure or any other
detached accessory structure shall not be higher than a maximum of 15
feet, and the vertical walls of said garage or accessory structure shall
not exceed 10 feet in height. The garage or the accessory structure
shall not exceed 250 square feet for a one-car garage and 500 square
feet for a two-car garage. [Amended 4-9-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
D. The walking surface of all external stairways, decks, patios or similar
structures erected or constructed or renovated in any business or
residential area of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park shall
not exceed five feet in height above the grade level of the real property.
[Added 5-21-1984 by L.L. No. 7-1984; amended 11-24-1986 by
L.L. No. 8-1986]
E. Exceptions.
(1) In any district, any portion of a building may be erected to a height
in excess of the foregoing limits, provided that the plans therefor
have been approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to restrict the height
of a church tower, spire or belfry or of a flagpole, wireless tower,
monument, chimney, water tank or elevator bulkheads or of a stage
tower or scenery loft.
(3) Nothing in these regulations shall apply to prevent the erection
above the height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament and
without windows, extending such height limit not more than five
feet.
A. Areas of lots and buildings. For buildings hereafter erected, the
minimum lot area for each dwelling house, exclusive of accessory
buildings, garages, porches or other buildings appurtenant thereto,
shall be as follows:
(1) Residential districts. In Residential A Districts and except as
otherwise provided in the Residential AA District, the minimum lot
area shall be 8,000 square feet, and each lot shall have at least 80
§ 345-27 VILLAGE HALL § 345-28
332:581
feet in the front and rear and shall be at least 100 feet in depth on
both sides. [Amended 12-27-1999 by L.L. No. 15-1999]
(2) Residential AA District. In the Residential AA District, no building
hereafter erected or altered shall have a depth of front yard less
than 25 feet. If on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersecting street lines there shall have been erected a
building with less than a thirty-foot setback, the front yard depth
shall be in conformity with the setback established by the existing
buildings. [Amended 6-19-1967]
(3) Business G District. In a Business G District, the main building shall
cover not less than 600 square feet of ground floor space and shall
not be less than 1 1/2 stories.
(4) (Reserved)121
(5) Hospitals, hotels, etc. In any district, for a hospital, sanatorium,
hotel or apartment house, the area of the lot shall not be less than
400 square feet for each sleeping room for which such building is
arranged or designed, and the main building thereon shall cover
not less than 800 square feet of ground floor space and shall be not
less than two stories.
(6) Buildings in residential districts. The minimum ground floor area of
buildings in residential districts shall be as follows:
(a) Residential A District.
[1] Eight hundred fifty square feet for 1 1/2 stories.
[2] Seven hundred fifty square feet for two stories.
[3] Nine hundred fifty square feet for one-story ranch-type
home.
[4] In Residential A District where buildings already exist of
dimensions in excess of the foregoing, all building plots on
the opposite side of any street in this district from such
buildings shall have a lot area of not less than 8,000
square feet and shall have a ground floor space area of not
less than 900 square feet and not less than 2 1/2 stories
and cellar.
(b) Residential AA District.
[1] Nine hundred fifty square feet for 1 1/2 stories.
[2] Eight hundred square feet for two stories.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), regarding special permit uses, was repealed
12-27-1999 by L.L. No. 15-1999.
§ 345-28 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-28
332:582
[3] One thousand fifty square feet for one-story ranch-type
home.
(7) Split-level homes.
(a) The first level and second level of split-level homes shall be
considered as one for the purpose of compliance with ground
floor area. In all split-level homes, the minimum ground floor
area shall be 950 square feet.
(b) All split-level homes shall be constructed with a cellar under at
least 50% of the building. A cellar shall be considered as a
story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be considered a story for the purpose of height
measurement in determining the permissible number of
stories.
(c) This Subsection A(7) with respect to split-level homes shall
apply to construction in the Residential A District and shall not
apply to the Residential AA District, where cellarless or
basementless houses are permitted.
(8) Slab or crawl-space houses.
(a) In the Residence AA District, basementless (slab) or crawlspace
houses shall be permitted, provided that the ground floor
area for one-story houses has a building area of 1,150 square
feet and the minimum ground floor area for more than onestory
houses shall be 1,050 square feet. The portion of a
Residence AA District to which this provision shall apply will be
all that south of Nassau Street.
(b) The construction of basementless (slab) or crawlspace houses
shall be in conformity with the building requirements as set
forth in the Building Code.122
B. Width of lot. For buildings hereafter erected, the minimum average
width of the lot for each building, together with the accessory buildings
appurtenant thereto, excepting the provisions of § 345-11B, shall be as
follows: [Amended 12-27-1999 by L.L. No. 15-1999]
(1) In any residence district: 80 feet.
(2) In any Business G District: 20 feet.
(3) In a Business G District, every building used as a residence on the
first floor shall have a lot of similar width as that prescribed in
Subsection B(1).
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 345-28 VILLAGE HALL § 345-28
332:583
§ 345-29. Area standards in Residential A District.
§ 345-30. Front yards.
C. In a residential district, the maximum lot coverage permitted shall be
30%. [Amended 3-14-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
D. Windows and courts. In any district, every living or sleeping room in a
dwelling, apartment house, hotel, hospital or sanatorium shall have at
least one window opening directly upon either a street, a front yard, a
rear yard, a side yard or a court. The least dimension of any such court
shall be not less than four inches for each foot of the height of the
highest wall of such court. Such court shall be open and unobstructed
to the sky except for ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses
and other ornamental features to the extent of not more than four
inches.
E. Certificate of occupancy. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 10-2000]
(1) Up to and including December 29, 1999, all real properties located
within the Village of Massapequa Park which had a valid certificate
of occupancy for a one-family house for a lot of 6,000 square feet or
more can have the house demolished and build a new house on said
premises with a minimum plot of 6,000 square feet.
(2) A new certificate of occupancy shall be required for the new
structure or building on the real property that had a valid
certificate of occupancy up to and including December 29, 1999,
which new structure or building must meet the requirements of the
Building Department of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park for a new certificate of occupancy.
F. After December 29, 1999, the minimum lot area to be erected or altered
shall, as stated in the existing law of § 345-28, have a minimum lot area
of 8,000 square feet, and each lot shall have at least 80 feet in front and
rear and shall be at least 100 feet in depth on both sides. [Added
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 10-2000]
G. Except as stated above, all the rest and remaining provisions of the
local law enacted on December 27, 1999, shall remain in full force and
effect. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 10-2000]
A. Generally. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered in
Residential A District shall be on a lot having the area, frontage and
depth on both sides provided in § 345-28A(1).
B. Issuance of building permits. No building permit shall be issued and no
building shall be erected on a plot of less than 8,000 square feet as set
forth herein, nor when the issuance of the same shall leave remaining a
plot immediately adjacent less in size than required by this chapter.
[Amended 12-27-1999 by L.L. No. 15-1999]
§ 345-28 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-30
332:584
A. Generally.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection A(2), every building hereafter
erected shall have a front yard which shall be of the following
minimum depth:
(a) In a Residential A District: 25 feet.
(b) In a Residential AA District: 25 feet. [Amended 6-19-1967]
(c) In a Business G District, the depth shall be fixed by the Board
of Trustees.
(2) Exception. In a block in any residence district in which 25% of the
frontage on one side of the street is improved with buildings, the
front yard of a building hereafter erected shall extend at least to
the alignment of existing buildings, provided that no building
hereafter erected in such residence district shall have a front yard
of less than 10 feet in depth nor need have a front yard of greater
depth than 40 feet.
B. Corner lots.
(1) A corner lot shall have a front yard along its principal frontage of
the depth required by Subsection A(1)(a), (b) and (c). A corner lot
shall also have a front yard along its side street frontage of the
following depth:
(a) In any Residential A District: 25 feet.
(b) In a Residential AA District: 25 feet.
(c) In a Business G District, the depth shall be fixed by the Board
of Trustees.
(2) Where corner plots of 80 feet by 100 feet exist, the setback on each
street shall be a minimum of 25 feet in a Residential A District and
25 feet in a Residential AA District. In a Business G District, such
setback shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. [Amended
6-19-1967; 12-27-1999 by L.L. No. 15-1999]
C. Through lots. A through lot shall have a front yard on each frontage.
D. Permitted structures in front yards. [Amended 1-10-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000; 9-11-2000 by L.L. No. 18-2000]
(1) The space in a front yard shall be opened and unobstructed, except
that in a residence district an uncovered porch may extend not
more than eight feet, without columns or roof, into the front yard;
the cornices or eaves on the main building may project into the
front yard for a distance and in a manner prescribed by the
Building Inspector, and the basement window wells may extend
into the front yard not more than five feet. [Amended 4-24-2017
by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 345-30 VILLAGE HALL § 345-30
332:585
(2) A front covered portico shall have a width not greater than eight
feet. The roofline only may extend an additional one foot on each
end. A front covered portico cannot extend more than six feet from
the house line. A covered porch may encroach not more than five
feet into the twenty-five-foot front setback and shall not have a
width greater than the width of the house to which it is attached.
[Amended 9-26-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
(3) Temporary storage containers. [Added 2-28-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006]
(a) Definition. "Storage container" means any container intended
for the purpose of storing or keeping household goods and
other personal property that is intended to be filled, refilled, or
emptied while located outdoors on a residential property.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place,
keep or maintain any storage container on any property
improved with a single-family dwelling, without securing a
permit.
(c) Any person desiring a permit to place or maintain a storage
container shall file an application with the Building
Department. The form for this application is to be furnished by
the Building Department and shall be sworn to and filed by the
applicant with the Building Department, along with an
application fee of $10.
(d) A permit for a storage container may only be granted if there is
currently a building permit for improvement of the singlefamily
dwelling upon which the storage container is located.
(e) A storage container may not be more than 160 square feet and
no more than 8.6 feet in height. [Amended 1-8-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
(f) The storage container shall be set back from any side yard
property line a minimum of five feet and from the front
property line by a minimum of five feet and also be a minimum
of five feet away from any structures on the property. In
granting the permit the Building Inspector shall consider the
rights of adjacent property owners so that there shall not be
any unreasonable deprivation of light, air or a reasonable use
of adjoining property.
(g) The Building Inspector is hereby authorized, in the exercise of
reasonable discretion, to revoke any permit issued hereunder
if, after due investigation, he deems that the holder thereof has
violated any provisions of this subsection, in that the storage
container is being maintained in an unsafe manner or is being
maintained as a nuisance. Written notice of said revocation
shall be given, either by personal service upon the person to be
§ 345-30 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-30
332:586
notified or by depositing said notice in the United States mail
in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such
person at the address which appears on the records of the
Building Department.
(h) The length of time a storage container shall be permitted to
remain shall be 180 days. An extension beyond 180 days will be
considered upon application to the Board of Trustees. It shall
be mandatory that the storage container be removed at the end
of the permitted period of time.
(4) Dumpsters. [Added 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
(a) Definition. "Dumpster" means a large trash receptacle
designed to be hoisted and emptied into a truck.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place,
keep or maintain any dumpster(s) on any property improved
with a single-family dwelling, without securing a permit.
(c) Any person desiring a permit to place or maintain a
dumpster(s) shall file an application with the Building
Department. The form for this application is to be furnished by
the Building Department and shall be sworn to and filed by the
applicant with the Building Department, along with an
application fee of $25.
(d) When placing on residential property dumpster(s) shall be set
back from any side yard property line a minimum of five feet
and from the front property line by a minimum of five feet and
also be a minimum of five feet away from any structures on the
property. In granting the permit the Building Inspector shall
consider the rights of adjacent property owners so that there
shall not be any unreasonable deprivation of light, air or a
reasonable use of adjoining property.
(e) The Building Inspector is hereby authorized, in the exercise of
reasonable discretion, to revoke any permit issued hereunder
if, after due investigation, he deems that the holder thereof has
violated any provisions of this subsection, in that the
dumpster(s) is being maintained in an unsafe manner or is
being maintained as a nuisance. Written notice of said
revocation shall be given, either by personal service upon the
person to be notified or by depositing said notice in the United
States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed
to such person at the address which appears on the records of
the Building Department.
(f) The length of time a dumpster(s) shall be permitted to remain
shall be 180 days. An extension beyond 180 days will be
considered upon application to the Board of Trustees. It shall
§ 345-30 VILLAGE HALL § 345-30
332:587
§ 345-31. Rear and side yards.
be mandatory that the dumpster be removed at the end of the
permitted period of time.
E. Vision clearance. On any corner lot on which a front yard is required by
this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or permit any
fence or any other structure, whether temporary or permanent, within
25 feet of the curbline which obstructs a view between 30 inches and
eight feet above the level of the sidewalk of the adjacent street
pavement. [Amended 9-18-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006; 9-26-2016 by
L.L. No. 4-2016]
A. Rear yards. Except as provided in Subsection E, every building
hereafter erected shall have a rear yard which shall be of the following
minimum depth:
(1) In Residential A District: 15 feet.
(2) In a Residential AA District: 15 feet.
(3) In a Business G District: 10 feet.
B. Rear yards of corner lots. Except as provided in Subsection E, the rear
yard of a corner lot shall be of the following minimum depth:
(1) In a Residential A District: 15 feet.
(2) In a Residential AA District: 15 feet.
(3) In a Business G District, the depth of rear yard in a corner lot shall
be fixed by the Board of Trustees.
C. Side yards. Except as provided in Subsection E, every building erected
hereafter shall have a side yard along each lot line, other than a street
or a rear line, the minimum depth of which shall be as follows:
[Amended 10-30-1967; 2-5-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(1) In a Residential A District: five feet for a house and five feet for a
garage.
(2) In a Residential AA District: a minimum of five feet to a garage and
five feet to a building, with a minimum of 30 feet between
structures of the adjacent properties.
D. Side yards in corner lots. Except as provided in Subsection E, the
minimum depth of side yards in corner lots shall be as follows:
(1) In a Residential A District: five feet.
(2) In Residential AA District, where irregular and regular plots exist
side by side, the side yards as specified in Subsection C(2) shall be
determined as measured from the front building line, and in no
§ 345-30 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-31
332:588
§ 345-32. Modification of yard requirements for garages.
Where garage space for one or more motor vehicles is provided, the yard
requirements shall be modified as follows:
event shall any structure be less than five feet from the property
line. [Amended 10-30-1967]
(3) In a Business G District, the depth of side yard in a corner lot shall
be fixed by the Board of Trustees.
E. Exceptions.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in § 345-32, a side or rear yard shall
be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of
windowsills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental features
to the extent of not more than four inches, except that if the
building is not over 2 1/2 stories in height, the cornices or eaves
may project not more than 18 inches into such yard.
(2) A building and any accessory buildings erected on the same lot
shall, for the purpose of side and rear yard requirements, be
considered as a single building, except that a garage or other
accessory building in a residence district may occupy not more
than 40% of the rear yard area and shall have a side yard and a rear
yard of not less than one foot. [Amended 2-5-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
(3) In any district, for a hospital, sanatorium, hotel, apartment house
or philanthropic institution, the Zoning Board of Appeals may make
special individual requirements as to the minimum depth of the
side yard and rear yard of each such building.
A. The depth of front yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet in a Residential A
District and 25 feet in a Residential AA District. In a Business G District,
the depth shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. [Amended
10-30-1967]
B. The depth of rear yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet in a Residential A
or AA District; and in a Business G District, it shall be fixed by the Board
of Trustees.
C. All garages attached to residential buildings in Residential A and AA
Districts shall extend not more than five feet beyond the rear of the
building and shall be at least five feet from the side line of the property.
D. All garages detached from the building shall be erected at least five feet
from the property line of the subject premises, except that any garage
constructed in the rear corner of the property can be a minimum of two
feet from the property line, provided that the garage is equally distant
from the side and rear property lines. Any part of a garage, be it the
base or the overhang or any part thereof, shall be a minimum of two
§ 345-31 VILLAGE HALL § 345-32
332:589
feet from the side and rear property lines. [Amended 10-25-1993 by
L.L. No. 10-1993]
§ 345-32 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-32
332:590
ARTICLE V
Parking and Loading
§ 345-33. Residential space and garages.
§ 345-34. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any building for which a
certificate of occupancy has heretofore been issued. Said provisions shall
apply to any premises changed in use or a building built, enlarged or
changed in use after said sections take effect,124 except that an existing
building may be rebuilt for continuance of a use which is the same as or
similar to that preexisting without regard to the provisions of said sections.
§ 345-35. Off-street parking in business areas. [Amended 5-21-1984
by L.L. No. 4-1984; 4-25-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988]
A. Amount of space. The number of motor vehicles for which space may be
provided as accessory to an authorized use in a residential district shall
be as follows:
(1) For a single-family dwelling, two motor vehicles; space for
additional motor vehicles may be provided only after receiving a
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) Not more than 200 feet square of floor area for each vehicle
authorized in the preceding subsection may be provided, but the
floor area so located with respect to walls, doors or permanent
obstructions that cannot be used for storage of motor vehicles shall
not be included.
B. (Reserved)123
A. No use shall be maintained in the Village unless the following off-street
parking requirements are met:
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use or Use Category Parking Spaces Required
Hotels, inns, motels and tourist
cabins
1 1/4 per room or suite
Hospital or clinic 1 per bed
Nursing or convalescent home 1 per 2 beds
Offices and banks 1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which established lot area requirements for accessory
structures, was repealed 7-26-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993.
124. Editor's Note: The ordinance from which this section is derived was enacted 11-27-1950.
§ 345-33 VILLAGE HALL § 345-35
332:591
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use or Use Category Parking Spaces Required
Medical, dental or diagnostic
center
1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area and 5 per suite
Theaters, churches and places of
public assembly with fixed seats
1 per each 3 seats
Funeral homes 1 per each 50 square feet of floor
area
Retail or personal service shops or
stores
1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area
Gasoline filling stations and public
garages
3 per bay and 1 per 200 square
feet of undesignated space
Industry 1 per each 300 square feet of floor
area
Wholesale and warehouse 1 per each 500 square feet of floor
area
Game courts (tennis, racquetball,
etc.)
4 1/2 per court
Marina and boatyard 1 1/4 per slip
Library and museum 1 per each 300 square feet of floor
area
Private club, commercial catering,
commercial amusement center,
bar, tavern, dance hall or
discotheque
1 per each 50 square feet of floor
area
Restaurant, cabaret, dinner
theater
1 per each 3 seats
Bowling alleys 6 per each lane
School 1 per each 200 square feet and 1
per each 50 square feet of
assembly area
Outdoor sales 1 per each 4,000 square feet of lot
area
Fast-food restaurants, drive-in
restaurants and drive-in retail
stores
1 per each 100 square feet of floor
area
Furniture, appliance store or
machinery store [Added
4-26-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
1 per each 500 square feet of floor
area
§ 345-35 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-35
332:592
§ 345-36. Off-street loading.
There shall be provided on the same lot with any building or premises
hereafter erected or altered or dedicated to the following uses, space for
off-street loading or unloading of vehicles, together with access thereto
from a public street, of sufficient size to comply with this section. A single
unloading space is considered to be a space 10 feet wide and 30 feet long,
or 300 square feet. Such space shall be provided as follows:
§ 345-37. Special permit uses.
Where a particular use in any district is permitted only if a special exception
is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, such Board as a condition of
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use or Use Category Parking Spaces Required
Any place of public assembly for
50 or more persons other than
listed above and for which no offstreet
parking is otherwise herein
provided
1 per 50 square feet of floor area
Any other use, structure or
building not otherwise expressly
provided for herein
1 per each 150 square feet of floor
area
B. Notwithstanding the above, whenever an existing building shall be
structurally altered or added to in an amount less than 10% of its total
area, only that portion of the area of the existing building which has
been structurally altered or added to need comply with the foregoing
off-street parking requirements.
C. All off-street parking shall consist of parking stalls paved to
specifications of the Village or garage facilities or a combination of
both, together with a direct means of access thereto from the public
street.
D. All off-street parking stalls shall be at least nine feet wide by 20 feet
long. All off-street parking stalls shall be located a minimum of two feet
from any property line.
A. Retail business buildings. Retail business buildings with floor area of
over 4,000 square feet shall provide off-street loading spaces as follows:
one space for each two employees or 400 square feet, whichever is
greater.
B. Wholesale or industrial buildings. Wholesale establishments, storage
buildings, coal yards, lumberyards, oil tank yards and industrial
buildings of over 4,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces as
follows: one space for each two employees or 400 square feet of floor
space, whichever is greater.
§ 345-35 VILLAGE HALL § 345-37
332:593
granting such permission may require such off-street parking or loading
facilities as are deemed necessary to ensure that the use being made of the
premises will not cause undue traffic congestion in the streets. In making
any such requirement, the Board shall be guided by the requirements set
forth herein, and a requirement of one space for each two employees or
each five occupants using any building in the usual course of business shall
be deemed adequate unless special circumstances justify deviation.
§ 345-38. Prerequisite for permit and certificate of occupancy.
No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued with respect to any
building or premises as to which any off-street parking facilities are
required by this article unless such facilities are provided for in the plans
and constructed accordingly. In the event that any individual, firm or
corporation desires to construct buildings for the purposes set forth herein
and sufficient land is not available for parking facilities, application for
a variance shall be made, and said Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce
the off-street parking requirements which would otherwise be required
hereunder.
§ 345-37 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-38
332:594
ARTICLE VI
Special Use Regulations
§ 345-39. Gasoline service stations.
§ 345-40. Fences and similar obstructions. [Amended 3-4-1996 by
L.L. No. 3-1996; 12-22-1977 by L.L. No. 17-1997; 7-26-1999 by L.L.
No. 9-1999; 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 12-2000]
A. Location restricted. No gasoline and/or service station shall be erected,
altered or extended except in Business G or GG Districts, provided that
the property is abutted on the rear and side by property zoned Business
G or GG and said plot shall have at least 150 feet of frontage and shall
be 100 feet in depth.
B. Special permit required. No lot or plot shall be used for the sale or
storage of gasoline or oil until the owner has made application and
received a special permit therefor from the Board of Trustees of the
Village after a public hearing held for that purpose.
A. Erection restricted. No person shall erect in any residential district of
the Village a solid fence, such as but not limited to a basket-weave-type
fence, a solid board fence or any synthetic or metal solid fence that is
greater than six feet in height or is before the front house setback; nor
shall there be erected in such zone any fence more than 48 inches in
height, excepting in the rear of the front line of the house, in which case
the same shall be not more than six feet.
B. Corner plots.
(1) On corner plots, the front side shall be limited to nonopaque, not
solid fences no higher than 48 inches. The street side (side yard)
shall be entitled to a six-foot opaque (solid) fence, provided a
minimum thirteen-foot setback from the property line is
maintained. [Amended 3-27-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
(2) Obstruction of view prohibited. On any corner plot on which a front
or side yard is required, no wall, fence or structure shall be erected
and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained in
such location within such required front or side yard space as to
cause danger to traffic by obstruction of the view.
C. Location of posts and unfinished side facings. Any fence constructed in
accordance with this section shall have the fence posts and/or
unfinished side facings and/or horizontal and diagonal cross member
pieces facing inward and located on the inside and/or that side of the
property of the person who is erecting said fence. In the event that
there is any question in reference to the above, it shall always be
construed in favor of the adjoining property owner and against the
person who is erecting said fence as to the location of said fence posts
§ 345-39 VILLAGE HALL § 345-40
332:595
§ 345-40.1. Stockade fences for business property. [Added
2-14-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
A six-foot stockade fence shall be erected in the rear of all business property
and on the sides of corner business property where said property abuts
residential property. Such fence shall be bolted to two-inch galvanized
posts. Where the grade of the adjoining property is lower or higher, a
retaining wall shall be installed and the galvanized posts shall be embedded
in the wall for depth of four feet. If no retaining wall is necessary, the posts
shall be embedded in four feet of concrete.
§ 345-41. Pools. [Amended 11-8-1967]
and/or unfinished side facings and/or horizontal and diagonal cross
member pieces of the fence and/or any other item relating to the fence.
D. Permit required. No fence shall be erected within the Village in
accordance with this section without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Department of said Village.
E. Compliance required. No fence shall be permitted except as provided in
this section or as authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals after a
public hearing.
F. The height of a fence shall be measured from the natural grade of the
property at all points along the fence run. The height of the fence shall
be the highest point of the fence measured at the natural grade. Manmade
berms, retaining walls and other structures shall not be
considered part of the natural grade. [Added 12-23-2002 by L.L. No.
10-2002]
G. All fences legally existing as of December 23, 2002, shall be permitted
to remain as legal nonconforming fences. Legal nonconforming fences
may be repaired and maintained. Any fence replaced or repaired to the
extent of more than 50% of the existing fence must conform to
§ 345-40F. [Added 12-23-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or alter any pool in
the Village except in compliance with all the provisions of this section
and upon issuance of a permit or registration as applicable for same by
the Village of Massapequa Park. [Amended 12-22-1997 by L.L. No.
18-1997]
B. The term "pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, including
all accessory equipment, having a depth at any point above or below
ground of more than 18 inches and having a surface area of water
greater than 50 square feet or having a capacity of over 500 gallons of
water, intended for the purpose of ornamentation or for the immersion
or partial immersion therein of human beings. [Amended 12-22-1997
by L.L. No. 18-1997]
§ 345-40 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-41
332:596
C. The Village Building Inspector shall approve any swimming pool which
conforms to the provisions of this section, provided that the public
health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood will be secure
and that such use will not be detrimental to the general character of the
neighborhood or to the orderly development of the Village. [Amended
12-22-1997 by L.L. No. 18-1997]
D. Permit. [Amended 4-11-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983; 1-13-1986 by
L.L. No. 1-1986; 1-7-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(1) At the time of filing the application for registration of portable
aboveground pools, there shall be paid a onetime fee as provided in
Chapter A350, Fees.
(2) In-ground pools shall require the filing of an application for a
building permit, accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter
A350, Fees.
E. Conformance to plans and specifications for below-ground and decktype
pools. All work performed under a permit issued by the building
official under this section shall conform to the approved application and
plans. It shall be unlawful to revise the area or the construction of work
provided for in an application hereunder.
F. Materials of construction. No pool shall be built, constructed or
maintained except of materials having adequate strength to retain the
water designed to be contained therein. Each pool shall be designed in
accordance with sound engineering practice.
G. Drawings and plans for below-ground and deck-type pools.
(1) All drawings and plans for the construction, installation or
alteration of any below-ground pool and aboveground deck-type
and/or accessories shall be countersigned by a registered architect
or professional engineer and be filed with the Village Building
Inspector for examination and approval as to the proper location
and construction.
(2) All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and
drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line and
including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal
systems and all accessories pertaining to the swimming pool.
Detailed plans and vertical elevation shall also be provided.
(3) The Building Inspector may revoke a permit issued under the
provisions of this section in the event that he finds there has been
any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit was based. (See
Subsection E.)
§ 345-41 VILLAGE HALL § 345-41
332:597
H. Walkway. Unobstructed walk areas not less than 24 inches wide shall be
provided to extend entirely around pools below ground. The walk area
of below-ground pools and the deck area of aboveground pools shall be
constructed of durable material and the surfaces shall be of such
material as to be easily cleaned and of nonslip construction.
I. Ladders. For all below-ground swimming pools, a means of access
through the use of steps or ladders shall be provided. At least one such
means of access, entrance or exit, shall be located in the water at the
deep end of the pool. All aboveground-type pools shall be provided with
a removable or retractable-type ladder or steps for entering or leaving
the pool, which shall be removed or retracted at all times when the pool
is not in use.
J. Distances. No portion of a pool, including walkways, and pump, filters,
showers, accessories or pool water disinfectants shall be located at a
distance less than five feet from any side or rear property line or
building setback line.
K. Fences. [Amended 4-9-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(1) All outdoor pools shall be completely surrounded by an
impregnable enclosure fence or as hereafter provided. A dwelling
or house shall be construed as part of the enclosure or fence and at
no point be less than the height of the fence or impregnable
enclosure. Such fence must be erected in a structurally sound
manner so as to completely enclose the pool itself or the particular
rear yard in which the pool is situated.
(2) Said fence or enclosure is to remain on the property only as long as
the pool remains on said real property. If for any reason said pool is
removed from said real property, then the owner or owners of the
real property must make proper application to the Village of
Massapequa Park or to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case
may be, for said fence to remain on said real property, or, in the
alternative, said fence must be removed from said real property. If
after the pool is removed from the real property, proper application
is not made by the owner or owners of the real property to the
Village of Massapequa Park or to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as
the case may be, then within 60 days after the pool has been
removed from the property or the pool has been filled in, the owner
must remove the fence erected or constructed or installed on said
real property.
(3) All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be
equipped with gates. All gates shall be constructed with a selfclosing
device and shall have self-acting devices placed at the top
of the gate, except for the door of the dwelling that forms a part of
the enclosure.
§ 345-41 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-41
332:598
(4) Fences shall be decay- or corrosion-resistant and shall be
permanently installed. To be considered impregnable, an enclosure
shall be constructed to not have openings, holes or gaps larger than
four inches in any dimension except for door and gaps, and except
if a picket fence is erected and maintained, the horizontal
dimension of the holes or gaps shall not exceed four inches.
[Amended 1-14-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
(5) The fence and gate shall not be less than four feet nor more than six
feet in height above the grade level.
L. Water supply.
(1) When municipal water is piped directly into the pool, a check valve
shall be installed on the supply line used to supply water to the
pool.
(2) When municipal water is used to fill a pool from a hose, the
discharge end of the hose shall be above the surface of the pool
water.
(3) When private water is used to supply pool water, such supply shall
not be cross-connected to a municipal waterline.
M. Water disposal.
(1) Water overflowing from the pool and, when the pool is emptied, the
water therefrom shall be disposed of on the owner's land and shall
be prevented from flowing over or into the land of any adjoining
property owner or over or into any abutting street.
(2) When it is impossible to comply with this section, special
permission to drain pool water into the municipal storm sewer
system may be granted upon written request. In cases of
extenuating circumstances, a verbal request followed with a
written request to the Superintendent of Public Works will be
satisfactory.
N. Noise nuisance.
(1) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village Board to prevent
any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. Noise of
such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the
life and health of any individual or contrary to the public welfare is
prohibited.
(2) The operation of any radio or phonograph or the use of any musical
instrument or any loud, riotous, vociferous, social exchange by or
between persons in such a manner or with such volume,
particularly between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling
pertinent or adjacent to or near said premises is prohibited.
§ 345-41 VILLAGE HALL § 345-41
332:599
§ 345-42. (Reserved)125
§ 345-43. Sheds. [Added 7-26-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993]
(3) The provisions of Chapters 218, 222 and 236 of the Code of the
Village of Massapequa Park and any amendments thereto shall
apply.
O. Electrical apparatus and wiring.
(1) Electric lights used within the pool proper or on the premises
where a pool is located shall be shielded in such a manner as not to
reflect light rays upon adjoining premises.
(2) Electrical apparatus, lights, conduit, cable or wire located or used
in conjunction with the operation of such pools shall be properly
grounded by a licensed electrician or in a manner acceptable to the
Building Inspector or by a certified electrical inspection agency
approved by the Board of Trustees and shall comply with provisions
of Chapter 128 of the Code of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park. [Amended 7-14-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003;
1-11-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
P. Abandonment.
(1) Any discontinuance of the use of a below-ground pool or
abandonment of the same by the owner shall require the filling in of
said pool and/or the removal of the same for the purpose of
returning the ground surface to its original grade and condition as
existed prior.
(2) The Building Inspector shall be notified of said intention to
abandon the use of said pool and that inspection of the site be made
by the Building Department Inspector prior to and upon completion
of said work.
(3) Aboveground pools, when abandoned, shall be emptied of water
and dismantled.
Q. Fines. Failure to comply with the requisite requirements of this section
shall subject the owner to a penalty of not less than $10 nor to exceed
$500, and said penalty shall be a continuing penalty for each day there
is not compliance with any directive from a police officer or authorized
Village representative.
A. A shed, for the purposes of this section, is defined as a freestanding
structure of 120 square feet or less, with no permanent connection to
any other structure. Any structure that has a permanent connection of
electricity, water, drainage or a foundation shall be considered a
125. Editor's Note: Former § 345-42, Fencing for swimming pools, was repealed 8-25-2003 by
L.L. No. 8-2003.
§ 345-41 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-43
332:600
permanent structure not covered by this section. A permanent
structure requires a Building Permit and is subject to the Building Code
Requirements.
B. All sheds on residential property in Residential A and AA Districts in the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park shall be a minimum of two
feet from the rear and ether side of the property line. The furthest point
of a shed, be it the base or the overhang, shall be a minimum of two feet
from the rear and either side of the property line of the subject
premises.
C. No shed shall be allowed to stand in the front setback of the house on
the subject premises.
D. Any shed as defined by this section shall have a vertical height of not
more than nine feet.
E. The door or entrance to the shed shall only be on the owner's side of the
property and not on the side of the adjoining property owner.
F. The minimum fine for each and every violation of this section shall be
$100.
§ 345-43 VILLAGE HALL § 345-43
332:601

ARTICLE VII
Golden Age District
[Added 9-14-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
§ 345-44. Statement of intent.
The intent of the Golden Age District includes the provision of affordable
owner-occupied housing for senior citizens in the Village of Massapequa
Park, with said housing located on sites proximate to necessary facilities,
services and transportation. Senior housing developments in the Golden
Age District shall be developed by the private sector, subject to price
guidelines for each residential unit.
§ 345-45. Use restrictions.
§ 345-46. Use of basement or cellar space.
No basement or cellar shall be occupied as living or sleeping quarters.
§ 345-47. Height restrictions.
No building shall be greater than 2 1/2 stories high and in no event greater
than 30 feet in height.
A. This zoning district shall be restricted to and used only to provide
affordable owner-occupied senior housing for individuals and couples
with at least one partner 62 years of age or older.
B. No land shall be placed in this district unless and until it has been found
suitable for senior citizen housing and has been approved by the Village
Board after a public hearing. Said approval shall include an acceptable
plan providing for maintenance, operation and administration of a
senior complex.
C. The Village Board in its absolute discretion reserves the right to place
any additional covenants and restrictions on the property developed
pursuant to this section, including but not necessarily limited to the
following items: age restrictions, owner selection criteria, eligible
income criteria, sales and resale restrictions and any additional items
deemed advisable by the Village Board to meet the intent of this article
and ensure that said development positively impacts and promotes
harmony with the land uses, zoning and nature of the surrounding
community.
D. Priority for the owner-occupied housing for senior citizens shall be
given first to the residents of the Incorporated Village of Massapequa
Park. The second priority shall be given to the residents of the
Massapequa Union Free School District No. 23. The third priority shall
be given to residents of the Town of Oyster Bay.
§ 345-44 VILLAGE HALL § 345-48
332:603
§ 345-48. Lot area.
In a Golden Age District, no building shall be erected or altered on a lot
having an area of no less than 2.5 acres.
§ 345-49. Building area.
The total building area shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
§ 345-50. Front yards.
The required front yard depth shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
§ 345-51. Corner lots.
In case of a corner lot, a front yard shall be required on each street.
§ 345-52. Side yards.
There shall be two side yards, one on each side of property, each having a
minimum width of at least 25 feet. Where a side yard(s) abuts a residential
zone, the minimum width of side yard(s) shall be at least 35 feet with no
portion of the building less than 25 feet from the property line. In addition,
where there are two or more main buildings upon the plot, there shall be a
minimum distance between buildings of 20 feet.
§ 345-53. Rear yards.
There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at least 25 feet,
except where a rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the
minimum depth of a rear yard shall be at least 50 feet.
§ 345-54. Encroachments.
§ 345-55. Parking.
A. Chimneys, cornices, eaves, gutters or bay windows, projecting not more
than 24 inches, and one-story open porches and/or terraces, not
exceeding three feet in height, are hereby permitted as encroachments
into the yard area.
B. Vestibules and one-story open porches and/or terraces, not exceeding
three feet in height and projecting not more than 60 inches, are
permitted.
A. All open parking facilities provided, pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter, shall not be less than nine feet in width by 20 feet in depth,
shall be individually identified by pavement marking and shall provide
such space as is reasonably necessary for adequate ingress, egress and
turning.
§ 345-48 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-55
332:604
§ 345-56. Density.
In a Golden Age District, the maximum number of dwelling units shall not
exceed 25 per acre or more than a proportionate number of dwelling units
on any fractional part of an acre subject to the provisions of this article, and
for the purpose of this section, a dwelling unit shall be such combination
of rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities
arranged for the use of one family.
§ 345-57. Exterior lighting.
All parking areas and walkways shall be provided with suitable lighting so
arranged as to direct light away from adjoining lots in any residence district
and away from any public street.
§ 345-58. Sewage disposal.
No plot, piece or parcel of land within the Village of Massapequa Park shall
be classified a Golden Age District until evidence, satisfactory to the Village
Board, has been received that the system of sewage disposal for multiple
dwelling and accessory buildings, authorized by this article, has received
prior approval by the Village Engineer and the Nassau County Board of
Health.
§ 345-59. Recreation facilities.
There shall be provided a usable indoor recreation area of a size deemed
suitable by the Village Board to be commensurate with the number of units
as designated pursuant to an approved site plan as required by § 345-62
contained herein.
§ 345-60. Fences.
In a Golden Age District, a fence, as defined in this chapter, not exceeding
six feet in height may be erected on the rear lot line and such portions of the
side lot lines as shall be lot lines enclosing the rear yard; and with respect to
all other lot lines, such fence shall not exceed four feet in height, provided
that if such fence shall be erected along any road or highway, the permitted
height thereof shall be measured from the existing elevation of the center
B. Parking space within 10 feet of any wall that contains windows, other
than bathroom windows, with a sill height of less than eight feet above
the level of said parking space, shall be prohibited.
C. Parking spaces may be provided in the side and rear yard setbacks
when such side and rear setback abuts a residential zone; however, a
suitable designed buffer, no less than 25 feet shall be provided to
separate said parking from abutting residential property.
D. In a Golden Age District, 1.4 spaces are required for each residential
unit.
§ 345-55 VILLAGE HALL § 345-60
332:605
line of such highway opposite such fence, and provided further that such
height, so measured, shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet to any point within a radius
of 35 feet of the corner formed by any intersecting roads or highways.
The provisions hereof shall also apply to hedges or other densely growing
shrubbery.
§ 345-61. Drainage easement.
The owner of the property and/or the builder under this chapter shall not
be allowed to construct any building on top of any easement on the said
property.
§ 345-62. Site plan approval.
In a Golden Age District, no building or permit shall be issued unless a site
plan is approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massapequa
Park pursuant to a public hearing. Said site plan shall include depictions,
drawn to scale, of the following: front, side and rear elevation of each
building, interior layout for each use, location of each building on the
subject parcel, parking areas, including location and size of each parking
space, means of ingress and egress for pedestrians and motor vehicles,
exterior lighting, recreation facilities, fencing and landscaping, and shall
conform in all instances to the site plan as submitted pursuant to the
applicant's request of a change of zone.
§ 345-60 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-62
332:606
ARTICLE VIII
Residential-Office Designation
[Added 6-26-2000 by L.L. No. 13-2000126]
§ 345-63. Purpose and intent; applicability. [Amended 12-22-2003
by L.L. No. 13-2003]
§ 345-64. Permitted uses.
With a residential-office designation, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be hereafter erected, altered or added to unless
otherwise provided in this article, except for one or more of the following
provisions:
A. The provisions set forth in this article are intended to encourage limited
office development of a high character and low community impact that
will be visually and aesthetically compatible with adjoining singlefamily
residences and residential neighborhoods. This article applies
when the owner of the premises is a professional, as set forth in
§ 345-64C, who does not reside in the premises, as well as when the
premises are used by the professional as a home-office combination.
B. Notwithstanding the above, anyone who, prior to the effective date of
this article, has established a professional office where the owner of
such professional office does reside in the dwelling house shall not be
required to comply with this article until he or she sells or transfers the
dwelling house, at which time the new owner must comply with this
article.
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Church or school.
C. Professional office.
(1) Office of a physician, lawyer, dentist, accountant, chiropractor,
podiatrist or engineer duly licensed by the State of New York to
practice as such, provided that such office is located in the dwelling
or house owned by said professional.
(2) Said professional must conduct his practice at the subject
premises, but it is not required that the professional reside in the
subject premises as his private residence.
(3) Said professional shall not be allowed to rent the premises for a
professional use set forth in this subsection to some other
professional other than himself or a professional corporation or a
limited partnership or a limited corporation in which he is the sole
126. Editor's Note: This local law also exempted certain residences from its provisions. A
complete list of the owners, addresses and uses is on file in the Village offices.
§ 345-63 VILLAGE HALL § 345-64
332:607
§ 345-65. Accessory uses.
In any residential district, the following uses shall be permitted, provided
that they are accessory to an authorized use:
§ 345-66. Number of employees.
The number of persons working in any building or in any premises with
residential-office designation shall not exceed one person per each 200
square feet of usable office space. The number of persons working in any
building or in any premises shall include professional persons, associates,
partners, employees and any and all other persons, regardless of title, who
are engaged in pursuing the use to which the premises are being put.
§ 345-67. Site plan approval.
With a residential-office designation, all uses and signs shall be subject to
site plan and aesthetic approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the
Incorporated Village of Massapequa Park in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this article. After a review of the site plan, the Board of
Trustees may issue such reasonable restrictions, covenants or conditions as
it may deem in the public interest.
and only professional named in said certificate of incorporation of
the profession enumerated in this article.
D. No building, however, shall be constructed or altered to provide a show
window, display window or storefront.
A. Garage, subject to the limitations of § 345-33.
B. An announcement sign as an accessory to the following uses only and
subject to the following limitation: In connection with an authorized
professional occupation carried on by a person residing on the
premises, there may be displayed a small nameplate with a simple
statement of the profession or the nature of the profession. The
nameplate must be on a sign in conformity with the Village Sign Law.127
C. Office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, accountant, chiropractor or
podiatrist, provided that such office is located in the dwelling owned by
the professional person or professional corporation but is not his place
of residence.
D. Any customary home occupation, provided that the same is carried on
in a dwelling occupied as a private residence by the person carrying on
such home occupation and provided, further, that approval thereof is
obtained from the Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of
Massapequa Park.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 286, Signs.
§ 345-64 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-68
332:608
§ 345-68. Architectural style.
With a residential-office designation, any building or addition to a building
or structure shall be designed and constructed in such fashion so as to be
aesthetically compatible with the design of the neighboring conventional
single-family dwellings.
§ 345-69. Lot area.
With a residential-office designation, no building shall be erected on a lot
having an area of less than 8,000 square feet, and no existing building shall
be altered on a lot having an area less than 6,000 square feet.
§ 345-70. Height requirements.
With a residential-office designation, no building shall be erected or altered
to exceed a height of 30 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
§ 345-71. Front yards.
With a residential-office designation, no building hereafter erected or
altered shall have a depth of front yard less than 25 feet. If, on the same
side of the street, 40% or more of the total street line distance between
the two nearest intersecting street lines shall have been improved with
two or more buildings, or in the event that building permits shall have
been issued therefor, not less than the average depth of front yard as so
established by such existing or permitted buildings shall be maintained;
provided, however, that any such front yard depth shall not be required to
be more than 30 feet. In the event of a corner or double frontage lot, the
required front yard shall be provided on all streets.
§ 345-72. Side yards.
With a residential-office designation, there shall be two side yards, one on
each side of the building. The total of the widths of both side yards shall be
not less than 15 feet, and neither side yard shall be less than five feet wide,
except that where such property line coincides with a residence district
boundary, such side yard distance shall be increased to 10 feet. Where a
side yard of less than 10 feet is maintained, no entrance may be provided
on that side of the building.
§ 345-73. Rear yards.
With a residential-office designation, there shall be a rear yard having
a minimum depth of 25 feet, except that, where such rear property fine
coincides with a residence district boundary, such distance shall be
increased to 35 feet.
§ 345-68 VILLAGE HALL § 345-74
332:609
§ 345-74. Building area.
With a residential-office designation, the sum of all areas covered by
buildings and all parking areas shall not exceed 60% of the area of the lot.
§ 345-75. Encroachments.
§ 345-76. Off-street parking and loading.
A. With a residential-office designation, the following encroachments upon
required yard areas are permitted:
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys or bay windows projecting not
more than 24 inches.
(2) One-story open porches and terraces not exceeding three feet in
height, projecting not more than six feet into a front or rear yard.
(3) One-story enclosed vestibules not greater than six feet wide and
five feet deep into the front yard.
B. In any case where the Zoning Board of Appeals has diminished a
required yard by a variance, none of the foregoing encroachments shall
be permitted into such diminished yard.
A. With a residential-office designation, no building shall be hereafter
erected, altered or added to unless:
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each
200 square feet of usable floor space, exclusive of common
hallways, bathrooms, mechanical rooms, maintenance rooms,
storage and other similar service facilities.
(2) In any case where property is classified and used for a purpose
authorized under this article and is contiguous to or abuts any
property classified for residential purposes, no off-street parking
area or driveway shall be located less than five feet from such
property line.
(3) Off-street parking may be provided in the driveway portion of the
front, side and rear yards. Tandem parking may be permitted,
subject to approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village
of Massapequa Park.
B. In order to provide for the development of property in the manner and
to the degree intended herein, the Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Massapequa Park may waive any or all off-street parking
requirements and/or may require any number of parking spaces up to
the number required by this article either on the premises or on a
separate lot determined by said Village Board of Trustees to be
convenient therefor, which will, in the opinion of the Village Board of
Trustees, reasonably or adequately alleviate undue traffic and street
curb parking congestion.
§ 345-74 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-76
332:610
§ 345-77. Landscaping.
With a residential-office designation, the entire lot, except for areas covered
by building or surfaced for parking, shall be suitably landscaped. All
landscaping shall be properly maintained throughout the life of any use on
said lot.
C. No truck loading facilities shall be permitted.
§ 345-76 VILLAGE HALL § 345-77
332:611

ARTICLE IX
Mother-Daughter Dwellings
[Added 6-26-2000 by L.L. No. 14-2000]
§ 345-78. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to encourage residents of the Village of
Massapequa Park who require mother-daughter housing arrangements to
legally make such arrangements by means of a Village approval and permit
system. It is also the purpose of this article to provide for the safety
and appearance of mother-daughter residences as well as to maintain and
preserve the single-family residential character of the Village and to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
§ 345-79. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOOD RELATIVE — Any family member of the following group: parent,
child, adoptive child, grandparent, great-grandparent or sibling.
BOARDER (or ROOMER) — An unrelated person (not a family member)
occupying, on a transient basis, at least a single room in a dwelling.
FAMILY[Amended 10-17-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016] —
One of the following:
A group of people related by blood, marriage or legal adoption,
living together in a dwelling unit, constituting a natural family; or
(1)
No more than three unrelated persons living together in a dwelling
unit; or
(2)
Four or more persons living together in a dwelling unit who are not
related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, who have overcome a
presumption that they do not constitute a family by a determination
that they are the functional equivalent of a natural family.
(3)
A.
In determining whether a group of individuals is living together as the
functional equivalent of a natural family, the following criteria must be
present:
The group is one which, in appearance, structure and function,
resembles a natural family.
(1)
The group must share the entire dwelling unit, including the
cooking facilities, as a single housekeeping unit, use all rooms and
housekeeping facilities in common and have access to all parts of
the dwelling unit.
(2)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
(3)
B.
§ 345-78 VILLAGE HALL § 345-79
332:613
MOTHER-DAUGHTER DWELLING — A separate and second dwelling with
a detached single-family dwelling which is occupied by a blood relative of
the legal owner of the property or by the legal owner himself.
§ 345-80. Mother-daughter usage.
The presence of minor dependent children regularly resident
in the household who are enrolled in local schools;
(a)
Members of the group have the same address for purposes of
voter registration, driver's license, motor vehicle registration
and filing taxes;
(b)
(c) Members of the group are employed in the area; and
The group has been living together in the current dwelling
unit, or elsewhere, for a continuous period of one year or more.
(d)
Any other factors which may be determinative of whether or not
the group is the functional equivalent of a natural family.
(4)
A. A detached single-family dwelling may be altered to include an
additional kitchen facility and bedroom(s) for the sole use by a blood
relative or the legal owner of said single-family dwelling. Such use shall
only be permitted upon the prior written approval of the Village Board
of Trustees and the issuance of a special use permit by the Building
Department of the Village of Massapequa Park.
B. The Village Board of Trustees may approve and permit such use subject
to the general guidelines and conditions set forth by the Board of
Trustees and the following specific conditions:
(1) Not more than one mother-daughter dwelling unit may be located
in a single-family dwelling.
(2) The legal owner of the single-family dwelling shall occupy one of
the dwelling units, and the blood relative of the legal owner (and
family of the blood relative, if applicable) shall occupy the other
dwelling unit.
(3) A mother-daughter dwelling unit shall not be located within a
garage, a basement or above a second floor.
(4) The single-family detached dwelling in which the mother-daughter
dwelling unit is located must contain at least one unobstructed
passageway between the main dwelling unit and the motherdaughter
dwelling unit.
(5) Adequate off-street parking areas shall be provided on the site and
shall be available for use by each dwelling unit. Not less than two
off-street parking spaces shall be required for the main dwelling
unit, and not less than one off-street parking space shall be
required for the mother-daughter dwelling unit. No vehicles may be
§ 345-79 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-80
332:614
§ 345-81. Inspections.
The Village shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises with 48
hours' notice to the occupant of the premises during reasonable hours to
ascertain whether the use of the premises is in compliance with the terms
and conditions set forth in this article and those of the Village Board of
Trustees. The applicant or applicants shall execute a written consent for
such inspection at the time of application, and such consent shall be valid
for the duration of the special permit issued for mother-daughter usage
and for any renewal period thereafter. The Village shall have the right to
parked at other locations in order to meet the off-street parking
requirements. No front yard area shall be used for parking, except
on a driveway. For the purpose of this subsection, "driveway" shall
be defined as a permanent paved surface.
(6) No boarders or roomers shall be allowed, under any circumstances,
in a single-family dwelling, whether or not said dwelling is a
mother-daughter dwelling unit.
(7) A mother-daughter residence application, duly notarized, shall be
accompanied by documentary proof of legal ownership of the
single-family detached dwelling and at least two forms of
documentary proof establishing that the occupant of the motherdaughter
dwelling unit is a blood relative of the legal owner.
Acceptable forms of documentary proof shall be a certified copy of
the recorded deed from the County Clerk's office for the subject
property, and all owners shall have to execute an affidavit of
relationship, duly notarized, both of which have to be given to the
Village at the time of the legal owner's application. The names and
ages of all occupants of the two dwelling units shall be required to
be provided with each application. Clear and distinct photographs
of each applicant or applicants, labeled for identification, shall be
required to be provided to the Village with each application.
(8) A mother-daughter special use permit shall be issued for a period
not exceeding one year and shall be renewed by the applicant or
applicants in accordance with the procedures established by the
Village Board of Trustees.
(9) The permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees in § A350-1 is to
be paid to the Village by said applicant or applicants; the annual
renewal fee as set forth in the schedule of fees in § 350-1 is to be
paid to the Village by said applicant or applicants. [Amended
8-10-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(10) If the annual fee or renewal fee is not paid by the applicant or
applicants to the Village when due, then the permit for the motherdaughter
housing arrangement shall immediately cease and desist
and shall become null and void and shall be of no force and effect.
§ 345-80 VILLAGE HALL § 345-81
332:615
reinspect the premises at the end of any one-year term, even if the special
permit is not renewed.
§ 345-82. Termination.
The mother-daughter special use permit shall terminate immediately upon
any of the following events:
§ 345-83. Fees.
Fees for application and inspection shall be as established by resolution
of the Village Board of Trustees at an open meeting. All special permit
approvals are made subject to payment of required fees and expenses by
the applicant or applicants.
§ 345-84. Applications.
A. Sale or lease of the dwelling in which the mother-daughter residence is
located or any other change or transfer of title thereof.
B. Any change in occupancy of the dwelling which disqualifies the ownerblood
relative relationship as approved by the Board of Trustees.
C. Violation of any other conditions of the special use permit as approved
by the Board of Trustees.
A. Applications for mother-daughter residential special permits shall be on
forms, papers and documents prescribed and set forth by the Village
Board of Trustees.
B. The mother-daughter usage application, papers, approval and permit
process shall be subject to the rules and procedures of the Board of
Trustees, which shall be empowered to establish any term or condition
of the process not specifically provided for in this article.
§ 345-81 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-84
332:616
ARTICLE X
Stormwater Control
[Added 12-10-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
§ 345-85. Definitions.
The terms used in this article and Chapter 294 or in documents prepared or
reviewed under this article and Chapter 294 shall have the meaning as set
forth in this section:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, that serves as
the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
§ 345-85 VILLAGE HALL § 345-85
332:617
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Coldwater fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
§ 345-85 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-85
332:618
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or non-structural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Village to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
§ 345-85 VILLAGE HALL § 345-85
332:619
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 345-86. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this article
and Chapter 294.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s). The site map should be at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet (e.g., one inch equals
500 feet is smaller than one inch equals 100 feet).
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
§ 345-85 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-86
332:620
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill-prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project closeout;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 345-85 of this article
and meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also include water
quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater
runoff controls) as set forth in Subsection B (3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
§ 345-86 VILLAGE HALL § 345-86
332:621
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1);
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 345-88 of this
article.
(4) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this article and Chapter 294.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
§ 345-86 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-86
332:622
§ 345-87. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
E. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article and Chapter 294,
the following documents shall serve as the official guides and
specifications for stormwater management. Stormwater management
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these
technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed
by this article and Chapter 294.
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Deign Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
§ 345-86 VILLAGE HALL § 345-87
332:623
§ 345-88. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
set forth in Subsection A and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed
professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their
representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this article
and Chapter 294. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps
or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been
reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 345-85 of this article
and meeting Condition A, B or C in § 345-86B(2), the applicant shall
have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event
producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site logbook.
(3) The applicant or developer or his or her representative shall be on
site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Massapequa Park to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this local law. The easement shall be recorded
by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the
counsel for the Village of Massapequa Park.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article and Chapter 294 shall ensure they are operated and maintained
to achieve the goals of this article and Chapter 294. Proper operation
and maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the following:
§ 345-87 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § 345-88
332:624
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article and Chapter 294.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 345-87C.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Massapequa Park shall
approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management
facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the
office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to
final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent
with the terms and conditions of Schedule B of this local law, entitled
"Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."128 The
Village of Massapequa Park, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its
sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future
stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets all the
requirements of this article and Chapter 294 and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
128. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 345-88 VILLAGE HALL § 345-88
332:625
Appendix
Chapter A350
FEES
§ A350-1. Schedule of fees. [Amended 5-7-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001;
12-8-2003, effective 1-1-2004]
There are hereby established the following permit, license, application and
other miscellaneous fees and charges within the Village of Massapequa
Park. All fees are nonrefundable.
Ch. 74, Amusements and Public
Entertainment
Part 1, General Provisions
Billiard room, annual license fee $165
Bowling alley, annual license fee $165
Coin-operated amusement machine $110
Dance hall, cabaret and catering
establishments
Annual license fee $165
Ch. 78, Auctions and Auctioneers
Annual license fee $50
Barbershops and beauty parlors and nail
salons
Annual license fee $55
Ch. 116, Dogs and Other Animals [Amended 11-22-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2011]
Annual license fees
Spayed or neutered dogs $10
For persons over 65 years of age $5
Unspayed or unneutered dogs $18
For persons over 65 years of age $9
Ch. 136, Environmental Conservation
PEAS application fee $55
PEAS application fee (subdivision
approval)
$110
Requested or draft environmental impact
statement, application fee
$55
Final environmental impact statement,
application fee
$110
§ 345-88 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § A350-1
332:626
Ch. 142, Explosives
Annual permit fee $110
Ch. 154, Fire Prevention and Building
Construction
Building permit application fee,
including certificate of occupancy and
final inspection fee
$55
Cancellation processing $35
New homes and buildings $11 per $1,000 estimated
construction cost
Renewal fee $55
Alterations
Minimum application fee $30
Estimated construction cost as
determined by the Building
Department129
$0 to $1,000 $55
$1,001 to $2,000 $85
$2,001 to $3,000 $165
$3,001 to $4,000 $195
$4,001 to $5,000 $220
Over $5,000 $220 plus $11 per $1,000 of
estimated construction cost
Fence application
Inspection fee $55
Demolition permit $110
Refund processing fee $35
Certificate of occupancy fees
Standard $30
Search, inspection and issuance $85
Ch. 178, Gasoline Stations
Annual license fee $220
Ch. 192, Junk Dealers
Annual license fee $85
Ch. 196, Landscaping [Amended 3-8-2010]
Landscaping application fee $100
129. Note: All fees, subject to final inspection and adjustments as determined by the Building
Inspector in conformance with the promulgations of the Board of Trustees, shall be paid
prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ A350-1 VILLAGE HALL § A350-1
332:627
License fee $100
Annual renewal fee $100
Sticker fee (per vehicle) $10
Ch. 214, Newspaper Vending Machines
Annual administrative fee $30
Ch. 232, Parks
Picnics and outings
Brady Park, Section B $30, Friday through Sunday
Brady Park, Section C $50, Friday through Sunday
Brady Park, Section D $50, Friday through Sunday
Each section $20, Monday through
Thursday
Ch. 234, Pawnbrokers
Annual license fee $165
Ch. 240, Peddling and Soliciting [Amended 3-8-2010; 2-6-2017]
Article II, Canvassers and Solicitors $100 per person
Article III, Hawkers and Peddlers $125
Annual license fee for peddling or
hawking goods, wares or merchandise
Ch. 248, Plumbing and Drainage
Plumber's license fees
Application $30
License $85
Annual renewal $55
Sewer connection permit $110
Ch. 260, Records, Public Access to
Record copies, each $0.25
Ch. 268, Sales, Special
Article III, Close-Out Sales
Close-out sale license fee $55
Ch. 272, Satellite Antennas
Application for erecting, placing or
constructing a new satellite antenna
$110
Application for relocating, altering,
reconstructing or enlarging any existing
satellite antenna
$55
Ch. 274, Secondhand Dealers
General or management license
§ A350-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § A350-1
332:628
Annual fee $55
Half-yearly rate $30
Exposition license
Annual fee $55
Half-yearly rate $30
Ch. 286, Signs
Residential signs $55
Commercial signs $140
Ch. 298, Streets and Sidewalks [Amended 3-22-2004]
Article II, Openings and Excavations
Permit fee for openings and
excavations up to 5 square yards
$200
For every additional 5 square yards or
fraction thereof
$30
Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land
Preliminary layout submission fee; final
plat submission fee
$275
Ch. 306, Taxicabs
Article I, General Provisions
Annual driver's permit fee $25
Annual taxicab permit fee (each
vehicle)
$100
Annual taxicab inspection fee (3
inspections)
$30
Ch. 314, Towing
Annual license fee $140
License of less than 6 months' duration $85
Each additional towing car after 2 cars $55
Ch. 322, Vehicles and Traffic [Amended 3-8-2010]
Parking
Resident and commuter parking
To be paid upon the issuance of the
parking permit for resident and
resident commuter parking, which fee
shall cover a twelve-month period (i.e.,
June 1 through May 31). Once a
parking permit has been issued, there
shall be no refund or partial refund of
the fee paid for resident and resident
commuter parking.
$50
§ A350-1 VILLAGE HALL § A350-1
332:629
Half-year fee, applicable as of
December 1
$30
Merchant employee parking
To be paid upon the issuance of the
parking permit for merchant employee
parking, which fee shall cover a
twelve-month period (i.e., June 1
through May 31). Once a permit has
been issued, there shall be no refund
or partial refund of the fee paid for
employee and merchant employee
parking.
$50
Half-year fee, applicable as of
December 1
$30
Nonresident parking
To be paid before the issuance of the
parking permit for nonresident
parking, which fee shall be for a
twelve-month period (i.e., June 1
through May 31). Once a parking
permit has been issued, there shall be
no refund of the fee paid for such
nonresident parking.
$265
Ch. 345, Zoning
Variances
Application filing fee $220
Mother/daughter usage, application
filing fee
$220
Mother/daughter usage, annual
renewal fee
$30
Fence application filing fee $220
Construction application fee $55
Pools
Aboveground $55
In-ground $30 plus $55 for each $1,000
or fraction thereof of
estimated cost determined
by the Building Department
§ A350-2. Changes in fees. [Added 6-25-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The fees set forth in § A350-1 of this chapter may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees duly enacted.
§ A350-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § A350-2
332:630
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 1-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
2-2005 2-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
3-2005 3-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
4-2005 8-10-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
5-2005 9-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
6-2005 10-17-2005 Vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 330
11-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2006 2-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-2006 3-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
3-2006 4-24-2006 Canvassers and solicitors
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. II
4-2006 9-18-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 298, Art. I;
345
1-2007 1-8-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
1-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
2-2007 2-5-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
3-2007 3-12-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 304, Art. II
4-2007 3-12-2007 Tax exemption for disabled
individuals amendment
Ch. 304, Art. IX
5-2007 4-16-2007 Fire prevention and
building construction
amendment
Ch. 154
6-2007 4-30-2007 Real property tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 304, Art. III
§ A350-2 VILLAGE HALL § DL-1
332:631
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2007 6-11-2007 Sales on Memorial Day
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. I
8-2007 9-10-2007 Storm sewers: illicit
discharges, activities and
connections
Ch. 293, Art. I
9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
10-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
9-2007 12-10-2007 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control
Chs. 287; 294;
300; 345
10-2007 12-10-2007 Fire fighter's tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 304, Art. X
1-2008 1-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-2008 2-11-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
3-2008 2-11-2008 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 304, Art. V
4-2008 3-10-2008 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment; tax
exemption for disabled
individuals amendment
Ch. 304, Arts. II
and IX
5-2008 8-11-2008 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 304, Art. XI
6-2008 10-6-2008 Housing: illegal
occupancies
Ch. 189, Art. I
7-2008 10-6-2008 General penalties Ch. 1, Art. II
11-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
8-2008 11-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
9-2008 12-8-2008 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. I
12-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2009 3-23-2009 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Ch. 279, Art. I
2-2009 8-10-2009 Flood damage prevention Ch. 158
§ DL-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § DL-1
332:632
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2010 1-11-2010 Electrical standards
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 128; 345
3-8-2010 Landscaping amendment;
fees amendment
Chs. 196; A350
2-2010 4-26-2010 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 42 (footnote
only)
3-2010 5-10-2010 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 287
4-2010 8-23-2010 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 6-2016
5-2010 9-13-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 218
6-2010 9-13-2010 Taxicabs: general
provisions amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 6-2016
1-2011 11-22-2010 Dogs and other animals
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 116; A350
11-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2012 1-9-2012 Tax levy limit override NCM
2-2012 6-11-2012 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 254
6-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
3-2012 7-9-2012 Brush, grass and weeds
repealer
Ch. 94,
reference only
4-2012 8-13-2012 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions amendment
Ch. 279, Art. I
9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2013 3-25-2013 Tax levy limit override NCM
2-2013 3-25-2013 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 202
3-2013 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
1-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
§ DL-1 VILLAGE HALL § DL-1
332:633
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2014 1-27-2014 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 42 (footnote
only)
2-2014 2-24-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
5-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
3-2014 9-8-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A350
4-2014 12-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2015 5-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
6-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
6-22-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
11-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 322
1-2016 2-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-2016 6-27-2016 Bamboo Ch. 80
3-2016 7-11-2016 Towing and booting
amendment
Ch. 314
4-2016 9-26-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
general provisions
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. I;
Ch. 345
5-2016 10-17-2016 Fire prevention and
building construction
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 154; Ch. 345
6-2016 11-28-2016 Taxicabs Ch. 306
2-6-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A350
1-2017 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-2017 10-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
3-2017 11-27-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
Village rights-of-way
Ch. 298, Art. III
1-2018 11-26-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Miscellaneous Provisions
Ch. 322, Art. IXA
§ DL-1 MASSAPEQUA PARK CODE § DL-1
332:634