Part I, Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local
laws and certain resolutions of the Village of Massena, as codified by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 300, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the “Code of the Village of Massena,” hereafter termed the “Code.”
Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the “Code of the Village of Massena” to any other local law, ordinance or
resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing in the Code as
if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local
laws and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this
local law are intended as a continuation of such local laws and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force
and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Massena, and it is the intention of said Board that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Massena in force on
the date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the
effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not affect the
following classes of local laws, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved
from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Village of Massena prior to the effective date of this local law or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in
violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Massena or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law or of
any local law or resolution included in this Code now or through supplementation shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to
the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly involved
in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk
of the Village of Massena and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such
copy shall be certified by the Village Clerk of the Village of Massena by impressing
thereon the Seal of the Village of Massena, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law, brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Village of Massena.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Massena.
E. Any local law of the Village of Massena providing for the laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Village of Massena or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law of the Village of Massena appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Village of Massena or other instruments or evidence of
the Village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property, or any
lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for
municipal employees.
M. Any local law or portion of a local law establishing a specific fee amount for any
license, permit or service obtained from the Village.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to January 1, 2007.
§ 1-4 MASSENA CODE § 1-6
1:4
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by
the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws
and resolutions known collectively as the “Code of the Village of Massena” or any
new local laws or resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate
the intention of the Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the
loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing
contained in this local law shall affect the status of any local law or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from
time to time as the Board of Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code of the Village of Massena required to be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws and
resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local
law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall,
when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Village
Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Village of Massena in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Massena to be
misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this local law, shall be
guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws and resolutions for publication as the
Code of the Village of Massena, no changes in the meaning or intent of such local
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code
of the Village of Massena, such local law to be entitled “General Provisions, Article I,
Adoption of Code,” and the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13,
inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
laws and resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of
the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
local laws and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the
effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section number references are to the
local laws and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the
following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007.” Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Village offices.
§ 1-11 MASSENA CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 7
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants of the Village of Massena to
issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations of state statutes or local
laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of the Village which the public servants are
authorized or required to enforce.
§ 7-2. Issuance by certain public servants.
The following public servants of the Village of Massena are hereby authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets with respect to violations of a state statute or a local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village of Massena which such public servants are,
respectively, required or authorized to enforce:
§ 7-3. Personal service required; exception.
An appearance ticket other than for a parking violation shall be served personally.
A. Building Inspector: building, zoning and planning, housing, fire prevention and
safety and licensing of occupations or businesses.
B. Constables: parking, public health, safety and welfare and licensing of occupations
or businesses.
C. Police paraprofessionals: parking, public health, safety and welfare and licensing of
occupations or businesses.
D. Animal Control Officer: public health, safety and welfare. [Amended 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 1-13 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 7-3
7:1

Chapter 15
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 15-1. Intent. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in § 29 thereof, authorizes political
subdivisions of the state to provide for the continuity of their governments in the event
of an actual or imminent attack upon the United States by an enemy or foreign nation.
Executive Law § 27 authorizes political subdivisions to provide for the continuity of
their governments in the event of other public disasters, catastrophes or emergencies.
Based on the authority contained in such laws this chapter is adopted so that on such
occasions the government of the Village of Massena, New York, may continue to
function properly and efficiently under emergency circumstances.
§ 15-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ATTACK — An attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy or foreign
nation upon the United States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury
to civilian property or persons in the United States in any manner by sabotage or by the
use of bombs, shellfire or nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological
means or other weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY—A person authorized to perform all the powers and
duties of a public office in the event that the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent officer, where
such authorization is provided pursuant to the provisions of any general, special or local
law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to this
chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of
a Village officer in the event that neither the officer nor any duly authorized deputy is
able, due to death, absence from the Village, or other physical, mental or legal reasons,
to perform the power and duties of the office.
PUBLIC DISASTER —
A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or imminent, of such unusual
proportions or extent that:
A substantial number of the residents of the Village of Massena either sustain
injury, become ill, are infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are
killed or die as the result of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a
substantial number of residents is imperiled, damaged or destroyed; and
(1)
It is necessary and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare
that the continuity of the government of the Village of Massena be assured in
order that it be enabled to function properly and efficiently, and to exercise its
essential powers in meeting emergency conditions.
(2)
A.
B. Such disasters, catastrophes and emergencies may include, but shall not be limited
§ 7-3 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 15-2
15:1
§ 15-3. Designation, status, qualifications and terms of emergency interim
successors.
to, conflagrations, explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods,
tidal waves, pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric
power or essential transportation services, or any incident or occurrence which
causes or threatens to cause danger to life, health or property from exposure to
noxious materials or radiation.
A. Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this chapter, and
thereafter within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of his office, each
elective officer shall, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate such
number of emergency interim successors to the powers and duties of his office and
specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that
there will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim
successors, or combination thereof, to perform the powers and duties of the office.
B. Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law to appoint
officers shall within the time specified in Subsection A of this section, in addition
to any duly authorized deputy, designate for each such appointive officer such
number of emergency interim successors, by title, to such officers and specify their
rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be
not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or
combination thereof, for each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists
of members having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review and, as
necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency interim successors by
such board within 30 days after a new member elected or appointed to such body of
officers first enters upon the duties of his office as a member of such body of
officers. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
C. Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective officers
specified in Subsection A of this section, and the appointing officer or body of
officers specified in Subsection B of this section shall from time to time review and,
as necessary, promptly revise the designations of emergency interim successors to
ensure that at all times there are at least three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, for each elective and appointive officer
of the Village.
D. Qualifications. No person shall be designated to nor serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he is legally qualified to hold the office of the person to whose
powers and duties he is designated to succeed.
E. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an emergency
interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure of the designator and
such a designation shall remain effective until replaced by another by the authorized
designator.
F. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without salary, unless
otherwise provided by local law. He shall, however, be entitled to reimbursement
for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of his powers and
duties.
§ 15-2 MASSENA CODE § 15-4
15:2
§ 15-4. Assumption of powers and duties by emergency interim successor.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in Subsection
A or Subsection B of § 15-3 of this chapter, or his duly authorized deputy, if any, is
unable, due to death, absence from the Village, or other physical, mental or legal reasons,
to perform the powers and duties of the office, the emergency interim successor of
such officer highest in rank in order of succession who is able to perform the powers
and duties of the office shall, except for the power and duty to discharge or replace
duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors of such officer, perform
the powers and duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall perform
such powers and duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or his
duly authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office or undertakes the performance of
the powers and duties of the office, as the case may be, or until, where an actual
vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or appointed to fill such vacancy and qualifies
as provided by law. The authority of an emergency interim successor performing the
powers and duties of an office shall not terminate upon the subsequent availability of an
emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession.
§ 15-5. Recording and publication of designations.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy and
emergency interim successor shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and each designation,
replacement or change in order of succession of any emergency interim successor
shall become effective when the designator files with such Clerk the successor's name,
address and rank in order of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of
all such data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors and
the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify, in writing, each
designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim successor and
his rank in order of succession and also shall notify, in writing, any person previously
designated who is replaced or whose place in order of succession is changed.
§ 15-6. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible, emergency interim
successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to
qualify them to perform the powers and duties of the office to which they may succeed.
§ 15-7. Quorum and vote requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Mayor, or his duly authorized deputy
or emergency interim successor performing his powers and duties, may suspend quorum
requirements for the Board of Trustees. If quorum requirements are suspended, any local
law, ordinance, resolution or other action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by
an affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or
approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting thereon.
§ 15-4 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 15-7
15:3

Chapter 19
CONVENTION, CONFERENCE AND SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
§ 19-1. Delegation of power.
The Village of Massena hereby delegates to the Mayor the power to authorize attendance
of municipal officers and employees, at conventions, conferences and schools conducted
for the betterment of local government.
§ 15-7 CONVENTION, CONFERENCE AND SCHOOL § 19-1
19:1

Chapter 25
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 25-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for those
individuals serving the Village of Massena from losses which may be brought against
them in their individual capacity for actions taken while in the performance of their
official duties and responsibilities. In enacting this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds
that the State of New York has enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial
security of its officers and employees and further finds that such security is also required
for local personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of Trustees does not intend
to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of the Village or its
employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense. It is solely the intent of this
chapter to provide similar coverage for local employees as is presently provided for state
employees so as to continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 25-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE—Any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment
in the service of the Village of Massena, whether or not compensated, or a volunteer
expressly authorized to participate in a municipally sponsored volunteer program, but
shall not include an independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 25-3. Provisions for defense by Village.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 25-5 of this chapter, the
Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or
proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or omission
which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the employee
was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties or which is brought
to enforce a provision of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983. This duty to provide for a
defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on
behalf of the Village of Massena.
B. Subsequent to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the employee
shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney; provided, however, that
the employee shall be entitled to representation by private counsel of his choice in
any civil judicial proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based
§ 19-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 25-3
25:1
§ 25-4. Indemnification.
upon his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate or whenever a court
of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding,
determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to
be represented by private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney shall notify
the employee, in writing, of such determination that the employee is entitled to be
represented by private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require,
as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that
appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same counsel. If the
employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by private counsel
under the provisions of this section, the Village Attorney shall so certify to the
Village Board. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by
the Village to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the
civil action or proceeding subject to certification that the employee is entitled to
representation under the terms and conditions of this section by the head of the
department, commission, division, office or agency in which such employee is
employed and upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute
with respect to representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the
amount of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be
resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the Village
Attorney as required by § 25-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall take the necessary
steps, including the retention of private counsel under the terms and conditions
provided in Subsection B of this section, on behalf of the employee to avoid entry
of a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of any
judgment obtained against such employees in any state or federal court or in the
amount of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act or omission from which
such judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting within
the scope of his public employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save
harmless prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage
resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee.
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be submitted to the
Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification
by the Village and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor
shall certify such settlement and submit such settlement and certification to the
Village Attorney. The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form
and amount and shall give his approval if, in his judgment, the settlement is in the
best interest of the Village. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize
the Village to indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement
not so reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the settlement of the
claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement,
personally or by certified or registered mail within 30 days of the date of entry or
§ 25-3 MASSENA CODE § 25-4
25:2
§ 25-5. Conditions.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter shall be
conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant, at this office, by the
employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand
or pleading within five days after he is served with such document and upon the full
cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense
of any action or proceeding against the state based upon the same act or omission and in
the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee
that the Village provide for his defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 25-6. Extension of benefits to certain employees restricted.
The benefits of this chapter shall be extended to an employee of a negotiating unit for
which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to the Civil Service Law, Article 14,
only if such agreement expressly so provides.
§ 25-7. Limitation of applicability.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees, as defined herein, and
shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any provision
of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision of the Workers'
Compensation Law.
§ 25-8. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the
rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
§ 25-9. Effect on pending proceedings.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon
the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 25-10. Construal of provisions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict
any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the
Village or any right to defense and/or indemnification provided for any governmental
officer or employee by, in accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state
or federal statutory or common law.
settlement, upon the Mayor; and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, such judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor.
If the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement shall be
paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
§ 25-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 25-10
25:3

Chapter 31
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 25-10 ETHICS, CODE OF § 25-10
31:1

ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 31-1. Legislative intent.
The Village Board of the Village of Massena recognizes that there are state statutory
provisions relating to the establishing of rules and standards of ethical conduct for public
officers and employees, which, if observed, can enhance public confidence in local
government. In the light of a tendency today on the part of some people to downgrade
our local governments and to discredit our public servants and our free institutions
generally, it appears necessary that every effort be made to assure the highest caliber
of public administration of this Village as part of our state's important system of local
government. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement this objective through the
establishment of standards of conduct, to provide for punishment of violation of such
standards and to create a Board of Ethics to render advisory opinions to the Village
officers and employees as provided herein.
§ 31-2. Applicability of other laws.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established herein are in addition to any
prohibited acts, conflicts of interest provisions or procedures prescribed by statute of
the State of New York and also in addition to common law rules and judicial decisions
relating to the conduct of Village officers to the extent the same are more severe in their
application than this chapter.
§ 31-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-2
31:3

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 31-3. Definitions and word use.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGENCY — Any Village department or division, board, commission, committee
or bureau, including the Village Board or any successor to the Village Board.
BOARD — The governing board of a municipality and any municipal
administrative board (e.g., Planning Board, Zoning of Board of Appeals),
commission, or other agency or body comprised of two or more municipal officers
or employees.
CODE — This code of ethics.
COMPENSATION—Any money, thing of value or financial benefit conferred for
services rendered or to be rendered.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a
municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the municipality
which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this chapter, a municipal
officer or employee shall be deemed to have an "interest" in the contract of:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Massena, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be
deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer
fireman of civil defense volunteer, except a Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief.
RELATIVE—A spouse, parent, step-parent, sibling, step-sibling, sibling's spouse,
child, step-child, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, or household member of
a municipal officer or employee, and individuals having any of these relationships
to the spouse of the officer or employee.
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of employment
with the municipality which such officer or employee serves.
(1)
A firm, partnership, association, corporation, or limited liability company of
which such officer or employee is a member, manager, employee, owner,
shareholder, or partner.
(2)
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or
employee.
(3)
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly
by such officer or employee.
(4)
B. Usage. The masculine gender as used herein shall include the feminine where
appropriate.
§ 31-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-3
31:5

ARTICLE III
Rules and Standards
§ 31-4. Interests in conflict with proper discharge of duties.
§ 31-5. Other employment or business transactions impairing independence of
judgment.
A. No officer or employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, or engage or
invest in any business or transaction or professional activity, or incur any obligation
of any nature, which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the
public interest. To this end, no officer or employee shall:
(1) Be or become interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in any
business or professional dealings with the Village of Massena or any agency
thereof.
(2) Act as attorney, agent, broker, employee or representative in business or
professional dealings with the Village of Massena or any agency thereof for
himself or any person, firm or corporation, directly or indirectly.
B. This section does not prohibit a municipal officer or employee from acquiring any
other investments not in conflict with this section, including, but not limited, to the
following assets:
(1) Real property located within the municipality;
(2) Stock of a publicly traded corporation; or
(3) Bonds or notes issued by the municipality and acquired more than one year
after the date on which the bonds or notes were originally issued.
A. No officer or employee shall accept other employment or engage in any business
transaction which will impair his independence or judgment in the exercise of his
official duties or create a conflict of interest with his official duties.
B. No municipal officer or employee, during his or her tenure as a municipal officer or
employee, may engage in any private employment, including the rendition of any
business, commercial, professional or other types of services, when the
employment:
(1) Can be reasonably expected to require more than sporadic recusal and
abstention pursuant to Article VI of this Code;
(2) Can be reasonably expected to require disclosure or use of confidential
information gained by reason of serving as a municipal officer or employee;
(3) Violates § 805-a(1)(c) or (d) of the General Municipal Law; or
(4) Requires representation of a person or organization other than the municipality
in connection with litigation, negotiations or any other matter to which the
municipality is a party.
§ 31-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-6
31:7
§ 31-6. Improper use of official position.
No municipal officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her municipal
position or official powers and duties to secure a financial or material benefit for himself
or herself, a relative, or any private organization in which he or she is deemed to have an
interest.
§ 31-7. Conduct giving impression that improper influence can be exercised.
No officer or employee shall by his conduct give a reasonable basis for the impression
that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the
performance of his official duties, or that he is affected by the kinship, rank, position or
influence of any party or person.
§ 31-8. Compensation for service involving Village agency.
No officer or employee shall receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any case, proceeding, application
or any other matter before any Village agency.
§ 31-9. Use of Village-owned equipment or property.
§ 31-10. Contracts.
§ 31-11. Nepotism.
Except as otherwise required by law:
A. Municipal resources shall be used for lawful municipal purposes only. Municipal
resources include, but are not limited to, municipal personnel, and the
municipality's money, vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies or other property.
B. No municipal officer or employee may use or permit the use of municipal resources
for personal or private purposes, except as follows:
(1) Any use of municipal resources specifically authorized by law or municipal
policy;
(2) The use of municipal resources for personal or private purposes when provided
to a municipal officer or employee as part of his or her compensation; or
(3) The occasional and incidental use during the business day of municipal
telephones and computers for necessary personal matters.
A. No municipal officer or employee may have an interest in a contract that is
prohibited by § 801 of the General Municipal Law.
B. Every municipal officer and employee shall disclose interests in contracts with the
municipality at the time and in the manner required by § 803 of the General
Municipal Law.
A. No municipal officer or employee, either individually or in an official capacity, may
participate in any interview or decision to appoint, hire, promote, discipline or
§ 31-6 MASSENA CODE § 31-11
31:8
§ 31-12. Political solicitations.
§ 31-13. Confidential information.
No municipal officer or employee who acquires confidential information in the course
of exercising or performing his or her official powers or duties may disclose or use
such information unless the disclosure or use is required by law, or is in the course of
exercising or performing his or her official powers and duties.
§ 31-14. Exceptions.
discharge a relative for or from any position at, for, or within the municipality or a
municipal board.
B. No municipal officer or employee may directly supervise a relative in the
performance of the relative's official powers or duties.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall directly or indirectly compel or induce a
subordinate municipal officer or employee to make, or promise to make, any
political contribution, whether by gift of money, service or other thing of value.
B. No municipal officer or employee may act or decline to act in relation to appointing,
hiring, promoting, discharging, disciplining, or in any manner changing the official
rank, status or compensation of any municipal officer or employee, or an applicant
for a position as a municipal officer or employee, on the basis of the giving,
withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money, service or any other
thing of value for any political purpose.
A. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this article, any person serving the
Village or any agency thereof without compensation shall not be deemed to be in
violation of this article unless such interest is in conflict with the proper discharge
of his official duties.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agency, registration agent or other investment in
the funds of the Village in which the municipal officer or employee has an interest
by reason of stock holdings when less than 5% of the outstanding stock of the
corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or
employee, except when the chief fiscal officer or his deputy or employees have an
interest in such bank or trust company.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the designation of a newspaper,
including, but not limited to, an official newspaper, for the publication of any
notice, resolution, ordinance or other proceeding, where such publication is
required or authorized by law.
D. No conflict shall be deemed to arise under this chapter by virtue of stock ownership
where such ownership constitutes less than 5% of the outstanding stock of the
corporation involved.
E. Where a member of a body, serving without pay, appointed by the Village Board,
enters into a contract with the Village for the performance of services or sale of
§ 31-11 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-14
31:9
goods or equipment, which contract does not appertain to or involve dealings with
the body upon which said member is serving, the Ethics Board may find that said
contract creates only a technical conflict and may advise that such a conflict is
not a violation of the Code of Ethics. Before the appointment of a member to a
body, the Board of Ethics shall have the duty to give an opinion on the facts to
be submitted by the appointing officer with respect to possible conflicts and shall
have the discretionary power to hold that a technical conflict of interest does not
disqualify a particular person from serving.
F. This Code shall not be construed as prohibiting a municipal officer or employee
from:
(1) Representing himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children before
the municipality; or
(2) Asserting a claim against the municipality on his or her own behalf, or on
behalf of his or her spouse or minor children.
§ 31-14 MASSENA CODE § 31-14
31:10
ARTICLE IV
Compliance
§ 31-15. Compliance required; distribution of copies of Code.
Compliance with this Code of Ethics shall be deemed a condition of employment for
all officers and employees, and every officer and employee shall, subsequent to the date
of enactment of this Code, be given a copy of this Code, together with all amendments
thereto, and a receipt for the same shall be signed by such employee or officer. Such
receipt shall be filed with the Village Clerk who shall supply the necessary forms.
Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer or employee to receive such
copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such Code, nor the enforcement
provisions thereof.
§ 31-15 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-15
31:11

ARTICLE V
Gifts and Favors
§ 31-16. Gifts from persons interested in dealings with the Village.
A. No municipal officer or employee may directly or indirectly solicit any gift.
B. No municipal officer or employee may accept or receive any gift having a value of
$35 or more, when:
(1) The gift reasonably appears to be intended to influence the officer or employee
in the exercise or performance of his or her official powers or duties;
(2) The gift could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or employee in
the exercise or performance of his or her official powers or duties; or
(3) The gift is intended as a reward for any past, present, or future official action
on the part of the officer or employee.
C. For purposes of this section, a "gift" includes anything of value, whether in the form
of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing, or promise, or in
any other form. The value of a gift is the gift's fair market value, determined by the
retail cost of the item or a comparable item. The fair market value of a ticket
entitling the holder to food, refreshments, entertainment, or any other benefit is the
face value of the ticket, or the actual cost to the donor, whichever is greater.
D. Gifts to influence and reward.
(1) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended to
influence the exercise or performance of his or her official powers or duties
when the gift is from a private person or organization that seeks municipal
action involving the exercise of discretion by or with the participation of the
officer or employee.
(2) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended as a
reward for official action when the gift is from a private person or organization
that has obtained municipal action involving the exercise of discretion by or
with the participation of the officer or employee during the preceding twelve
months.
E. This section does not prohibit any other gift, including:
(1) Gifts made to the municipality;
(2) Gifts from a person with a family or personal relationship with the officer or
employee when the circumstances make it clear that the personal relationship,
rather than the recipient's status as a municipal officer or employee, is the
primary motivating factor for the gift;
(3) Gifts given on special occasions, such as marriage, illness, or retirement,
which are modest, reasonable and customary;
(4) Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of little intrinsic value, such
as pens, pencils, note pads, and calendars;
§ 31-16 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-16
31:13
(5) Awards and plaques having a value of $75 or less which are publicly presented
in recognition of service as a municipal officer or employee, or other service
to the community; or
(6) Meals and refreshments provided when a municipal officer or employee is a
speaker or participant at a job-related professional or educational conference
or program and the meals and refreshments are made available to all
participants.
§ 31-16 MASSENA CODE § 31-16
31:14
ARTICLE VI
Disclosure of Interest
§ 31-17. Disclosure of interest by officer or employee participating in discussion
before board, agency, etc.
Any officer or employee of the Village of Massena, whether paid or unpaid, who has,
will have or intends to acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any matter being
considered by the Village Board or by any other official board, agency, officer or
employee of the Village of Massena, and who participates in discussion before or
gives opinions or advice to any board, agency or individual considering the same, shall
publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 31-18. Disclosure of interest by officer or employee having knowledge of matter
being considered by board, agency, etc.
A. Any officer or employee of the Village of Massena, whether paid or unpaid, who
has knowledge of any matter being considered by any board, agency, officer or
employee of the Village of Massena in which he has or will have or intends to
acquire any direct or indirect interest, shall be required to disclose, in writing, his
interest to such board, agency, officer or employee and the nature and extent
thereof.
B. In the case of a person serving in an elective office, the disclosure shall be filed
with the governing board of the municipality. In all other cases, the disclosure shall
be filed with the person's supervisor or, if the person does not have a supervisor, the
disclosure shall be filed with the municipal officer, employee or board having the
power to appoint to the person's position. In addition, in the case of a person serving
on a municipal board, a copy of the disclosure shall be filed with the board. Any
disclosure made to a board shall be made publicly at a meeting of the board and
must be included in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 31-17 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-18
31:15

ARTICLE VII
Disclosure of Confidential Information
§ 31-19. Disclosure restricted.
No officer or employee of the Village of Massena, whether paid or unpaid, shall disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the Village or
any other confidential information of an official character except when required by law,
nor shall be use such information to advance the financial or other private interests of
himself or others.
§ 31-19 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-19
31:17

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 31-20. Forfeiture of pay: suspension or removal from office.
A violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall constitute cause for forfeiture of
pay, suspension or removal from office or employment in the manner provided by law.
§ 31-21. Avoidance of contracts.
Any contract knowingly entered into by or with the Village of Massena or any agency
thereof in which there is an interest prohibited by this chapter shall be null, void and
wholly unenforceable.
§ 31-22. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any of the foregoing penalties, any officer or employee who willfully and
knowingly violates the foregoing provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
punishable for a term of imprisonment not in excess of 15 days and/or a fine not in
excess of $250.
§ 31-23. Other laws may apply.
Nothing contained in this article shall limit any other applicable laws or ordinances
which are now or may hereafter be provided.
§ 31-24. Actions not constituting violations.
No action, expressly or impliedly, permitted under Article 18 of the General Municipal
Law, shall constitute a violation of this Code.
§ 31-20 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-24
31:19

ARTICLE IX
Amendment
§ 31-25. Amendment of Code.
This Code may be amended from time to time by the Village Board or its successor
legislative body by the adoption of further rules and standards designed to improve the
administration of the Village and protect the public, or by supplementing the coverage
of this Code, to the extent permitted by law.
§ 31-25 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-25
31:21

ARTICLE X
Board of Ethics
§ 31-26. Creation of Board; conditions of membership.
There is hereby created and established a Board of Ethics consisting of five members
to be appointed by the Mayor or his successor to that office, by whatever name it is
known, to wit, the chief administrative officer of the Village, subject to the confirmation
of the Village legislative body. The members shall include at least one member who
is a municipal officer or employee of the Village of Massena, with the majority of the
members being non-Village officers or employees. The Village Attorney shall be an exofficio
member of the Board of Ethics without the power to vote. The members of such
Board shall receive no salary or compensation for their services as members of such
Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Board of the Village of Massena.
§ 31-27. Disqualifications for membership.
No persons may be appointed as members of such Board who shall be:
§ 31-28. Election of Chairman and Secretary.
The members of said Board of Ethics shall elect from their group a Chairman and
Secretary.
§ 31-29. Promulgation of rules and regulations: records; expenses.
Such Board, upon its formation, shall promulgate its own rules and regulations as to its
forms and procedures and maintain appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings,
for which expenses it shall be reimbursed as a Village charge, and an adequate
appropriation for its operation shall be budgeted by the Mayor or his successor in office.
§ 31-30. Advisory opinions and recommendations.
The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to Village officers and employees
with respect to this Code of Ethics. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to
the written request of any Village officer or employee under such rules and regulations
as the Board of Ethics may deem advisable, and said advisory opinion shall have
the approval of the Village Attorney. In addition, the Board of Ethics may make
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a Code of Ethics or
amendments thereto upon the request of the Village Board.
A. Political committeemen or officials of any political club in the Village.
B. Persons closely related by family or business to any Village officer or employee.
C. Persons having business dealing with the Village or any Village agency, directly or
indirectly, either personally or through some firm, association or corporation in
which such person has any business interest or in which such person has an official
capacity.
§ 31-26 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-31
31:23
§ 31-31. Cooperation of Village agencies.
All agencies of the Village shall furnish to such Board, in connection with its
investigations, such data, information and statements as may in the opinion of the Board
be necessary for the proper exercise of its functions, powers and duties.
§ 31-32. Confidential matters; matters of record.
All requests for advisory opinions or interpretations, and all complaints and
investigations shall be deemed confidential. All findings, recommendations, advisory
opinions, interpretations and proposed revisions to this code shall be matters of public
record.
§ 31-31 MASSENA CODE § 31-32
31:24
Chapter 39
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
§ 39-1. Maximum yearly contribution.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena may appropriate funds to make yearly
contributions in a reasonable amount not to exceed $75,000 to the Massena Industrial
Development Corporation. Said amount may be adjusted from time to time without the
need to amend this chapter so long as the amount does not exceed the amount aforesaid.
§ 31-32 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION § 39-1
39:1

Chapter 43
JOINT RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 43-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena, New York, has for the past several
years equipped, operated and maintained playgrounds, ice rinks, baseball diamonds
and other recreation centers for the use and enjoyment of its citizens. The growth and
development of said recreation program is such that it now requires the attention of a
commission to supervise, plan and expand its program.
§ 43-2. Establishment; powers and responsibilities.
The Town of Massena Town Board has, by written agreement with the Village of
Massena, covenanted to establish a Joint Recreation Commission pursuant to § 244-d
of the General Municipal Law and a Joint Recreation Commission shall be established,
which shall possess all the powers and be subject to all the responsibilities of local
authorities under Article 13 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 43-3. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year for the Joint Recreation Commission shall commence June 1 and
terminate on May 31 of each year hereafter, to continue so long as the joint agreement
shall remain in effect.
§ 43-4. Contributions to budget. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
In February of each year, the Joint Recreation Commission shall present a budget for
consideration. Upon approval of the budget, the contributions by the Village of Massena
shall be prorated based on current assessment rolls or by a similar method approved the
the Village Board.
§ 39-1 JOINT RECREATION COMMISSION § 43-4
43:1

Chapter 49
NARCOTIC GUIDANCE COUNCIL
§ 49-1. Legislative purpose.
It is hereby declared the purpose of the Village of Massena, State of New York, to
create and provide for the appointment of a Village Narcotic Guidance Council for the
development of a program of community participation in the control and use of narcotics
at the local level for the accomplishment of the following purposes:
§ 49-2. Appointment of Council. [Amended 10-5-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971]
The Council shall be known as the Village of Massena Narcotic Guidance Council and
shall be composed of seven members, who shall be appointed by the Village Board of
the Village of Massena for a term not exceeding three years, and shall include at least
one clergyman, one attorney and one physician.
§ 49-3. Operation of Council.
The presiding officer or Chairman of the Council shall be designated by the Village
Board from among the members so appointed to the Council. The Village Board shall
have authority to remove any member of said Council so appointed for cause, after a
public hearing, if requested. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 49-4. Compensation expenses.
The members of the Village of Massena Narcotic Guidance Council shall serve without
compensation. The Village Board, however, may appropriate in the annual budget of the
Village a sum of money for the purpose of providing to the Narcotic Guidance Council
funds to defray the costs and expenses incurred by it in the performance of its duties set
forth hereafter, such appropriation to be a charge upon the taxable property of that part
of the Village of Massena inside the incorporated Village.
§ 49-5. General duties.
It shall be the duty of the Narcotic Guidance Council to accomplish the following:
A. Educating the community and especially its youth in the field of drug use.
B. Creating a climate which will encourage those in need of assistance to combat
narcotic problems and, without embarrassment, seek such assistance from
authorized and knowledgeable persons and agencies.
C. Send forth from authorized agencies persons into the community who can
disseminate necessary information on the subject matter.
D. Cooperate with other narcotic guidance councils and the Massena Police
Department Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) Program for a total
alleviation of the vexatious problem. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 43-4 NARCOTIC GUIDANCE COUNCIL § 49-5
49:1
A. Make immediately available to the community basic knowledge acquired in the
field of drug use, especially by youth.
B. Create a climate in which persons seeking assistance in coping with narcotics
problems can meet, without embarrassment, with responsible individuals or
agencies in a position to render assistance.
C. Authorize persons approved by the Council to contact and counsel persons within
the community suspected of using narcotics or those persons allegedly having
knowledge of such usage.
D. Cooperate with other narcotic guidance councils and the Massena Police
Department Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) Program for a total
alleviation of the vexatious problem. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 49-5 MASSENA CODE § 49-5
49:2
Chapter 53
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Continuity of government — See Ch. 15.
Convention, conference and school attendance — See Ch.
19.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 25.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 31.
§ 49-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 49-5
53:1

ARTICLE I
Grievance Procedures
[Adopted 9-22 1969 as Part II of the Appendix of the 1969 Code]
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DAYS — All days other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in computing the number of days within
which action must be taken or notice given within the terms of this article.
DEPARTMENT — Any office, department, board, commission or other agency of the
government of the Incorporated Village of Massena, New York.
EMPLOYEE — Any person directly employed and compensated by the Incorporated
Village of Massena, New York, except persons employed in the legislative or judicial
branch thereof.
GRIEVANCE — Any claimed violation, misinterpretation or inequitable application
of the existing laws, rules, procedures, regulations, administrative orders or work rules
of the Incorporated Village of Massena, New York, or a department thereof, which
relate to or involve employee health or safety, physical facilities, materials or equipment
furnished to employees, or supervision of employees; provided, however, that such term
shall not include any matter involving an employee's rate of compensation, retirement
benefits, disciplinary proceedings or any other matter which is otherwise reviewable
pursuant to law or any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law.
IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR — The employee or officer on the next higher level of
authority above the employee in the department wherein the grievance exists and who
normally assigns and supervises the employee's work and approves his time record or
evaluates his work performance.
§ 53-2. Declaration of basic principle.
Every employee of this Village shall have the right to present his grievance in
accordance with the procedures provided herein, free from interference, coercion,
restraint, discrimination or reprisal, and shall have the right to be represented by a person
of his own choosing at all stages of the grievance procedure.
§ 53-3. Initial presentation.
A. An employee who claims to have a grievance shall present his grievance to his
immediate supervisor, orally, within two days after the grievance occurs.
B. The immediate supervisor shall discuss the grievance with the employee, shall
make such investigation as he deems appropriate and shall consult with his
superiors to such extent as he deems appropriate, all on an informal basis.
C. Within three days after presentation of the grievance to him, the immediate
supervisor shall make his decision and communicate the same to the employee
presenting the grievance, and to the employee's representative, if any.
§ 53-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 53-4
53:3
§ 53-4. Second stage.
§ 53-5. Grievance Board.
§ 53-6. Appeals to Grievance Board.
A. If an employee presenting a grievance be not satisfied with the decision made by
his immediate supervisor, he may, within five days thereafter, request a review and
determination of his grievance by the department head. Such request shall be in
writing and shall contain a statement of the specific nature of the grievance and the
facts relating to it. Such request shall be served upon both the department head and
the immediate supervisor to whom the grievance was originally presented.
Thereupon, and within two days after receiving such request, the immediate
supervisor shall submit to the department head a written statement of his
information concerning the specific nature of the grievance and the facts relating to
it.
B. The department head, or his nominee, may, and at the request of the employee, shall
hold a hearing within five days after receiving the written request and statement
from the employee. The employee and his representative, if any, may appear at the
hearing and present oral statement or arguments.
C. Within five days after the close of the hearing, or within eight days after the
grievance has been submitted to him if there be no hearing, the department head, or
his nominee, shall make his decision and communicate the same to the employee
presenting the grievance, and to the employee's representative, if any.
A. A Grievance Board of three members is hereby established to hear appeals from
decisions of the department heads on grievances.
B. The members of this Board shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve at
the pleasure of the Board of Trustees.
C. A hearing of any matter before the Grievance Board may be conducted by any one
or more members of the Board, designated by the Board to act on its behalf;
provided, however, that if less than the full Board presides at such a hearing, the
member or members thereof conducting such hearing shall render a report thereon
to the full Board and the full Board shall thereupon make its report.
D. Two concurring votes shall be necessary to determine any official report or action
of the Grievance Board.
E. Necessary funds, supplies, facilities and personnel to implement the operation of
the Grievance Board shall be provided by the Board of Trustees.
F. The Grievance Board may make and amend the rules and regulations for the
conduct of its proceedings not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A
complete and up-to-date set of such rules and amendments shall be kept on file in
the Village Clerk's office.
A. An employee may appeal from the decision of the department head, or nominee of
the department head, within 15 days after notice of such decision. The appeal shall
§ 53-4 MASSENA CODE § 53-6
53:4
be taken by submitting to the Grievance Board a written statement signed by the
employee taking the appeal, containing:
(1) The name, residence address and department of employment of the employee
presenting the grievance.
(2) The name, residence address and department of employment of each other
employee or official involved in the grievance.
(3) The name and address of the employee's representative, if any, and his
department of employment if he be a fellow employee.
(4) A concise statement of the nature of the grievance, the facts relating to it, and
the proceedings and decisions on the grievance up to the time of the appeal.
(5) A request for a review of the decision of the department head or his nominee.
B. The Grievance Board may request the department head to submit a written
statement of facts, including a summary of the record of the hearing, if there was a
hearing, and the original or a true copy of any other record or document used by the
department head or his nominee in making his decision. Such written statement
shall be submitted within three days after request by the Grievance Board.
C. The Grievance Board shall hold a hearing within 10 days after receiving the written
request for review. It shall give at least three days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing to the employee, the employee's representative, if any, and the
department head or his nominee, all of whom shall be entitled to be present at the
hearing.
D. The hearing on the appeal may be held in public or in private as determined by the
Grievance Board.
E. New evidence, testimony or argument, as well as any documents, exhibits or other
information submitted to the department head or his nominee at the hearing held by
him may be introduced at the hearing by the employee, by the department head, or
his nominee, or upon the request of the Grievance Board.
F. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the Grievance Board if in its
judgment such adjournment is necessary in order to obtain material evidence. The
total of all such adjournments, however, shall not exceed 10 days, except that
adjournments consented to by both the employee and the department head shall not
be counted in determining the total days of adjournments as herein limited.
G. The Grievance Board shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence.
H. A written summary shall be kept of each hearing held by the Grievance Board.
I. The Grievance Board shall make its report in writing within five days after the close
of the hearing. It shall immediately file its report and the written summary of the
proceedings with the Village Clerk and shall at the same time send a copy of its
report to the employee, the employee's representative, if any, the department head,
the Board of Trustees and the local Civil Service Commission, if appropriate. The
report shall include a statement of the Board's finding of fact, conclusions and
§ 53-6 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 53-6
53:5
§ 53-7. Amendments.
This article may be amended at any time in accordance with the general procedures and
requirements in effect at such time for the amendment of a resolution.
§ 53-8. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on the third day of September, 1963.2
advisory recommendations.
J. The report of the Grievance Board shall be final.
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Sick-Leave Regulations, adopted 9-22-1969 as Part III of the Appendix of the 1969 Code,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 53-6 MASSENA CODE § 53-8
53:6
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)3
§ 53-9. through § 53-15. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Residency Requirements, adopted 1-17-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978, as amended, was
repealed 4-19-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011.
§ 53-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 53-9
53:7

ARTICLE III
Elections
[Adopted 3-19-1986 by L.L. No. 9-1986]
§ 53-16. Mayor and Trustees; terms of office.
Four-year terms and biennial elections on the even-numbered years for Mayor and
Trustees are hereby established as approved by the voters of the Village of Massena,
New York, at the March 18, 1986, election.
§ 53-16 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 53-16
53:9

ARTICLE IV
Appointments
[Adopted 1-15-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 53-17. Massena Housing Authority Board of Commissioners.
It shall be the responsibility of the Mayor to appoint the members, excluding tenantelected
members, of the Massena Housing Authority Board of Commissioners, subject
to the approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 53-17 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 53-17
53:11

Chapter 59
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 59-1. Preparation of Master Plan. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The Massena Village Planning Commission shall prepare and may present for approval
by the Village Board a comprehensive Master Plan for the development of the entire
area of the Village, which Master Plan shall show existing and proposed streets, bridges
and tunnels, and the approaches thereto, viaducts, parks, public reservations, roadways
in parks, sites for public buildings and structures, zoning districts, pierhead and bulkhead
lines, waterways and routes of public utilities and such other features, existing and
proposed, as will provide for the protection and improvement of the Village and its
future growth and development, and will afford adequate facilities for the public
housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, public health, safety and
general welfare of its population. The Master Plan, and all modifications thereof, shall
be on file in the office of the Planning Commission and in the offices of the Village
Engineer and Village Clerk.
§ 59-2. Public hearings.
Said Planning Commission may advertise and hold public hearings when it desires,
notice of which hearings shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village and by posting a notice of said hearing in at least three
prominent places at least five days before each such hearing.
§ 59-3. Approval of Planning Commission.
A. No plan, plot or description showing the layout of any highway or street upon
private property, or of building lots in connection with, or in relation to, such
highways or streets within the limits of this municipality shall be received for
record in the office of the Clerk of this county until two copies thereof shall have
been filed with the said Planning Commission and it has certified its approval
thereof. Before such approval shall be given, formal offers of cession of all streets,
highways and parks, not marked by notation on the plat as being retained under
private ownership, shall be filed with the Commission, and public hearings shall be
held by the Planning Commission advertised as directed in § 59-2. The Planning
Commission may, thereupon, approve, modify and approve, or disapprove such
plat.
B. The approval required by this section, or the refusal to approve, shall take place
within 45 days from and after the time of submission of the plat to the Commission
for approval; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and the
certificate of the Village as to the date of submission of the plat for approval and
the failure of the Commission to take action within such time shall be issued by the
Village Clerk on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement
or other evidence of approval herein required.
C. The Planning Commission shall, within five days after its receipt of copies of the
proposed plot, plan or description, file one copy with the Village Clerk upon which
§ 53-17 PLANNING COMMISSION § 59-3
59:1
shall be endorsed the date of its receipt by the Planning Commission.
D. Within five days after the approval or disapproval of any plot, plan or description
by the Planning Commission, notice of such action shall be given to the Village
Clerk by said Planning Commission. The grounds of refusal shall be stated in the
records of the Commission.
E. The approval by the Planning Commission or the certificate of the Village as to the
date of submission of the plat and the failure of the Planning Commission to take
action thereon within 45 days shall expire 62 days from the date of such approval
or of such certificate, unless within such sixty-two-day period such plat shall have
been duly filed or recorded by the owner in the office of the County Clerk.
[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
F. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and charged with the duty of filing in the
office of the County Clerk a certificate showing that said Planning Commission has
been so authorized and that the Village Clerk shall issue the aforementioned
certificate of failure to take action as aforesaid.
G. Before the approval by the Planning Commission of a plat, such plat shall show in
proper cases, and when required by the Planning Commission, a park or parks
suitably located for playground or other recreational purposes. In approving such
plats, the Commission shall require that the streets and highways shall be of
sufficient width and suitable grade and shall be suitably located to accommodate
the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and air, to facilitate fire protection,
and to provide access of fire-fighting equipment to buildings and to be coordinated
so as to compose a convenient system conforming to the Master Plan; that the land
shown on such plats shall be of such a character that it can be used safely for
building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace;
that suitable monuments shall be placed at such block corners and other necessary
points as may be required by the Commission and the location thereof is shown on
the map of such plat; that the parks shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood
playgrounds or other recreational uses; that all streets or other public places shown
on such plats shall be suitably graded and paved and that sidewalks, streetlighting
standards, curbs, gutters, street trees, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains
or combined sewers shall be installed in accordance with standards, specifications
and procedure acceptable to the Board of Trustees or the appropriate municipal
departments, or that, alternatively, a performance bond, sufficient in amount to
cover the full cost of the same as estimated by the Planning Commission or other
appropriate municipal department designated by the Planning Commission, shall be
furnished to the municipality by the owner; provided, however, that the Planning
Commission may waive, subject to appropriate conditions and guarantees for such
period as it may determine, the provisions of any, or all, such improvements as, in
its judgment, of the special circumstances of a particular plat or plats are not
requisite in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare.
H. Such performance bond shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved
by the Board of Trustees, or by the owner with security acceptable to the Board of
Trustees, and shall also be approved by the Board of Trustees as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution. Such performance bond shall run for a term
to be fixed by the Planning Commission but, in no case, for a longer term that three
§ 59-3 MASSENA CODE § 59-3
59:2
§ 59-4. Zoning regulations.
The Planning Commission is authorized and empowered, simultaneously with approval
of such plat mentioned in § 59-3, to confirm the zoning regulations of the land so platted
as shown on the Official Zoning Maps of the Village, or to make such reasonable change
therein as may be necessary or proper to improve or protect the interests of the Village
in its public health, safety and general welfare.
years; provided, however, that the term of the performance bond may be extended
by the Planning Commission with the consent of the parties thereto. If the Planning
Commission shall decide at any time during the term of the performance bond
that the extent of building development that has taken place in the subdivision
is not sufficient to warrant all the improvements covered by such performance
bond, or that required improvements have been installed as provided in this section
and by the Planning Commission in sufficient amount to warrant reduction in
the face amount of such bond, the Planning Commission, after due notice and
public hearing, may modify its requirements for any or all such improvements
and the face value of such performance bond shall thereupon be reduced by an
appropriate amount so that the new face value will cover the cost in full of the
amended list of improvements required by the Planning Commission and any
security deposited with the bond may be reduced proportionately. In the event
that any required improvements have not been installed with the term of the
performance bond, the Board of Trustees may thereupon declare the performance
bond in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder and, upon receipt
of the proceeds thereof, the Village shall install such improvements as are covered
by such performance bond and commensurate with the building development that
has taken place in the subdivision but not exceeding in cost the amount of such
proceeds.
I. In making such determination regarding streets, highways, parks and required
improvements, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration the
prospective character of the development, whether dense residence, open residence,
business or industrial.
J. Insofar as provisions of the law, other than those in this chapter, require approval
of a plat, map or plan of land as a prerequisite of its record, or to allow it to be
recorded, said provisions shall not be in force insofar as they apply to plats, maps
and plans of land within the limits of this municipality.
§ 59-3 PLANNING COMMISSION § 59-4
59:3

Chapter 63
POLICE RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 63-1. Police district.
The authority of the Police Department of the Village of Massena, New York, extends
over the territory embraced within the boundaries of said Village as they now exist or
may be hereafter established by law.
§ 63-2. Administration and control.
§ 63-3. Qualifications for appointment to Police Force.
§ 63-4. Rules and regulations.
§ 63-5. Duties.
The duties of the members of the Department shall be determined by the Chief of Police
and will be contained in the Policy Manual.
A. The Chief of Police is the Chief Executive Officer of the Police Force, and is
subject to the orders of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. He has general
supervision over the entire Police Force: he is held responsible for the enforcement
of these rules, for the preservation of order and the enforcement of law and the
ordinances of the Village of Massena. He shall make and file monthly with the
Board of Trustees a written report concerning the operations of the Police Force.
The Chief of Police shall at all times be subject to the rules and regulations of the
Board of Trustees of the Village.
B. The Sergeants shall exercise supervision over the Patrolmen and perform such other
duties as from time to time may be assigned them by the Chief or Lieutenant.
A. Appointments to the Police Department shall be regulated by the New York State
Civil Service Commission and the St. Lawrence County rules for the Classified
Civil Service.
B. Upon completion of the probationary period, the Chief of Police shall submit to the
Village Board a report on the performance of the patrolman with recommendations
to approve or disapprove his application for permanent appointment.
A. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for implementing rules, regulations,
policies and procedures for the Police Department that shall govern the operations
of the Department and support the Department's mission.
B. A Policy Manual shall be formulated at the Chief's direction, and each member of
the Department shall be provided with a copy of it and provided any updates,
revisions, changes or additions made to it.
§ 59-4 POLICE RULES AND REGULATIONS § 63-5
63:1

Chapter 71
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 71-1. Establishment. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The Village Board of the Village of Massena is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic
Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic
violations in Chapter 280.
§ 71-2. Personnel and hours.
Said Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons and shall be open at such hours
as the Court may designate.
§ 71-3. Jurisdiction. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Said Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of traffic
regulations as prescribed in § 71-4 of this chapter.
§ 71-4. Procedure. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A person charged with an offense within the limitations herein stated is hereby permitted
to answer before the prescribed appearance date at the Traffic Violations Bureau either
in person or by written power of attorney in the form hereinafter prescribed, by paying
a prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in Court, pleading to the charge and
authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine
in Court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be
deemed complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt
which so states. If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as herein
before the prescribed appearance date, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be filed
against them and a criminal summons issued for their appearance before the Court.
§ 71-5. Form of written power of attorney. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
The written power of attorney shall be substantially in the form herein prescribed: Date
_______ I, the undersigned, for good and valuable consideration, hereby waive a hearing
in Court and plead guilty to the traffic violation as charged on the reverse side hereon,
and duly constitute the Clerk of the Traffic Violations Bureau, or ____________ my
Attorney, and authorize him to appear in Court, enter my plea and pay my fine which is
enclosed herewith.
§ 63-5 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 71-5
71:1
Motor Vehicle License No.
Name
Address
§ 71-6. Fines.
The Court shall designate the fines to be paid for offenses which may be satisfied at the
Bureau as hereinbefore stated, provided that such fines are within the limits established
as penalties for such offenses.
§ 71-7. Limitation.
Such Traffic Violations Bureau shall not be authorized to deprive a person of his right
to counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer
to, explain or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 71-5 MASSENA CODE § 71-7
71:2
Chapter 77
VOTER REGISTRATION
§ 77-1. Adoption of permanent personal registration.
The Village of Massena hereby adopts for the purpose of registration of the voters for
election in the Village of Massena the system of permanent personal registration as set
forth in Article 15 of the Election Law, as added by the Laws of 1954 and amended by
Chapter 319 of the Laws of 1965.
§ 77-2. First election; registration.
The first election to be held hereunder shall be the general election of the year 1966, and
registration shall be taken preceding such election in the manner provided by Article 15
of the Election Law.
§ 71-7 VOTER REGISTRATION § 77-2
77:1

Part II, General Legislation
§ 77-2 VOTER REGISTRATION § 77-2
77:3

Chapter 92
ANIMALS
§ 92-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace, health, public
welfare and good order in the Village of Massena and to contribute to the public welfare
and the preservation of the property and the person of the inhabitants of said Village by
declaring and enforcing certain regulations and restrictions in the activities of animals
and their owners within the Village of Massena.
§ 92-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person appointed by the Board of Trustees or
any member of the Massena Village Police Department or any authorized officer, agent
or employee of an incorporated humane society or similar incorporated dog protective
association under contract with a municipality to assist in the enforcement of this
chapter.
CONFINED — Any such animal is securely confined or restrained or kept on the
owner's premises, either within a building, kennel or other suitable enclosure or securely
fastened on a chain, wire or other effective tether of such length and so arranged that the
animal cannot reach or endanger any person on any adjacent premises or in any public
street, sidewalk, way or place; or, if the animal is being transported by the owner, that
it is securely confined in a crate or other container or so restrained in a vehicle that it
cannot be expected to escape therefrom.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any animal.
OWNER—Any person who harbors or keeps any animal. In the event that the "owner"
of any animal which is found to be in violation of this chapter is a minor, the owner shall
be deemed to be the parent or guardian of such person and shall be responsible for any
acts of said animal in violation of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other organized
group of persons, municipality, or other legal entity.
RUN AT LARGE — An animal shall be deemed to be "running at large" if it is
elsewhere than on the premises of the owner while not under the control of the owner
or his or her agent and without the knowledge, consent or approval of the owner of such
lands.
UNDER CONTROL — An animal shall be deemed to be "under control" when it is
under either voice command or a suitable restraining device designed for that purpose.
§ 92-3. Livestock prohibited at large.
No person shall possess, harbor or maintain, anywhere within the Village, any cattle,
goat, sheep or swine, nor shall any such livestock be permitted to run at large in any
street, public place or unenclosed private grounds.
§ 77-2 ANIMALS § 92-4
92:1
§ 92-4. Fowl prohibited at large.
No person shall possess, harbor or maintain, anywhere within the Village, any chicken,
duck, goose, turkey or other fowl, nor shall any such fowl be permitted to run at large in
any street, public place or unenclosed private grounds.
§ 92-5. Confinement to owner's premises.
No exotic pets will be allowed outside the premises of the owner of said wild animal,
bird or reptile.
§ 92-6. Dogs prohibited at large.
§ 92-7. Animals injured by motor vehicles.
Every person operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle in the Village who strikes and
injures a dog, cat or other domestic animal is required to stop and report the matter to the
owner or to the Village Police Department.
§ 92-8. Humane treatment of animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to torture or torment, deprive of
necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat or otherwise abuse or needlessly
mutilate or kill a dog, cat or other domestic animal. This section shall be enforced by
any member of the Police Department or the Animal Control Officer upon personal
knowledge or observation or upon the written complaint of any other person.
§ 92-9. Nuisances by cats.
No person, being the owner or harborer of any cat, shall allow such cat to commit
any nuisance within the Village of Massena or cause damage to the person or property
of others. The following are declared to be public nuisances and are set forth herein
for explanatory purposes only and are not to be considered as excluding other types
of nuisances, and the establishment of the fact that the owner or harborer of a cat has
allowed or permitted such cat to commit any of the acts hereinafter prohibited shall
be presumptive evidence against the owner or harborer of such cat that he or she has
failed to properly confine or control such cat: defecating, urinating, digging or otherwise
damaging public or private property other than the property of the owner or harborer.
§ 92-10. Nuisances by dogs.
No person, being the owner or harborer of any dog, shall allow such dog to commit
any nuisance within the Village of Massena or cause damage to the person or property
A. No dog shall be allowed to run at large within the Village of Massena.
B. No dog shall be allowed upon the public streets or upon any public property within
the Village of Massena unless it shall be accompanied by its owner or a responsible
person able to restrain and control such dog by command and unless such person
accompanying such dog shall actually control and restrain such dog by some
suitable device designed and used for that purpose.
§ 92-4 MASSENA CODE § 92-10
92:2
of others. The following are declared to be public nuisances and are set forth herein
for explanatory purposes only and are not to be considered as excluding other types of
nuisances, and the establishment of the fact that the owner or harborer of a dog has
allowed or permitted such dog to commit any of the acts hereinafter prohibited shall be
presumptive evidence against the owner or harborer of such dog that he or she has failed
to properly confine or control such dog:
§ 92-11. Dangerous dogs.
§ 92-12. Care of dogs.
A. Engaging in loud howling or persistent barking, crying or whining or so conducting
itself in such a manner as to unreasonably and persistently disturb the comfort or
repose of any person other than the owner or harborer of such dog.
B. Chasing and/or barking at motor vehicles while on a public street or highway or
upon public or private property other than property of the owner or harborer or such
dog.
C. Jumping upon, chasing or otherwise harassing any person in such a manner as to
reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
D. Defecating, urinating, digging or otherwise damaging public or private property
other than the property of the owner or harborer.
E. Any dog which shall attack another’s dog or cat on property other than the owner
of harborer. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
A. Any dog which shall attack any person or domestic animal, as such term is defined
in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, shall be
dealt with in accordance with Article 7 of said Agricultural and Markets Law.
[Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
B. A dog shall not be a "dangerous dog" within the meaning of this section if the owner
shall prove that any threat, injury or damage caused by such dog was sustained by
a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the
premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog, its owner and/or household members, or has in the past been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime. Nor shall a dog be a "dangerous dog"
if the dog was responding solely to pain or injury or was protecting itself while on
its owner's property.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of a dog or dogs to fail to provide
such dog or dogs with adequate food, water and shelter at all times.
B. Any person shall, at all times, keep the area wherein dogs are kept, possessed or
harbored in a neat, clean sanitary condition and in accordance with the regulations
of the Board of Health and public health laws of the State of New York, and such
area shall be open to inspection by the proper Village and health officials at all
reasonable times.
§ 92-10 ANIMALS § 92-13
92:3
§ 92-13. Complaint of violation; appearance ticket; seizure; fees.
§ 92-14. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who observes or has knowledge of a dog violating any provision of this
chapter may file or register a verbal complaint with the Animal Control Officer or
the Village of Massena Police Department specifying the alleged conduct of the
dog, the date thereof, the description of the dog and the name and address, if known,
of the owner or person harboring the dog.
B. Upon receipt by the Animal Control Officer of any such complaint or in the event
that any dog is found by the Animal Control Officer to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer shall, as soon as
circumstances permit, issue and deliver to the owner or the harborer of the dog an
appearance ticket pursuant to Article 7, § 114, of the Agricultural and Markets Law
and Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York. The
appearance tickets may require payment by mail of the designated fine or
appearance in Village Court and shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the
Justice of the Village Court. Upon receipt by the Village Justice of any complaint
against the conduct of any particular dog, the Village Justice may summon the
alleged owner or other person harboring said dog to appear in person before him;
and, if the summons is disregarded, the Village Justice may permit the filing of an
information and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
C. Upon receipt by the Animal Control Officer of any such complaint or in the event
that any dog is found by the Animal Control Officer to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer, in his discretion, shall seize
and take into custody such dog. The Animal Control Officer shall advise the owner
or harborer of the impounding of the dog, its location and the fact that it will be
destroyed unless redeemed within the period provided. Failure to give such notice
shall not be grounds to allege any cause of action against the municipality or
Animal Control Officer.
D. In the event that any dog has been seized or taken into custody by the Animal
Control Officer, its owner shall be required to pay:
(1) To the boarding facility designated by the Village, its standard fee otherwise
charged for holding and boarding of dogs for each day which said dog shall be
boarded by the boarding facility designated by the Village.
(2) To the Clerk, the impoundment fee as provided by § 118 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law.
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
§ 92-13 MASSENA CODE § 92-14
92:4
§ 92-15. Additional regulations.
The Board of Trustees may, by order or regulation, provide for the picking up of stray
animals, treatment and care of injured animals and disposal of animal carcasses. The
owner of the animal is responsible for all associated costs, including veterinary bills, and
shall reimburse the Village for any charges and fees incurred.
§ 92-16. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to dogs commonly known as "seeing eye dogs" while
guiding their master. This chapter shall also not apply to dogs actually confined to
the premises of incorporated societies devoted to the care or hospital treatment of lost,
strayed or homeless animals or confined to the premises of public or private hospitals
devoted to the treatment of sick animals.
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
§ 92-14 ANIMALS § 92-16
92:5

Chapter 96
AUCTIONEERING
§ 96-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GOODS, WARES AND CHATTELS — Includes all commodities, compounds,
chattels, merchandise, watches, clocks, jewelry and all other personal property, but shall
not include used household furniture or effects or real property.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships and corporations.
PUBLIC AUCTION — Includes any public offer to sell personal property or real
property to the highest bidder or to the person offering to pay the highest price therefor,
and shall be without qualifications or reservations unless, at the time of the offer of each
article of parcel and before any bids are asked thereon, a minimum price therefor is
publicly stated.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION — Shall not include any sale pursuant to the judgment,
decree or order of any court, or any sale made by an executor or administrator, or any
sale of unredeemed goods made by or in behalf of a licensed pawnbroker (or sales by
public officers in the manner prescribed by law, or sales pursuant to statute to satisfy
any lien upon the property sold, or resales pursuant to statute, of property taken under a
conditional sales contract).
§ 96-2. Public auctioneer to conduct auction.
No sale at auction of any goods, wares and chattels, as defined in this chapter, shall be
held within the Village of Massena, unless such sale be directly conducted by a duly
licensed public auctioneer.
§ 96-3. License.
No person shall act as a public auctioneer within the Village of Massena unless such
person be duly licensed as an auctioneer pursuant to law.
§ 96-4. Sales at public auction.
No public auctioneer and no person acting directly or indirectly through a public
auctioneer within the Village of Massena shall sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public
auction or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction,
any goods, wares and chattels, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 96-5. Application for permit.
Any person intending to sell at public auction any goods, wares and chattels, as defined
in this chapter, within the Village of Massena shall make application to the Mayor for a
permit to hold such sale at public auction, and if such permit be granted, the sale may be
conducted as provided in this chapter.
§ 92-16 AUCTIONEERING § 96-6
96:1
§ 96-6. Form of application, time for filing.
Such application shall be in writing and shall be verified, and must be filed not more than
15 nor less than 10 days before the commencement of any such sale. It shall set forth the
name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the public auctioneer, the
street and number of the premises in which it is proposed to conduct such sale, and the
place or places within said Village of Massena at which for two years next preceding the
date fixed for said sale the applicant has continuously conducted his business.
§ 96-7. Inventory.
There shall be attached to the application a written sworn inventory showing in detail the
quality, quantity, kind or grade of the goods, wares and chattels proposed to be sold, and
stating that no items or articles belonging to any other person other than the applicant are
included in said inventory. The affidavit to such inventory shall be made by the applicant
if he be an individual, or if the applicant be a partnership, by one of the partners, or if
such applicant be a corporation, by the president, secretary, treasurer or general manager
thereof.
§ 96-8. Bond. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The application shall be accompanied by a bond to the Village of Massena in the penal
sum of $5,000, conditioned that the applicant shall pay all losses and damages which
may lawfully be claimed against him on account of any material misrepresenting of
fact or belief, or any material suppressing of facts made by him or caused by him in
the conduct of such sale and public auction concerning the goods, wares and chattels
offered at such sale, or any losses or damages which may grow out of a violation of any
provisions of law relating to such sale at public auction by such applicant. If such a bond
is not executed as surety by a bonding or insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New York, it shall have as surety thereon two good and responsible residents
of the Village of Massena to be approved by the Village Attorney. Such bond shall be
for the benefit of any person who may sustain any such loss or damage and any such
person sustaining such loss or damage may bring suit or action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to recover such bond. Bond herein required to be furnished shall be executed
and be in full force for a period of one year.
§ 96-9. Examination of goods.
The Mayor, or his duly authorized representative, may examine goods, wares and
chattels specified in inventory. The Mayor, before issuing a permit, shall have the right,
either personally or by a person duly authorized in writing by him, to examine the goods,
wares and chattels specified in the inventory to be offered for sale to determine whether
said inventory correctly sets forth the items to be sold.
§ 96-10. To whom permit may be issued.
No permit shall be issued to any person to conduct a sale at public auction unless he shall
have been, for a period of at least one year preceding the date of such sale, continuously
engaged in business in the Village of Massena in dealing in the same kind of goods,
wares and merchandise as are to be offered for sale at such public auction.
§ 96-6 MASSENA CODE § 96-11
96:2
§ 96-11. License fee. [Amended 12-16-1975 by L.L. No. 7-1975; 9-4-2001 by L.L.
No. 2-2001]
The license fee shall be $25 per year or any part thereof.
§ 96-12. Duration of auction.
No permit shall be issued to conduct a sale at public auction for a period longer than 15
consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, at any one place in the Village
of Massena; and a period of at least 365 days must have elapsed after the conclusion
of any auction sale conducted either before or after the enactment of this chapter before
another permit shall be issued to the same applicant or to any other person for a sale
to be conducted at the same place, except that the Mayor, in his discretion, may extend
such period of 15 days for an additional period of 15 days which shall run consecutively
from the date for the expiration of the first fifteen-day period, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, which extension shall be endorsed in writing on the original permit by the
Mayor.
§ 96-13. Hours during which sale may be conducted.
No permit shall be issued and it shall be unlawful for any public auctioneer or other
person to conduct a sale at public auction in the Village of Massena between the hours
of 5:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 96-14. Limit of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or any other person through such auctioneer to
sell, dispose of or offer to sell or dispose of any goods, wares and chattels, as defined in
this chapter, at a sale at public auction which have not been included and described in
the inventory filed with the application for a permit to hold such sale.
§ 96-15. Misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any public auctioneer or any other person to make a printed
or oral statement concerning the goods, wares and chattels, as defined in this chapter,
which are the subject of such a sale at public auction, if such statement is false in any
particular or has a tendency to mislead any person present or to misrepresent the quality,
quantity, character, condition, value or cost of any such goods, wares and chattels which
are subject of such sale at public auction.
§ 96-16. Pretenses; fictitious bids.
It shall be unlawful for any public auctioneer or any other person to act or to cause any
other person to act as a bybidder or what is commonly known as a "capper" or "booster"
at any such sale at public auction or any place where any such sale takes place or to offer
or make any false bid or to pretend to bid for or buy any article sold or offered for sale at
any such auction; or for anyone directly or indirectly in the employ of a public auctioneer
or the person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter to bid for or buy any
such article.
§ 96-11 AUCTIONEERING § 96-17
96:3
§ 96-17. When provisions of chapter not applicable.
The provisions of this chapter other than the prohibitions contained in §§ 96-13, 96-15
and 96-16 shall not apply to the regular conduct of sales at public auction by a duly
licensed public auctioneer at his regularly maintained auction room in the Village
of Massena, provided that such licensed public auctioneer has for a period of one
year, immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, continuously maintained in
the Village of Massena an auction room or similar place for the regular conduct of
auctions; provided, however, that such licensed public auctioneer shall not be permitted,
without complying with the provisions of this chapter, to conduct sales in such regularly
maintained auction room in excess of two days, which shall not be consecutive in each
week.
§ 96-18. Revocation of license and permit.
For any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating
to auctions and auctioneers, the Mayor may revoke any license granted to a public
auctioneer or any permit issued for the conduct of any sale at public auction, and if it
appears to such Mayor that any such sale at public auction does in fact defraud or may
defraud bidders thereat, the permit to conduct such sale at public auction may in like
manner be revoked, notwithstanding that any such violation be not specifically shown or
proven to the Mayor.
§ 96-19. Declaration of invalidity.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances
is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the subdivision and of the application of
such subdivision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 96-20. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person violating any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $250
nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. These
penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village may also
seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter.
§ 96-21. Filing of inventory.
Owner of stock and proprietor must get a permit and license from the Mayor and file an
inventory taken at least three months prior to the auction sale. Only in the event of death
of proprietor (owner) will a thirty-day inventory of stock before sale be accepted.
§ 96-17 MASSENA CODE § 96-21
96:4
Chapter 100
BICYCLES
§ 100-1. Restrictions.
No person shall ride any bicycle or tricycle upon the sidewalks upon any of the streets
within said Village; every person riding any bicycle or tricycle upon any of the streets
within said Village shall give a warning by bell, whistle or horn which shall be heard
100 feet distant when about to meet or pass pedestrians, or when about to meet or pass
other vehicles; no person shall ride any bicycle or tricycle upon any of the public streets
within the limits of said Village unless there shall be attached thereto or carried therewith
a light of such illuminating power as to be plainly seen 200 feet ahead and kept lighted
between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise, and no person shall coast or
proceed by inertia or momentum on any bicycle or tricycle with the feet off the pedals
on any street or public place within said Village.
§ 100-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
§ 96-21 BICYCLES § 100-2
100:1

Chapter 104
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 174.
§ 104-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the General
Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo within
the territorial limits of the Village of Massena, subject to the provisions of this chapter,
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 104-2. Sunday games.
Any game of bingo conducted within the Village pursuant to a license issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable statutes may be operated by authorized
organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday."
§ 100-2 BINGO § 104-2
104:1

Chapter 105
BLIGHTED PROPERTY ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds; dumping — See Ch. 110.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Housing Code — See Ch. 186.
§ 105-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Massena Village Board to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by authorizing the establishment of procedures to identify, abate and eliminate
the presence of blight upon properties throughout the Village.
§ 105-2. Scope; applicability.
§ 105-3. Blighted property designation.
Blighted property. The following conditions will be factors in evaluating whether or not
a property is designated as a blighted property:
A. Scope. The provisions of this chapter will apply to all properties in the incorporated
portions of the Village of Massena, residential, commercial and otherwise, and
constitute the requirements and standards for such property.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter will be deemed to supplement
applicable state and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. Nothing in this
chapter will be deemed to abolish, impair, supersede or replace existing remedies
of the Village, county or state or existing requirements of any other provision of
local laws or ordinances of the Village or county or state laws and regulations. In
case of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and any applicable state or
local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the more restrictive or stringent provision
or requirement will prevail.
A. A determination by Code Enforcement that the property is in a condition which
poses a serious threat to the safety, health, and/or general welfare of the community:
50 points.
B. The owner of the property has been issued a summons and/or has been prosecuted
for any violation of the Code of the Village of Massena, and the violation(s)
associated with such summons and/or prosecution have not been corrected: 50
points.
C. The property has attracted or been an instrument of illegal, noxious or deleterious
activity as defined in Chapter 218, Public Nuisances, and/or in common law: 50
points.
§ 104-2 BLIGHTED PROPERTY ABATEMENT § 105-3
105:1
D. A determination has been made by the Code Officer that the conditions upon the
property constitute a fire hazard: 50 points.
E. The property is creating a substantial interference with the lawful use and/or
enjoyment of other space within a structure/building or within the surrounding
neighborhood: 50 points.
F. The property is determined to be unmaintained by a Village Code Enforcement
Officer/Official based upon evidence of the persistent and continued existence of
the following deleterious conditions:
(1) Boarded windows, doors, entryways or exits: five points.
(2) Broken or unsecured windows: 10 points.
(3) Broken or unsecured doors, entryways or exits: 10 points.
(4) Excessive litter or debris: 10 points.
(5) Overgrown grass at least six inches or higher or other overgrown vegetation or
shrubbery: 10 points.
(6) Unregistered motor vehicle: 10 points (see § 300-23Q).
(7) Broken, unsecured or in disrepair:
(a) Roof: 10 points.
(b) Gutters: five points.
(c) Siding: 10 points.
(d) Shingles: 10 points.
(e) Chimney: 10 points.
(f) Shutters: five points.
(g) Accessory structures including but not limited to: decks, sheds, porches,
pools, pool houses or cabanas, garages, carports, storage units, front and
rear porches, outside statuary, and fish ponds: 15 points.
(8) Storage of a junked vehicle: 15 points.
(9) Damaged, unsightly, unsecured or unpermitted signage or awnings: 15 points.
(10) Presence of graffiti: 10 points.
(11) Broken, unsecured or in disrepair fencing: 10 points.
(12) Broken, unsecured or in disrepair outdoor lighting fixtures: five points.
(13) Broken, exposed or hazardously utilized electrical wires, electrical equipment
or extension cords: 15 points.
(14) Unfinished construction: 20 points.
§ 105-3 MASSENA CODE § 105-3
105:2
§ 105-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words will have the following meanings:
BLIGHT COMMITTEE — A committee comprised of two Village Trustees (appointed
by the Village Mayor) and a Code Enforcement Officer.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — An improved or vacant property which meets or exceeds a
point value of 100 points as set forth within this chapter.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY INVENTORY LIST — A list containing properties within
the Village which possess an accumulation of blight conditions equaling or exceeding a
point value of 100 points.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — An official charged with the enforcement and/
or administration of this chapter.
DEFACEMENT — Any mark on the face or surface of, disfigurement, injury, damage
or alteration to the appearance of the property without the express permission of the
owner or person or entity in control thereof.
(15) Damaged, dead or fallen trees or limbs: 10 points.
(16) Evidence of fire damage to the property which has not been repaired or
restored: 10 points.
(17) Peeling or deteriorated paint: five points.
(18) Presence of stagnant water: 10 points.
(19) Open or unsecured wells, cesspools or cisterns: 10 points.
(20) Presence of vermin, rodent harborage and infestation: 30 points.
(21) Presence of any violation identified within this chapter: 20 points.
(22) Outdoor storage.
(a) Presence within/upon an outdoor area of the improper storage of:
[1] Refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank,
other household appliances, boxes or indoor furniture for a period in
excess of 72 consecutive hours: 10 points.
[2] Lumber, construction materials, dirt, debris, trash, garbage or
uncovered refuse cans, accumulated refuse or garbage in covered
refuse cans which is not timely or properly disposed of: 10 points.
(b) Outdoor storage exemptions:
[1] Machinery installed within the rear setback areas for household or
recreational use.
[2] The presence of refuse or trash cans, recycling bins or other debris
which has been secured, placed or stored in compliance with this
code.
§ 105-3 BLIGHTED PROPERTY ABATEMENT § 105-4
105:3
DILAPIDATED — Extreme disrepair such that a structure or dwelling unit or
commercial space is unfit or unsafe for habitation or occupancy.
GRAFFITI — Any inscription, mark or design which has been written, etched,
scratched, painted or drawn or otherwise visible upon a premises.
JUNKED VEHICLE — An unregistered motor vehicle not suitable for operation.
LEGAL OCCUPANCY—Occupancy that exists by virtue of fee ownership, a bona fide
lease agreement, a rent receipt or, if necessary, a utility statement, and which occupancy
is in compliance with federal, state, local laws, local zoning, local housing, and all other
pertinent rules, regulations and codes.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the Village of Massena defined by its residents and
its distinctive characteristics.
REGISTRATION FEES — An annual fee imposed upon properties which are listed on
the blighted property inventory list.
RESTORATION AGREEMENT—A legal and binding agreement between the Village
and a given property owner, wherein said property owner proposes to complete specific
repairs and/or improvements in order to resolve conditions existing on his or her
property as identified by a Code Enforcement Official in accordance with the definition
of "blighted property." Such repairs and/or improvements will be outlined on an
explicitly fixed timeline and as such will be offered a full exemption from the annual
registration fee outlined in § 105-6D. The Blight Committee will have the authority, on
behalf of the Village, to execute such restoration agreement.
VACANT — A period of 60 days or longer during which a building or structure or part
thereof, or land is not legally occupied.
VACANT PARCEL — A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
UNIT — Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a single person or
entity for his/her/its sole use and is intended to be a single and distinct space.
§ 105-5. Creation or maintenance of blighted property prohibited.
No owner, agent, tenant, business entity, voluntary association, nonprofit organization,
or person in control of real property located within the Village of Massena will allow,
create, maintain or cause to be created or maintained, any blighted property.
§ 105-6. Enforcement.
A. Code Enforcement will be charged with reviewing complaints and conducting
investigations in order to determine if blight exists at the subject property.
B. Once a property has been determined to be blighted, Code Enforcement will prepare
and send out notification letters to each property owner. Such notice will be served
by personal service upon the owner or person in charge of the affected building or
structure. If, after a reasonable effort is made, no such owner or person in charge
can be personally served, such notice will be served by mailing said owner such
notice by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address
as shown on the records of the Assessor, and by securely affixing a copy of such
notice upon the door of the affected building or structure, unless the property is a
§ 105-4 MASSENA CODE § 105-6
105:4
§ 105-7. Restoration agreement.
vacant parcel, in which case service of the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested alone will be sufficient.
C. Notice contents.
(1) The notice must contain a statement of the date(s) upon which an inspection
was conducted on the property to determine blight, the address of the blighted
property, the specific nature of the blight, a copy of this chapter, the point
rating review of the premises, the required annual registration fees and the
property's placement on the blighted property inventory list. Said notice will
further notify the owner that if no reasonable proof is offered establishing the
property does not constitute a blighted property, said annual registration fee
will be added to the Village property tax bill for the premises after 30 days of
the date of said notice.
(2) Any notice to qualifying property owners must also contain an offer of the
opportunity to enter into a restoration agreement with the Village.
D. Registration fees. If, after 30 days from the date of the notice described above,
sufficient proof is not presented to establish that all blight conditions have been
remediated, the following registration fees will be imposed:
(1) A registration fee of $5,000 will be added to the Village tax bill for any
commercial building or property;
(2) A registration fee of $2,500 will be added to the Village tax bill for any
residential building or property;
(3) A registration fee of $2,500 will be added to the Village tax bill for any vacant
parcel.
E. Any surplus administrative, mitigation or registration costs imposed by the Village
will be used to create a beautification fund, with the intent of financing the Village's
revitalization and antiblight efforts.
A. Property owner qualifications. In order to qualify to enter into a restoration
agreement, the property owner must:
(1) Possess or have applied for a valid certificate of occupancy or letter in lieu as
issued by the Village for the subject premises; and
(2) Have no other outstanding violations or complaints on file with Code
Enforcement.
B. Restoration agreement contents. All restoration agreements will include a definite
plan for the resolution of all blight conditions existing on the blighted premises as
identified by a Code Enforcement Official.
C. Such repairs and/or improvements will be outlined on an explicitly fixed timeline.
D. Registration fee exemption. In consideration for entering into a restoration
agreement with the Village, the property owner will be offered a full exemption
§ 105-6 BLIGHTED PROPERTY ABATEMENT § 105-7
105:5
§ 105-8. Incentives.
Any entity and/or individual that purchases a property registered on the Village's
blighted property inventory list may be offered certain incentives from the Village.
§ 105-9. Action by Village Board for failure to comply or abate violations.
from the annual registration fee(s) set forth in § 105-6D above.
E. Penalties for noncompliance with restoration agreement terms. Any property owner
who does not complete the repairs and/or improvements outlined in a restoration
agreement within the established timeline, or otherwise fails to comply with any
and all provisions of a restoration agreement, will be subject to the actions
described in § 105-9.
A. All incentives are at the complete and absolute discretion of the Blight Committee.
The factors to be considered in granting an incentive include, but are not limited, to
the following: The rating of the purchased property, the location of the purchased
property, the degree of repair and development necessary, the impact of the
proposed project on the Village's economy, the environmental condition of the
project site(s), and the applicant's liability and other insurance coverage.
B. Incentives may include, but are not limited to, a 25% reduction of certain permit
and/or application fees to be collected by the Village of Massena Building and Code
Enforcement Department and/or an acceleration of the processing of certain permits
as issued by the Village of Massena Building and Code Enforcement Department.
C. Applicants for an incentive must demonstrate the ability to pay for their proposed
projects either through commitment letters for loans obtained from a commercial
lender of their selection or through the availability of developer funds.
D. Any request for an incentive will be made by a property owner making a written
request to the Village of Massena Building and Code Enforcement Office. Any such
request may not be made until after an application has been made for a building
permit for the blighted property at issue, or an application has been made to initiate
an administrative process which would enable the submission of a building permit
application (such administrative processes include, but are not limited to, the
change of zone process, application for a variance from the Zoning Board of
Appeals, and/or site plan review).
A. Failure to comply with a restoration agreement. Whenever the owner of a property
will fail to comply with an executed restoration agreement, the Village Board may
authorize and arrange for completion of the work required to be done under the
terms of the restoration agreement and will provide for the cost thereof to be paid
from general Village funds as directed by resolution of the Village Board.
Additionally, failure to comply with an executed restoration agreement will result
in the placement or retention of the property on the blighted property inventory list
and the imposition of the corresponding annual registration fees applicable for each
year that the offending conditions exist or remain.
B. Authority to abate in the absence of a restoration agreement. In the event that an
owner and/or occupant of such land or premises will fail to abate any violation as
§ 105-7 MASSENA CODE § 105-9
105:6
described in the definition of "blighted property" contained herein, the Village
Board, after consideration at a public hearing, may declare said premises to be a
nuisance and thereafter, the Village Board will have the authority to enter onto such
premises where such violation exists, to remedy such violation and to charge the
cost or expense of such remediation against the owner and establish a lien in the
manner provided herein.
C. Assessment of costs and expenses, liens. A summary of all costs and expenses
incurred by the Village in connection with the abatement of a violation of this
chapter will be provided by the Blight Committee to the Village Board for review.
The total costs and expenses incurred will then be finally determined by the Village
Attorney, after consultation with the Village Board, and will be reported to the
Village Tax Collector. The amount determined by the Village Attorney will then be
added to the Village tax bill and assessed against the property, and the expense so
assessed will constitute a lien and charge on the premises on which it is levied until
paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged.
§ 105-9 BLIGHTED PROPERTY ABATEMENT § 105-9
105:7

Chapter 106
BLOCK PARTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Handbills, notices and billboards — See Ch. 180.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Parades — See Ch. 202.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 204.
Special events — See Ch. 242.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BLOCK — A designated area within which the public streets shall be closed for a
neighborhood party.
PARTY — A neighborhood block party, celebration or event, but shall not include a
garage sale, yard sale, bazaar, rummage sale or other similar activity having the principal
purpose of fundraising for an individual or organization, nor shall it include a political
meeting or rally, carnival or theatrical or musical performance, such as rock concerts or
similar events.
STREET — A Village street, highway or road.
§ 106-2. Authorization to issue permit; application.
§ 106-3. Cleanup after block parties.
The applicant shall be responsible for removal of litter, debris and other materials from
A. The Mayor shall be authorized to issue a permit for the temporary blocking of a
street for the purpose of holding a party. At least 14 days before the commencement
of such a party, an application for such permit shall be filed by a bona fide resident
of the street to be blocked, who is over the age of 18, and such application shall
contain at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name of the street or streets and a description of the portions thereof to be
blocked.
(3) A description of the specific party to be held.
(4) The date and hours thereof.
B. The application may require such additional information as the Village Board shall
prescribe by resolution.
§ 105-9 BLOCK PARTIES § 106-3
106:1
the street or portion thereof used for the party which are attributed to or caused by the
party.
§ 106-4. Event guidelines.
§ 106-5. Limit on number of permits.
No more than one permit shall be granted by the Mayor in any calendar year for the same
block(s).
§ 106-6. Liability.
The persons, organization or association to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all losses, damages or injuries sustained by any person, whether a participant or spectator
at the block party or recreational event, whether or not said losses, damages or injuries
arise by reason of the negligence of the person, persons or organization to whom such
permit shall have been issued. The Mayor shall require the applicant to enter into a holdharmless
agreement, which agreement shall provide that the applicant shall agree to save
and hold the Village harmless of and from any and all obligations and liabilities which
may arise from the temporary street closing which represents the subject matter of the
application. The applicant shall further agree as part of these provisions to hold harmless
the Village and to defend at his own cost and expense any claims or lawsuits instituted by
third parties, which obligations or liabilities might otherwise exist or be asserted against
the Village. The Mayor shall further have the option to require that, prior to the issuance
of a permit or commencement of the temporary street closing for commercial advertising
A. Daily time restriction. The hours of operation for any special event taking place on
the streets of the Village shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day of
the week.
B. Site maintenance. All areas used must be left in a clean condition.
C. Services available from the Village. The Village will provide certain equipment and
materials to facilitate comfort and control over the event, subject to availability and
the Village's prior need for such equipment and materials.
(1) Temporary parking signs. All temporary signs for restricting parking must be
posted 24 hours in advance and maintained by the sponsor. Requests for the
necessary materials should be directed to the Massena Police Department,
which shall have responsibility for the initial posting of the temporary signs
either through physical placement or directive as to locations. Any usage of
temporary signs without the authorization of the Police Chief, or his designee,
will be neither recognized nor enforced. Upon the event's completion, all signs
must be taken down by the sponsor and returned to the Police Department.
(2) Barricades. Moveable barricades shall be delivered to the site where the
sponsor or its designated representative shall sign for their receipt. The cost of
the replacing lost or damaged barricades lies with the sponsor.
D. A street or portion thereof blocked off for a party shall not be obstructed by
obstacles which cannot be readily moved to allow emergency and hazard vehicles
to enter it in response to an emergency.
§ 106-3 MASSENA CODE § 106-6
106:2
purposes or profit, the applicant submit evidence of liability insurance covering damages
to property and injuries to members of the general public arising out of the temporary
street closing in such amounts as may be determined by the Mayor.
§ 106-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of not more than $250, or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day's continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The Police Chief or his designee may close any special event conducted without
authorization from the Mayor, and the sponsors and participants may be subject to
arrest.
C. The Police Chief, Fire Chief or his designated representative(s) may close any block
party or portion that is subsequently determined to be an imminent hazard to the
public health, safety or welfare.
§ 106-6 BLOCK PARTIES § 106-7
106:3

Chapter 108
BOATING AND WATERCRAFT
§ 106-7 BOATING AND WATERCRAFT § 106-7
108:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 108-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating the speed and restricting the
operation of vessels, personal watercraft and specialty prop-craft while being operated or
driven upon any waters within the municipal bounds of the Village of Massena in order
that the peace, health, safety, welfare and good order of the operators of such vessels,
the Village and its inhabitants and the wildlife inhabitants of the waterways shall be
preserved. This chapter does not regulate watercraft which are propelled solely by hand
or sail.
§ 108-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the words used herein defined as follows:
BOAT or VESSEL — Includes every description of watercraft or contrivance used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation in the water. All boats or vessels will
shall belong to one of the following classes:
DOCK — A wharf, or portion of a wharf, extending along the shoreline and generally
connected with the uplands throughout its length, or any portion of its length.
MOTORBOAT — Any vessel propelled in water, in whole or in part, by an engine or
motor, whether inboard or outboard.
OPERATOR — An individual who operates or navigates the vessel.
OWNER — The person actually holding title to the vessel, except a public vessel
chartered unmanned for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, in which case
"owner" shall include the person chartering the vessel.
PERMANENT MOORING — The securing of a boat on a seasonal or annual basis by
means of securing the vessel to a fixed anchor placed on the harbor bottom.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel which uses an inboard motor powering a
water jet pump as its primary source of motive power and which is designed to be
operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on or being towed behind the vessel
PUBLIC VESSEL — Includes every vessel which is propelled in whole or in
part by mechanical power, or a barge which is propelled by the same and is used
or operated for commercial purposes on the navigable waters of the state; that is
either carrying passengers and/or freight, towing or for any other use; for which
compensation is received, either directly or where provided as an accommodation,
advantage, facility or privilege at any place of public accommodation, resort or
amusement.
A.
RESIDENTIAL VESSEL — Includes every vessel which is used primarily as a
residence.
B.
PLEASURE VESSEL — Includes every vessel not within the classification of
"public vessel" or "residential vessel." However, the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to rowboats and canoes except as otherwise expressly provided.
C.
§ 108-1 BOATING AND WATERCRAFT § 108-2
108:3
rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel.
SPECIALTY PROP-CRAFT — A vessel which is powered by an outboard motor or
a propeller-driven motor and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting,
standing, or kneeling on or being towed behind the vessel rather than in the conventional
manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel.
TEMPORARY ANCHORING — The securing of a boat to an anchor placed on the
harbor bottom and which anchor is otherwise carried aboard the boat.
§ 108-3. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all the docks and waters within the
municipal bounds of the Village of Massena.
§ 108-4. Enforcing authority.
§ 108-5. Manner of operation; speed limits.
A. The Village of Massena Police Department is empowered to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Every person operating, or otherwise in charge of, a vessel will at
all times obey the lawful orders of a police officer.
B. The Massena Village Clerk is empowered to issue application forms, permit forms
and otherwise promulgate such forms and information as may be necessary for the
administration of this chapter.
A. No person shall operate a boat, other than a boat propelled by hand, within 200 feet
of any lifelines or bathing float, or within 200 feet of any public or semipublic
beach regularly used for bathing or swimming, except that such boat may approach
or depart perpendicularly to such beach at less than five miles per hour solely for
the purpose of commencing or ending the ride.
B. Every person operating a boat shall at all times operate the same in a careful and
prudent manner and at a rate of speed so as not to unreasonably interfere with the
free and proper use of the waters or unreasonably endanger any person or property
or wildlife.
C. Except where a situation exists that requires lower speed for compliance with
Subsection A of this section, the maximum lawful speed in Grass River and
Raquette River shall be five miles per hour. Sailboats under sail shall be exempt
from this subsection.
D. The Village Board may, by resolution, limit the speed of boats in any waters to
which this article applies and cause notice of such speed limit to be posted at
appropriate places in the areas affected. Any person who shall operate a boat in such
areas at a greater speed than the speed specified in such notice shall be deemed to
have violated this article.
E. No person shall operate any vessel at any time in the waters within the jurisdiction
of the Village of Massena at a speed greater than five miles per hour one hour after
sunset to one hour before sunrise. Sailboats under sail shall be exempt from this
subsection.
§ 108-2 MASSENA CODE § 108-6
108:4
§ 108-6. Wake responsibility.
No person shall operate a vessel in a manner so as to cause the creation of a wake in
Grass River and Raquette River. Sailboats under sail shall be exempt.
§ 108-7. Operators.
§ 108-8. Water skiers.
No person shall operate a boat while towing a person on water skis, a surfboard,
inflatable tube, or similar devices.
§ 108-9. Equipment.
§ 108-10. Pilot rules; rules of the road.
All vessels operating in the waters of the Village of Massena are to observe the Inland
Rules of the Road and the New York State Pilot Rules, § 41 of the New York State
Navigation Law.
A. No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a mechanically propelled vessel,
nor shall the owner or a person responsible for a vessel allow or permit the
operation of a vessel by a person under the age of 16 years, unless:
(1) The operator, who is under the age of 16 years, is accompanied therein by a
person who is 16 years of age or older; or
(2) The operator is 10 years of age or older and has been issued a boating safety
certificate by the Commissioner of the Office of Parks and Recreation of the
State of New York, pursuant to § 78 of the New York State Navigation Law.
B. The failure of a person specified in Subsection A(2) hereof to exhibit a boating
safety certificate upon demand to any peace officer or other officer having authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be presumptive evidence that such
person is not the holder of such certificate.
C. No person shall operate a vessel while in an intoxicated condition or while his
ability to operate such a vessel is impaired by the consumption of alcohol or by use
of a drug.
A. All pleasure vessels and uninspected commercial vessels shall be equipped and
lighted while under way or at anchor with any person aboard, as required under the
Federal Boat Safety Act of 1971, as amended, and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto and contained in Title 46 of the Code of Federal Rules, Subchapter C, Parts
24, 25 and 26, and pursuant to the provisions of § 40 of the Navigation Law of the
State of New York. Failure to comply with the equipment and lighting requirements
as set forth above shall be a violation of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vessels competing in duly
authorized regattas and trials preceding such regattas.
§ 108-6 BOATING AND WATERCRAFT § 108-11
108:5
§ 108-11. Marine events.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village Board from issuing permits for
marine events, boat races or otherwise under proper supervision in limited areas for
limited periods after approval of the Village Board and the United States Coast Guard, if
appropriate.
§ 108-12. Mufflers.
No person shall operate a boat propelled wholly or partly by an engine operated by the
explosion of gas, oil, gasoline, naphtha or other substance without having the exhaust
from the engine run through a muffling device so constructed and used as to muffle the
noise of the exhaust in a reasonable manner.
§ 108-13. Maintenance and cleaning.
The cleaning of boats below the waterline is prohibited in the waters of the Grass River
and Raquette River. Sandblasting, power sanding and painting of vessels anchored,
moored or docked in the waters of Grass River and Raquette River are prohibited.
§ 108-14. Sanitation.
The dumping of oil, refuse, garbage, sewage or waste is prohibited. Sanitary equipment
must meet the applicable standards established by the appropriate federal and state
agencies.
§ 108-15. Hazards to navigation; abandoned vessels.
A. Any boat or barge which becomes a menace to navigation or sinks, grounds or
otherwise becomes disabled or incapable of navigation shall be removed or restored
to navigable condition by the owner upon written notice from the Village Board or
its designated agent, which notice shall be delivered by personal service or by
registered mail addressed to the registered owner's last known address as given by
him or as stated in his certificate of registration.
B. If such boat is not removed or restored to navigable condition by the owner within
one week after the mailing of the notice, the Village Board or its designated agent
may direct the removal or destruction of the boat, and the cost of removal, including
storage charges, shall attach to and shall become a lien upon the boat and be
chargeable against the owner of the boat. The boat may be sold upon direction of
the court at a public auction to defray expenses, and any surplus shall be returned
to the owner of record. The Village shall not be liable for any damage done to the
boat during its removal, storage and sale.
C. Unattended vessels shall not be moored or anchored in Village waters overnight
without registering the vessel with the Village Clerk. Vessels moored or anchored
overnight without registering with the Harbormaster may be impounded. The owner
shall be liable for payment of the overnight fees, if applicable, along with expenses
for storage. The Village shall not be liable for damage done to impounded vessels
during their removal and storage.
§ 108-11 MASSENA CODE § 108-15
108:6
ARTICLE II
Docks and Mooring
§ 108-16. General provisions.
§ 108-17. Permits.
§ 108-18. Revocation of permits.
A. No boat shall be so moored or anchored that it at any time rests within any channel
or freeway or interferes with the full use of such channel or freeway, nor shall any
boat be moored or anchored within 50 feet of any dock, pier or other boat docking
or launching facilities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use for an unreasonable period of time to the
exclusion of others or to restrict or obstruct the use of any public bulkhead, dock or
landing owned or controlled by the Village of Massena.
C. No person shall place a mooring in the municipal bounded waters of the Village of
Massena without first obtaining a permit from the Village of Massena.
A. No person shall moor or secure a boat at a beach, dock, pier, wharf or mooring
located in the Village of Massena on any public land or improvements or at the end
of any Village street without first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk.
B. There shall be only one permit issued per boat.
C. There shall be a fee for a permit in an amount the Village Board may establish from
time to time by resolution.
D. The application form shall include, in addition to the general information specified
in the license law and information required by the Village Clerk, the following:
(1) A description of the boat.
(2) The documentation number or license number of the vessel.
(3) The address of the owner and home port of the vessel.
(4) The name and address of the captain of the vessel.
(5) Proof of insurance.
A. Failure to comply with the permit application requirements or failure to abide by
the rules and regulations of the docks as hereinafter specified shall result in an
immediate revocation of said permit by the Harbormaster and/or his deputy.
B. In the event of such revocation, the former permit holder shall immediately remove
his vessel from the dock, wharf or mooring. Said vessel shall not be attached to any
dock, wharf or mooring within the jurisdiction of the Village of Massena until such
time as a new permit has been issued or a hearing has been held on the revocation.
C. In the event of such revocation, the former permit holder may appeal to the Village
Dock Committee, which shall hold a hearing as soon as practicable after filing of
§ 108-16 BOATING AND WATERCRAFT § 108-18
108:7
§ 108-19. Rules and regulations.
The Village Board may establish by resolution rules and regulations for the operation of
the docks and moorings under its jurisdiction. Such rules shall be posted at the Village
Office and at the docks and moorings under its jurisdiction.
§ 108-20. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as may be limited by the laws of the State of New York, a violation of
any provision of this article shall be punishable by not more than 15 days incarceration
and/or a fine of $250 for each violation. Each day of violation shall be deemed a new
violation and shall be treated accordingly.
the appeal, but in no event later than two weeks after filing of said appeal for review
of said revocation of the permit. A decision by the Village Dock Committee shall
be made no later than one week after the close of the hearing.
D. In the event of an adverse finding by the Village Dock Committee to the permit
holder, said permit holder may appeal the decision to the Village Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall hold a hearing as soon as practicable after filing of the
appeal, but in no event later than two weeks after filing of said appeal for review of
said revocation of the permit. The Village Board of Trustees shall render a decision
no later than one week after the close of the hearing before it.
§ 108-18 MASSENA CODE § 108-20
108:8
Chapter 110
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS; DUMPING
§ 110-1. Dumping prohibited in other places.
The use of any other lands within the corporate limits of the Village of Massena for
the dumping of waste material, junk, rubbish or debris is hereby prohibited, except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 110-2. Using garbage for filling lots prohibited.
The use of any material other than earth, sand or gravel for grading and filling lots
and lands within the corporate limits of said Village is hereby prohibited, except and
unless a permit in writing specifying the kind and nature of such other material and the
manner and place of its use shall be first obtained from the Mayor or other person duly
designated by him to pass upon the issuance of such permits.
§ 110-3. Keeping lots free from grass, brush, rubbish and standing water.
[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 12-5-2017
by L.L. No. 5-2017]
All persons, businesses, agencies or others owning land or lots within the corporate
limits of said Village, whether occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, are hereby
required to cut all grass and weeds greater than six inches in length, trim and/or remove
all brush, unsightly fences, ripe grass and weeds and flammable and unsightly waste and
rubbish therefrom and maintain all standing bodies of water (pools, hot tubs, ponds, and
like standing water sources) in a sanitary condition and remove, carry away and dispose
of all junk, rubbish, debris and waste materials of every kind and nature and keep such
lands and lots, including the area between the sidewalk and curb.
§ 110-4. Ability of Village to cut brush and weeds and remove standing water on
lots. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 12-5-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
Upon the failure or neglect of any such owner of lands to comply with the provisions
of § 110-3 and upon expiration of a two-day notice served upon such owner by said
Village requiring compliance with said § 110-3 and said owner not having complied with
such notice, the Village may, by its duly constituted officers, agents, representatives and
servants, enter upon said premises and remove or cause to be removed all waste, rubbish,
debris, junk, brush, ripe grass, weeds, standing water and other unsightly, injurious or
flammable refuse and assess the expense thereof against said premises, to be collected,
with interest, in the same way and manner as Village taxes. The mailing of such notice
to a nonresident owner of lands within said Village addressed to his last known address
shall be sufficient service thereof. A single notice served per calendar year shall be
deemed adequate notification for the cutting of grass and weeds.
§ 110-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
§ 108-20 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS; DUMPING § 110-5
110:1
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
§ 110-5 MASSENA CODE § 110-5
110:2
Chapter 114
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 110-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 110-5
114:1

Chapter 120
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 114.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 162.
Housing Code — See Ch. 186.
§ 120-1. Purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Village of Massena. Buildings
and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire, the elements, age or
general deterioration. Vacant buildings not properly secured at doorways and windows
also serve as an attractive nuisance for young children who may be injured therein, as
well as point of congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building may also
serve as a place of rodent infestation, thereby creating a health menace to the community.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safety, health protection and general
welfare of persons and property in the Village of Massena by requiring such unsafe
buildings be repaired or demolished and removed.
§ 120-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Unsafe Buildings Law of the Village of Massena."
§ 120-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used for residential, business
or industrial purpose.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER—The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of
Massena or such other person appointed by the Village Board to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.[Amended 10-16-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984]
§ 120-4. Defects deemed unsafe or dangerous.
A building is, or may become dangerous or unsafe to the general public if:
A. It is open at the doorways making it accessible or an object of attraction to minors,
vagrants and/or other trespassers.
B. Its interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the
middle third of its base.
C. Exclusive of its foundation, it shows 33% or more of damage to or deterioration of
the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage to or deterioration of the
§ 110-5 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 120-4
120:1
§ 120-5. Inspections; report to Village Board.
Upon complaint about a building or on his own volition the Code Enforcement Officer
will cause to be made or make himself an inspection thereof and report, in writing, to the
Village Board his findings and recommend actions as to repair or demolition or removal.
§ 120-6. Consideration of report; order to repair or remove.
nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering.
D. It has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used.
E. It has been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous
to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of this
Village.
F. It has become or is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary, or utterly fails to
provide the amenities essential to decent living that it is unfit for human habitation
or is likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, safety or
general welfare of those living therein or adjacent thereto.
G. It has light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health,
safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein, with
particular reference to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as a determinant.
H. It has inadequate facilities for egress in cases of fire or panic, or has insufficient
stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of access or egress, again
referencing the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as a
determinant.
I. It has parts which have become so detached they may fail and injure members of
the public or others' property.
J. Is or may become a place of rodent infestation.
K. Presents any other danger to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the
public.
L. Is unfit for the purposes for which it may be lawfully used.
A. The Village Board shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution call for a
hearing on the report. That resolution, if it seems proper, will direct notice to the
owner of the property as listed in the current tax rolls and any other persons that the
Board may deem appropriate. The Board shall conduct the hearing, or may by order
appoint a disinterested person to do so. After hearing all testimony, the Board or its
appointed hearing office shall determine, in writing, if the building is unsafe and, if
so, whether it is to be repaired or demolished and removed.
B. In the event that the building or other structure shall be unsafe or dangerous under
such report, the Village Board may also request the Corporation Counsel to make
§ 120-4 MASSENA CODE § 120-6
120:2
§ 120-7. Contents of notice and hearing.
The notice shall contain the following:
§ 120-8. Service of notice.
Said notice shall be served:
§ 120-9. Filing with County Clerk.
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of the County
Clerk of the County of St. Lawrence.
an application to the Supreme Court for an order determining the building or other
structure to be a public nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured
or taken down and removed. The decision of the Village Board to bring such
application does not waive its right to call for a hearing on the report. [Added
8-6-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or dangerous.
C. An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe and secure
or demolished and removed.
D. A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall commence within
30 days of the service of the notice and shall be completed within 60 days
thereafter, unless for good cause shown such time shall be extended.
E. A date, time and place for the hearing, which shall be scheduled not less than five
business days from the date of service of the notice.
F. A statement that, in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the order to
secure or demolish and remove the building, the Village Board is authorized to
provide for its demolition and removal, to assess all expenses thereof against the
land on which it is located and to institute a special proceeding to collect the costs
of demolition, including legal expenses.
A. By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner, executor, administrator,
agent, lessee or any person having a vested or contingent interest in such unsafe
building as shown by the records of the Receiver of Taxes (or Tax Collector) or of
the County Clerk; or, if no such person can be reasonably found, by mailing such
owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of such notice directed to
his last known address as shown by the above records; and
B. By personal service of a copy of such notice upon any adult person residing in or
occupying said premises if such person can be reasonably found; and
C. By securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the unsafe building.
§ 120-6 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 120-10
120:3
§ 120-10. Refusal to comply; removal by Village.
If the owner fails or neglects to comply with the order of the Village Board within 20
working days (Monday through Friday, excluding holiday), after service as provided in
§ 120-8, the Village Board shall order the repair or the demolition and removal of the
building.
§ 120-11. Assessment of expenses.
All expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the proceedings to repair and
secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including the cost of actually
removing such building, shall be assessed against the land on which such building is
located and shall be levied and collected in the same manner as provided in Article 5 of
the Village Law for the levy and collection of a special ad valorem levy.
§ 120-12. Emergencies.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent danger to the
life, safety or health of any person or property, unless an unsafe building is immediately
repaired and secured or demolished, the Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the
Code Enforcement Officer to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe
building. The expenses of such repair or demolition shall be a charge against the land on
which it is located and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided in § 120-11
hereof.
§ 120-13. Compensation of surveyor.
The surveyor appointed as provided herein shall be paid reasonable compensation as
shall be fixed by the Village Board.
§ 120-14. Transfer of title.
The transfer of title by the owner of premises upon which an unsafe building or structure
is located shall be no defense to any proceedings under this chapter.
§ 120-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person upon whom an order as provided in this chapter has been served who fails,
neglects or refuses to place such unsafe building or structure in a safe condition as
designated in such order or who shall resist or obstruct the Code Enforcement Officer
or any other Village employee is carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, by guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York,
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day in which such offense continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 120-10 MASSENA CODE § 120-15
120:4
Chapter 125
CANNABIS
§ 120-15 CANNABIS § 120-15
125:1

ARTICLE I
On-Site Consumption Opt-Out
[Adopted 10-19-2021 by L.L. No. 6-2021]
§ 125-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article that the Village of Massena opt out of having on-site
cannabis consumption establishments licensed to operate or established within the
Village of Massena.
§ 125-2. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to New York Cannabis Law § 131, which expressly
authorizes villages to opt out of allowing on-site cannabis consumption establishments
to be licensed or established within their boundaries.
§ 125-3. On-site consumption opt-out.
§ 125-4. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena hereby opts out of having on-site
cannabis consumption establishments licensed or established within the boundaries
of the Village of Massena.
B. Pursuant to the New York Cannabis Law § 131, the Village of Massena hereby
requests the Cannabis Control Board to prohibit the establishment of on-site
consumption licenses contained in Article 4 of the New York State Cannabis Law
(Chapter 7-A of the Consolidated Laws) within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Massena.
§ 125-1 CANNABIS § 125-4
125:3

Chapter 130
CURFEW
§ 130-1. Policy; purpose; findings.
§ 130-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Massena (the
"Village") to minimize nocturnal crime, juvenile delinquency and vandalism and to
prevent the damage and destruction of both public and private property.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of the Village to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the Village and to maintain rule and order by prescribing,
in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations concerning the
presence of minors on streets, roads, highways, public parks or other public areas
of the Village at night; to reduce juvenile crime and vandalism; to protect the
children and minors of the Village; and to further family responsibility.
C. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village hereby finds that:
(1) There has been a significant breakdown in the supervision, normally provided
by certain parents, and guidance of minors, resulting in minors being involved
in a wide range of unacceptable conduct, including vandalism, noisy, rowdy
and disturbing behavior, larcenies, and harassment of Village residents.
(2) Significant numbers of minors have been congregating in the Village after
dark, causing disturbances to residents.
(3) Offensive activities of minors are not easily controlled by existing laws.
(4) The sense of the community is that there is a proper time for the cessation of
outdoor activities of minors.
(5) There is a need for a curfew for minors to achieve, under local conditions, the
policy and purposes herein stated.
(6) Curfew regulations will meet special needs, will enable the community to
better control streets and public places, will be a significant factor in
minimizing juvenile delinquency and will enable the police to act reasonably
and fairly to prevent the violation of laws by minors.
(7) The curfew hours declared by this chapter take into consideration the danger
hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulations of minors with the potential
risks incident to immaturity.
(8) Curfew regulations in other communities have been a significant factor in
reducing juvenile delinquency.
(9) Parental responsibility for the whereabouts and conduct of minors should be
the norm; as parental control increases, the likelihood of juvenile delinquency
decreases.
§ 125-4 CURFEW § 130-2
130:1
§ 130-3. Curfew established for minors.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a minor to be or loiter or remain
in, on or upon a public place within the Town/Village between the following hours (the
"curfew hours"): beginning at 10:00 p.m. and extending until 5:00 a.m. on the following
day.
§ 130-4. Exceptions and exemptions to curfew.
A minor in a public place during the curfew hours shall not be considered in violation of
this chapter under the following circumstances:
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings indicated:
KNOWINGLY — Includes knowledge of information which a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
parent's legal custody. It is intended to include neglectful or careless parents and
require such neglectful or careless parents to maintain a reasonable community
standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense
that a parent was indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 16 years of age or, in equivalent phrasing
sometimes employed herein, any person 15 or less years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive
parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis or as a person to
whom legal custody has been given by court order.
PUBLIC PLACE—Any place to which the public has access, whether privately or
publicly owned, including, but not limited to, public streets, roads, thoroughfares,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, recreation or shopping areas, stores, cafes,
restaurants, eating establishments, public transportation facilities, vehicles used for
public transportation, parking lots or any other public building, structure or area.
REMAIN or LOITER — To stay behind, to tarry or to stay in or upon a public
place.
TIME OF NIGHT — Based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern
standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, generally observed at that hour by
the public in the Town/Village.
YEARS OF AGE—Years of age continue from one birthday to, but not including,
the day of the next so that 15 or less years of age is equivalent to under 16 years of
age.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number
include the plural.
A. When the minor is accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor
to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of
§ 130-2 MASSENA CODE § 130-4
130:2
§ 130-5. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a parent knowingly to permit,
or by inefficient control to allow, a minor to be or loiter or remain in or on or upon a
public place in the Village during curfew hours under circumstances not constituting an
exception to or an exemption from or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter.
time and purpose within a specified area.
C. When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right to such exercise, provided that the minor has in his possession a writing,
signed by the minor and by a parent of the minor, with their home address and
telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be in
a public place during curfew hours in the exercise of a First Amendment right
specified in such writing.
D. When the minor is, with parental consent, in or on a public place in a case of
reasonable necessity.
E. When the minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either
side of or across the street from the place where the minor resides and the adult
owner or resident of that property has given permission for the minor to be there.
F. When the minor is, with parental consent, returning home from, and within one
hour after the termination of, a school or Village-sponsored activity or an activity
of a religious, voluntary, cultural or community organization.
G. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged in normal
travel and when the minor is engaged in bona fide interstate movements along
major routes through the Town/Village or interstate travel beginning or ending in
the Town/Village.
H. When the minor is engaged in, or traveling to or from a place of, employment.
I. When the minor is engaged on an errand involving a medical emergency or other
emergency involving an immediate and significant threat to life or property.
J. When the minor is authorized by a special events permit from the Mayor carried on
the person of the minor thus authorized, as follows:
(1) When necessary nighttime activities of a minor are inadequately provided for
by the provisions of this chapter, recourse may be had to the Mayor for a
special permit as circumstances warrant.
(2) Upon the Mayor's finding of necessity for the use of a public place or places,
and with written parental consent, the Mayor may grant a special permit, in
writing, for use of a specified public place or places by such minor, for such
specified periods of time as in the Mayor's judgment may be necessary.
(3) Such special permit may be revoked by the Mayor for good cause shown
following a hearing.
§ 130-4 CURFEW § 130-6
130:3
§ 130-6. Enforcement procedures.
§ 130-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a person is in a public place in violation
of this chapter, the officer shall notify the person of such violation and shall require
the person to provide his or her name, address, telephone number and how to
contact his or her parents. In determining the age of the person, and in the absence
of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's license, the officer shall
use his or her best judgment in determining age.
B. If the officer determines or has reason to believe that a person is in violation of this
chapter, he or she shall, if practicable, take the person to police headquarters, where
a parent shall be immediately notified and required to report to police headquarters
and procure the person, whereupon the parent shall be questioned to ascertain,
within constitutional limits, the relevant facts.
C. The officer shall file a written report.
D. The officer shall issue an appearance ticket or tickets as the circumstances require.
E. The minor shall be released to the custody of a parent.
F. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will assume the
responsibility of caring for the minor pending availability of a parent.
G. In circumstances where the procedures in Subsections B, E and F of this section are
impracticable, the officer shall comply with or cause compliance with the
procedures in Subsections A, C, D and H of this section.
H. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, send to a parent written notice of the violation, with a
warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the Curfew
Law, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedures contained in § 130-6 herein
and on each violation shall be treated as a first violator.
B. Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the provisions of this chapter
as a second-time violator will be required to perform 20 hours of community
service to be administered by the Village. In circumstances where community
service is impractical, refused or not completed, the officer shall comply with
§ 130-7C.
C. Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the provisions of this chapter
as a third-time violator shall be petitioned to Family Court in accordance with the
standards set forth by the St. Lawrence County Probation Department and the St.
Lawrence County Family Court.
D. Any parent convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for the first conviction, $100
§ 130-6 MASSENA CODE § 130-7
130:4
§ 130-8. Notice of regulations.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations established by it
shall be posted, from time to time, in, on or at such public or quasi-public places as may
be determined by the Chief of Police in order that the public may be informed of the
existence of this chapter and its regulations.
for the second conviction and $250 thereafter or by a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 15 days or shall be required to perform community service, or any
combination thereof.
§ 130-7 CURFEW § 130-8
130:5

Chapter 138
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
§ 138-1. Purpose of chapter.
Whereas, by Chapter 677 of the Laws of 1958, the Legislature of the State of New York
added to the Agriculture and Markets Law a new § 169 which reads as follows:
Delegation of Powers and Immunities in regard to Dutch Elm Disease in Municipalities.
The Powers and Immunities prescribed and granted in §§ 164, 165 and 167 of this
article may, within the limits of any municipality, be exercised and enjoyed by the
appropriate officers and employees of such municipality with respect and in regard
to the Dutch Elm Disease, if with the approval of the Commissioner and under the
direction of the Commissioner or his representative and if the local legislative body
of any such municipality by local law or ordinance elects to exercise and enjoy such
powers and immunities.
§ 138-2. Village Board to exercise powers.
Therefore, be it resolved, that pursuant to the foregoing provisions of said Chapter 677
of the Laws of 1958, that the Board of Trustees do hereby elect, on behalf of the Village
of Massena, to exercise and enjoy through its appropriate officers and employees the
powers and immunities prescribed and granted in §§ 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of
the Agriculture and Market Laws with respect and in regard to Dutch Elm Disease within
the limits of said Village.
§ 130-8 DUTCH ELM DISEASE § 138-2
138:1

Chapter 142
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 114.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 162.
Housing Code — See Ch. 186.
§ 142-1. Purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical energy, this
electrical local law is enacted to regulate the installation, alteration of wiring for electric
light, heat or power and signal systems operating on 50 volts or more, in or on all real
property within the Village of Massena.
§ 142-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code, except when the provisions of this chapter
or any other local law, ordinance or building code of the Village of Massena shall
differently prescribe, in which event compliance with the provisions of such local law,
ordinance or building code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this chapter.
The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as "National Fire
Protection Association, Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and adopted by the American
Standards Association.
§ 142-3. Electrical Inspector. [Amended 10-5-1982 by L.L. No. 8-1982; 8-6-1985
by L.L. No. 3-1985; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The Chief Inspector and inspection agencies approved by the Massena Electric
Department are hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the Village of Massena to
make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and hereafter
described, and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost
or expense of such inspections and reinspections be a charge against the Village of
Massena.
§ 142-4. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report, in writing, to the Chief Building
Inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce all the provisions of this chapter, all
violations of or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions of the
National Electrical Code, and of all local laws, ordinances and the building code as
referred to in this chapter insofar as any of the same apply to electrical wiring.
B. Inspections.
(1) The Inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical
§ 138-2 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 142-4
142:1
§ 142-5. Prohibited actions. [Amended 10-5-1982 by L.L. No. 8-1982; 8-6-1985 by
L.L. No. 3-1985; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to install
or cause to be installed, or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on
properties in the Village of Massena until an application for inspection has been filed
and has received the issuance of a temporary certificate, or a certificate of compliance
by the chief inspector and/or the inspection agency approved by the Massena Electric
Department.
§ 142-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any
rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall be liable to a fine and penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each
violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 142-7. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations in mines,
ships, railway cars, automotive equipment, or the installations or equipment employed
by a railway, electrical or communication utility in the exercise of its function as a utility,
and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall
not apply to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or corporation engaged
in electrical manufacturing as their principal business. It shall not apply to any building
which is owned or leased in its entirety by the government of the United States or the
installations in and on properties in the Village of Massena upon written
request of an authorized official of the Village of Massena or as herein
provided.
(2) The Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical
wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment, in and on properties
within the Village of Massena where he deems it necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(3) In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to make electrical
inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of the Village of
Massena.
C. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the proper officials
of the Village of Massena and owners and/or lessee of property where defective
electrical installations and equipment are found upon inspection.
D. Certificate of compliance.
(1) The Inspector shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance when
electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with this chapter.
(2) The Inspector shall direct that a copy of the certificate of compliance be sent
to the Village of Massena to the attention of the Building Inspector.
§ 142-4 MASSENA CODE § 142-7
142:2
State of New York.
§ 142-8. Construal; disclaimer of liability. [Amended 10-5-1982 by L.L. No.
8-1982; 8-6-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of
any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices,
appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by any
defect therein, nor shall the Village of Massena be deemed to have assumed any such
liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this chapter by the chief inspector
and/or the inspection agencies approved by the Massena Electric Department.
§ 142-7 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 142-8
142:3

Chapter 148
EXCAVATIONS
§ 148-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED EXCAVATION — Any excavation whether created in the course of a
building operation or otherwise and regardless of whether a building permit has been
issued for the same, which said excavation has remained in an open and unfinished
condition for a period of two weeks or more.[Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
EXCAVATION — Any uncovered cutting, or cavity in the earth of any depth or size
created by the removal of earth, stone, topsoil or any other substance.
§ 148-2. Filling of abandoned excavations.
Any excavation which has been abandoned as herein defined shall be filled in to the
original level of the ground and any topsoil removed shall be replaced by the owner or
lessee of the property where such excavation exists.
§ 148-3. Filling of cellars, etc., of razed buildings.
Any cellar, basement, excavation or other opening over which a building has heretofore
been erected which shall have been demolished or razed by any means whatsoever, shall
be promptly filled to the natural grade of the adjoining land with clean, nonburnable fill
containing no garbage, refuse, offal or any deleterious or unwholesome matter.
§ 148-4. Filling of existing cellars.
Every presently existing cellar, basement, excavation or other opening which has been
abandoned shall be immediately filled to the level of the adjoining land with clean,
common, nonburnable fill containing no garbage, refuse, offal or any deleterious or
unwholesome matter.
§ 148-5. Failure to comply. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Upon failure or neglect of any such owner of lands to comply with the provisions of
Chapter 148 and upon the expiration of a five-day notice served upon such owner by said
Village requiring compliance with Chapter 148 and said owner not having complied with
such notice, the Village may, by its duly constituted officers, agents, representatives and
servants, enter upon said premises and level and fill said property to the extent necessary
to bring the property into compliance with Chapter 148. The Village will assess the
expense thereof against said premises, to be collected, with interest, in the same manner
as Village taxes. The mailing of such notice to a nonresident owner of lands within said
Village addressed to his last known address shall be sufficient notice thereof.
§ 148-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any such owner or lessee who fails to fill in such excavations and replace any topsoil
removed within 30 days after notice, in writing, shall be in violation of this chapter and
§ 142-8 EXCAVATIONS § 148-6
148:1
shall be liable to a fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 148-6 MASSENA CODE § 148-6
148:2
Chapter 152
FAIR HOUSING
§ 152-1. Purposes and enactment.
For the purpose of providing and ensuring fair housing opportunities for all within
the Village of Massena, the Village Board of the Village of Massena in St. Lawrence
County, State of New York, under the authority of the General Municipal and Village
Laws, hereby obtains, enacts, and publishes this chapter.
§ 152-2. Definitions.
§ 152-3. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
Except as exempted by § 152-6, it shall be unlawful within the Village of Massena:
A. General: For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or phrases herein shall be
interpreted as follows, except where the context clearly indicates the contrary:
words used in the singular include the plural, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, the word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual, and the word "shall" is always mandatory.
B. Specific words or phrases: For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE — An act that is unlawful under
§§ 152-3, 152-4 and 152-5.
DWELLING — Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
FAMILY — Includes a single individual.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
A. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to
negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling
to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or
national origin.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or
rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin.
§ 148-6 FAIR HOUSING § 152-3
152:1
§ 152-4. Discrimination in the financing of housing.
It shall be unlawful within the Village of Massena for any bank, building and loan
association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise
whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate
loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying there for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling;
or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or
other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person
or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial
assistance, or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present
or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in
relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided
that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the
exception contained in § 152-6.
§ 152-5. Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.
It shall be unlawful within the Village of Massena to deny any person access to or
membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate broker's
organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings; or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such
access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin.
§ 152-6. Exceptions.
C. To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice,
statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that
indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation, or discrimination.
D. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a
person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status,
or national origin.
A. Sales/rentals by owners.
(1) Nothing in § 152-3 (other than Subsection C) shall apply to:
(a) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided, further, that in the case of the sale of
any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing
§ 152-3 MASSENA CODE § 152-6
152:2
in such house at the time of such sale, or who was not the recent resident
of such house prior to such sale, the exception granted by this subsection
shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-fourmonth
period; provided, further, that such bona fide private individual
owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on
his behalf under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right
to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than
three such single-family houses at one time; provided, further, that the
sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the
application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented (a) without
the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental
services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities
or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or
person, and (b) without publication, posting, or mailing, after notice,
of any advertisement or written notice in violation of § 152-3 of this
chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as may be necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
(b) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies
one of such living quarters as his residence.
(2) For the purpose of this exemption, a person shall be deemed to be in the
business of selling or renting dwellings if:
(a) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three
or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any
interest therein;
(b) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than
in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental
facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving
the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(c) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by,
or occupied by, five or more families.
B. Sales/rentals by religious organizations. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a
religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings
§ 152-6 FAIR HOUSING § 152-6
152:3
§ 152-7. Administration.
§ 152-8. Miscellaneous provisions.
to its members or from giving preference to its members.
A. Authority and responsibility. The authority and responsibility for publicizing,
administering, and enforcing this chapter shall be the Village's Fair Housing
Officer, to be designated by the Mayor of the Village of Massena.
B. Violations. Violations of this chapter shall be reported in person or in writing to the
Village's Fair Housing Officer.
C. Enforcement. Where sufficient cause exists to believe that the terms of this chapter
have been violated, the Fair Housing Officer shall institute a suit in the Village
Court against the alleged violator.
D. Penalties. Where a person or organization has been found, after a trial on the merits,
in violation of this chapter, a fine shall be imposed on such person or organization
not to exceed $500 for a first offense, and $1,000 for each additional offense. The
minimum find for violations of this chapter shall be $100 for a first offense, and
$500 for each additional offense. Each and every separate violation of this chapter
shall be deemed an offense for the purposes of imposing the appropriate fine.
A. Amendment. The Village Board may, on its own initiative or on petition, amend,
supplement or repeal the provisions of this chapter in conformity with applicable
law after notice and hearing.
B. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety or the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the highest standards,
shall govern.
C. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
D. Short title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Village of Massena Fair
Housing Law."
E. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption.
§ 152-6 MASSENA CODE § 152-8
152:4
Chapter 156
FILMING
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The Village of Massena recognizes that the Village's natural beauty, historical sites and
waterfront settings are attractive to individuals, organizations, corporations, groups, and
other entities involved in the business of filming for motion pictures, television and
other media. Because such activities may create a hazard to public safety, health or
welfare due to the time, location or duration of the filming or may unduly interfere
with vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, the Village desires to regulate such activities
through the issuance of permits. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedure
governing such permit process.
§ 156-2. Permit required.
§ 156-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUDGET—The projected grand total of spending to produce and complete the project.
CHARITABLE FILMS — Filming produced by a not-for-profit organization which
qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable
organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing
and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos.
FILMING — The activity of filming or recording on film, video, electronic or other
media, for transmission or commercial use, a movie, motion picture, film, commercials,
television program, documentary, show, performance, athletic or sports event or other
similar events or activities. Filming shall include the use of public property for persons,
equipment, vehicles, props, cameras and any other items or materials used in connection
with such filming, photographing or recording.
A. General. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter is required prior to any person or
entity engaging in the activity of filming, transmitting, or other recording of a
commercial, movie, short, documentary, or television program on any street or
public property in the Village. The permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk.
B. Exemption.
(1) A permit pursuant to this chapter shall not be required:
(a) For filming intended for the exclusive noncommercial use of the owner.
(b) If three or fewer individuals constitute the entire cast and crew engaged
in one of the activities described in Subsection A above.
(c) For filming by the news media.
(2) Persons making a charitable film or student film shall be obligated to obtain a
film permit but shall be exempt from the payment of a permit fee.
§ 152-8 FILMING § 156-3
156:1
NEWS MEDIA — The filming or videotaping for the purpose of a news broadcast or
reporting for electronic media.
PRODUCTION COMPANY—The individual or entity that is issued a permit to engage
in filming on Village-owned property or facilities.
STUDENT FILMS — Filming produced pursuant to the curriculum of an educational
institution chartered by the State of New York or offered by an officially recognized
nonprofit organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the
marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, photos or other
media created.
VILLAGE OF MASSENA FILM PERMIT — Written authorization to engage in
filming on Village-owned property or facilities.
VILLAGE OF MASSENA FILM PERMIT APPLICATION — A paper or electronic
form to be used to apply for permission to engage in filming on Village-owned property
or facilities.
§ 156-4. Application for film permit.
A. An application for a film permit shall be made via an application provided by the
Village and shall contain at least the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity doing the filming.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the location coordinator or other
contact person.
(3) Purpose of the filming.
(4) Projected grand total of spending to produce the project.
(5) Specific location of each property to be used in the filming.
(6) Dates and times of the day that the property will be used.
(7) A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity.
(8) The exact number and description of the personnel to be involved.
(9) Proposed use of any animals or pyrotechnics.
(10) The exact number and type of the vehicles and equipment to be used.
(11) If a student film, a letter with an original signature from the school involved
verifying that the filming is being done pursuant to the curriculum of an
educational institution chartered by the State of New York.
(12) If a charitable film, proof of the organization's Section 501(c)(3) status.
(13) Such other information as may be required by the Clerk or Board of Trustees.
B. Submission to the Village Clerk. The following materials shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk by the applicant at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of the
filming:
§ 156-3 MASSENA CODE § 156-4
156:2
§ 156-5. Permit restrictions.
§ 156-6. Fees and deposits.
(1) Completed application form.
(2) Required nonrefundable application fee.
(3) Certificate of insurance and completed indemnification agreement.
C. The Village Clerk will review a film permit application. Applications for projects
with a budget of $10,000 or higher will also be reviewed by the Village Board of
Trustees. The Village of Massena may grant, deny, or grant with restrictions or
conditions a permit and may, in its discretion, require a public hearing on the
application for a permit. In the event that a public hearing is required, all property
owners within 500 feet of the property on which the filming is to take place shall be
notified of the public hearing, by the Village at the cost of the applicant, by certified
mail, return receipt requested. An application for a filming permit may be denied if
the Village determines that the filming will create a dangerous condition,
unreasonably interfere with the use of the Village streets or public places, or create
a nuisance to Village residents. The Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion,
require additional monies to be paid as a fee or deposit based on factors involved in
a particular application, including but not limited to the size and times of the
production and the expected impacts on the Village and the public.
A. Every permit shall contain a date of commencement and a date of expiration as well
as the specific hours during which filming may occur. The Village Clerk or the
Village Administrator may administratively extend the expiration date of a permit
during its term by up to 10 days without further action by the Board of Trustees,
subject to reasonable requirements, including but not limited to additional deposits,
that may be set as a condition of the extension if granted.
B. The Board of Trustees may place reasonable limitations on the hours and operation
of filming based on the conditions of a particular neighborhood or the existence of
conflicting scheduled events.
C. Possession of an approved filming permit does not waive requirements set forth in
any other laws or codes.
D. Such other restrictions as the Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion, deem are
appropriate for the application and filming.
A. Nonrefundable permit fee. The permit fee is based on the budget of the project and
the length of the period for which the permit is requested. Fees shall be determined
as follows:
Period of 1-3 Days Period of 4-6 Days
Period of 7 or
More Days
$0 - $10,000 $100 $200 $350
$10,001 - $25,000 $250 $400 $550
§ 156-4 FILMING § 156-6
156:3
§ 156-7. Insurance and indemnification.
§ 156-8. Suspension and revocation of permit.
§ 156-9. Penalties for offenses.
Period of 1-3 Days Period of 4-6 Days
Period of 7 or
More Days
$25,001 - $50,000 $400 $600 $750
$50,001 - $100,000 $550 $800 $950
$100,000 or more $900 $1,000 $1,150
B. Traffic and pedestrian supervision deposit. If road closure and/or traffic control is
requested and approved, a nonrefundable deposit of $250 for each day of the
filming shall be paid to the Village at the time of the payment of the permit fee, and
the amount required for a traffic and pedestrian supervision deposit may be
increased by the Board of Trustees for a particular application.
C. Administrative and incidental cost deposit. The Village of Massena may require an
administrative and incidental cost nonrefundable deposit in an amount to be set by
the Board of Trustees for expected administrative and incidental costs incurred by
a particular application.
D. The Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion, lower, raise, or waive any of the
fees or deposits set forth in this chapter with regard to a particular application.
E. The applicant shall be responsible to the Village for any expenses that are actually
incurred that are not covered by the deposits required by this section or the Village.
A. No filming permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk until the applicant has filed
with the Village Clerk a certificate or policy of general liability insurance, naming
the Village of Massena as additional insured, and including personal injury and
property damage in the amount of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for the
duration of the filming or until the applicant has filed with the Village Clerk an
indemnification form provided by the Village which shall indemnify the Village
from any claim, loss, damage or other liability resulting from the actions of the
applicant or the filming for which the filming permit is issued.
B. Applicants seeking to make a student film may provide a certificate of insurance
issued on behalf of their educational institution.
C. The Board of Trustees may set different or additional requirements for a particular
application.
A. The Village Clerk or Village Administrator by administrative action or the Board
of Trustees may suspend or revoke a filming permit that has been issued at any time
for any reason.
B. In the event that a filming permit is suspended or revoked, the fees paid therefor
shall be forfeited and shall not be refunded to the applicant.
§ 156-6 MASSENA CODE § 156-9
156:4
A. Any person or entity who or which violates or fails to comply with any provision of
this chapter or any determination made hereunder, or who shall undertake filming
without a permit therefor, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
more than $10,000 per offense of this chapter, and each and every day that a
violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a single and separate violation of this
chapter.
B. The Village may seek injunctive or other court-ordered relief, and the election by
the Village to seek court-ordered relief shall not be exclusive of the other remedies
available to the Village herein.
§ 156-9 FILMING § 156-9
156:5

Chapter 158
FIREARMS
§ 158-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena hereby determines that the discharge of
firearms, BB guns, pellet guns and the use of explosives in populated areas is detrimental
to the safety and welfare of persons residing within those areas and is detrimental to the
environment due to the noise created thereby.
§ 158-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any handgun,
revolver, shotgun, pistol, gun, rifle or any other firearm that emits explosive powder
bullets, BB's or pellets of any kind, whether explosive or nonexplosive, or to detonate
explosives or fireworks of any kind within the geographical boundaries of the Village of
Massena.
§ 158-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 158-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the State Police, Sheriff's Department or the Village of
Massena Police Department, each of which is hereby authorized and empowered to issue
an appearance ticket for any violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 158-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a fine and
penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than
A. A law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties.
B. The lawful use of a firearm, rifle or shotgun in defense of person or property.
C. The authorized use of a pistol, rifle or target range regularly operated and
maintained by any duly organized not-for-profit corporation and wholly on
premises owned, rented or leased by said corporation but not within 1,000 feet of
any dwelling, and provided that said use will be conducted with due regard for the
safety of the surrounding community.
D. Explosive devices that are lawfully used for demolition, construction,
reconstruction or remodeling purposes.
E. Any individual who establishes a safe range for the purpose of shooting BB's or
pellets within an enclosed building.
F. A person discharging a firearm on any agriculturally worked land, provided that the
provisions of the Penal Law and Conservation Law of this state are adhered to.
§ 156-9 FIREARMS § 158-5
158:1
15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 158-5 MASSENA CODE § 158-5
158:2
Chapter 162
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
§ 162-0. Definitions. [Added 4-16-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPROVED CONTAINER — A properly maintained and utilized barbeque grill,
barbeque pit or outdoor fireplace that utilizes a spark-arresting screen and a lid or
wherein products of combustion pass through a stack or chimney from an enclosed
chamber. The total fuel area shall be three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height.
BARBECUE PIT — A noncombustible container designed for roasting or baking food
or meat over an open fire.
COOKING DEVICE — A noncombustible, listed device designed for cooking food or
meat. A listed cooking device shall be fueled by either natural gas, liquefied petroleum
gas (LP gas), or commercial charcoal or briquettes.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an
enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudge pots, and similar
devices associated with safety or occupational uses.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE — A noncombustible container designed for burning wood
wherein products of combustion are emitted into the air by either passing through a stack
or chimney from an enclosed container or emitting into the air without passing through
a stack or chimney from an enclosed container. The total fuel area shall be three feet or
less in diameter and two feet or less in height.
RECREATIONAL FIRE—An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where
the fuel being burned is contained in a container designed for burning and has a total fuel
area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious,
ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes.
§ 162-1. Disposal of ashes.
Ashes shall not be kept or deposited by any person, owner or occupant in any place in
this Village, except the same may be kept in a closed metal or earthen vessel or in a
brick, stone or concrete ash house or at a distance of 20 feet from any wooden structure.
§ 162-2. Accumulation of rubbish in street or alley.
No person, owner or occupant shall keep, store or accumulate any boxes, barrels, refuse
or other flammable materials on any street or in any lane or alley or in or near any
building or structure, or in any manner so as to endanger or expose any building or
property to fire.
§ 162-3. Open burning. [Added 8-19-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
A. Burning of certain items prohibited. No person shall burn, allow or permit to be
§ 158-5 FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION § 162-3
162:1
burned any brush, lumber, paper products, plastics, chemicals, trash, garbage,
rubbish, wood or other related items in the Village of Massena.
B. Indoor fireplaces, woodstoves and outdoor grills. Nothing contained herein,
however, shall prevent the operation of properly installed and maintained indoor
fireplaces, hearths, woodstoves or outdoor grills or fireplaces for the preparation of
food.
C. Burning by authorized government agencies. Government agents may be
authorized to burn structures, lumber, brush or other items, provided that approval
is granted by the Code Enforcement Office, including that additional permits
required by the Health Department or the New York Department of Environmental
Conservation are obtained and complied with.
D. The use of outside furnaces is prohibited within the limits of the Village of
Massena. An "outside furnace" is defined as any wood-burning device, designed
and intended for installation outside of the primary building on a lot and used to
produce heat for transfer to the primary or an accessory building on such lot.
[Added 12-6-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 11-21-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
E. Exceptions. Liquid propane and natural gas fire pits shall be permitted in the
Village for residential use only.
(1) All propane and/or gas fire pits shall:
(a) Be installed to manufacturer specifications.
(b) Meet all state and international building and fire codes.
(c) Be safety certified for the use in the United States
(d) Not be operated closer than 10 feet from any structure of flammable
material.
(e) Be placed on a noncombustible surface.
(f) Not have any gasoline or other flammable liquids or vapors stored within
25 feet of a fire pit.
(2) Any permanently installed gas fire pits will require a building permit for
installation.
F. Recreational fires. [Added 4-16-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) A recreational fire meeting the following criteria shall be permitted within the
Village of Massena.
(a) A cooking fire shall be contained in a cooking device designed for
cooking and be fueled by natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, or
commercial charcoal or briquettes.
(b) A recreational fire contained in a container, designed for burning
combustibles, positioned on a noncombustible surface, and that is not less
than 15 feet from a building, structure, driveway, or property lot line.
§ 162-3 MASSENA CODE § 162-3
162:2
§ 162-4. Opening hydrants without permission.4
No person shall open any hydrant without permission from the Mayor of the Village, the
Chief of the Fire Department, or one of his assistants.
§ 162-5. Obstructing fire access to hydrants.
No person shall deposit any building material or other material of any nature near or in
front of any hydrant or so as to prevent or obstruct free access to said hydrant at all times.
Materials used for fuel for a recreational fire shall consist of seasoned
wood only (not freshly cut or treated wood).
(c) A cooking fire in a container, designed as a barbecue pit, positioned on a
noncombustible surface, and that is not less than 15 feet from a building,
structure, driveway, or property lot line.
(2) Exception. The following are exempt from the restrictions in Subsection F(1)
above:
(a) A recreational fire that is hazardous, offensive, objectionable, or
unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property due to smoke or odor emissions shall be prohibited. The Code
Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief or Chief of Police, or his or her designee,
is authorized to order the extinguishment of a recreational fire which
creates or adds to a hazardous, offensive, or objectionable condition.
G. Attendance at recreational fires. Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until
the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a
minimum 4-A rating or other locally approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment,
such as dirt, sand, a water barrel, garden hose or fire truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization. [Added 4-16-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
H. Open-flame cooking devices. [Added 4-16-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated
on combustible balconies, decks, porches, or within 10 feet of combustible
construction.
(2) Exceptions. The following are exempt from the restrictions in Subsection H(1)
above:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings.
(b) Where buildings, balconies, decks, or porches are protected by an
approved automatic sprinkler system.
(c) Liquefied petroleum gas (LP gas) burners, used with a cooking device,
designed for cooking, having an LP gas container with a water capacity
of 2.5 pounds or less.
4. Editor's note: Former § 162-4, Driving over unprotected hose, was deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 162-3 FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION § 162-6
162:3
§ 162-6. Restricted area fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department, or one of his assistants in command, may prescribe the
limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no person, except persons residing therein,
members of the Fire Department, officials of the Village, and other persons admitted by
order of the chief or his assistant in command, shall be permitted to come.
§ 162-7. Commanding man and material by Fire Chief. [Amended 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
It shall be lawful for the Chief of the Fire Department, or any of his assistants in
command, to require the assistance of any citizen, resident or bystander to aid a person
or personal property.
§ 162-8. Fire Chief to make monthly inspections.
§ 162-9. Destruction of property by Fire Chief. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to cause an inspection to be made monthly of all premises within
the established fire limits, and to make a report thereof to the Board of Trustees.
B. Whenever in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department or the Board of
Trustees any premises are permitted to remain in violation of this chapter, or to
endanger the safety of property or create a fire hazard, they shall cause a notice in
writing to be served upon the owner or occupant of said premises requiring the
abatement of such dangerous condition and the removal of such fire hazards within
24 hours after service of such notice, and every such person permitting or allowing
such unsafe or dangerous place or condition to continue in violation of this chapter
after the expiration of said period of 24 hours, shall be liable to the penalty
hereinafter prescribed.
A. Whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of property from fire to
move or destroy property to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining
property from fire, it shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, or his
assistant in command, to cause the removal or destruction of such property, and for
the purpose of checking the progress of any fire he shall have the power to tear
down or blow up or cause to be torn down or blown up any building which he may
deem necessary to extinguish such fire or check the progress thereof.
B. The Fire Chief may require the occupants of any such building or structure, or part
thereof, to vacate the premises forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such
building or structure or part thereof until it is made safe. Except for the owner, no
person shall enter premises which have been ordered vacated unless authorized to
perform inspections or repairs or to demolish and remove such building or structure
or part thereof.
C. All costs and expenses incurred by the Village of Massena Fire Department in
connection with any work done to remove the danger or in connection with the
demolition and removal of any such building or structure shall be assessed against
§ 162-6 MASSENA CODE § 162-9
162:4
§ 162-10. Setting fires negligently.
A person who willfully, or negligently sets fire to or assists another to set fire to any
grass, or trash, or other material by means whereof the property of another is endangered,
or negligently suffers any fire upon his own land to extend beyond the limits thereof, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 162-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a fine and
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than
15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
the land on which such building or structure is located, and a bill for such expenses
shall be presented to the owner of the property, or if the owner cannot be
ascertained, then such bill shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Such assessment shall be and constitute a lien upon such land. If the owner shall fail
to pay for such expenses within 60 days after the bill is presented or posted, a legal
action may be brought to collect such assessment or to foreclose such lien. As an
alternative to the maintenance of any such action, the Village may file a certificate
of the actual expenses incurred as aforesaid together with a statement identifying
the property in connection with which the expenses were incurred, and the owner
thereof, with the Assessor, who shall, in the preparation of the next assessment roll,
assess such amount upon such property. Such amount shall be included in the levy
against such property, shall constitute a lien and shall be collected and enforced in
the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time and under the same
penalties as are provided by law for the collection and enforcement of real property
taxes in the Village of Massena.
§ 162-9 FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION § 162-11
162:5

Chapter 168
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 252.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 168-1. Findings of fact.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village of
Massena and that such damages may include destruction or loss of private and public
housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve
the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 168-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
§ 168-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights
or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
shall be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective
barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
§ 162-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-3
168:1
§ 168-4. Definitions.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in areas of special
flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL—A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, V, VO, VE or
V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundredyear
floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT—That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for occupancy
or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
§ 168-3 MASSENA CODE § 168-4
168:2
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high velocity waters,
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM
as Zone V1-30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special
flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING—A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY - FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of
a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory
floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but no water
surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary - Floodway Map and the water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPROOFING—Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the
basement, i.e., the top of a slab in concrete slab construction or the top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(2)
§ 168-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-4
168:3
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of the lowest
enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, is not
considered a building's "lowest floor," provided that such enclosure is not built so to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a
site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL—For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)—As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND—At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood
Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 168-12B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and design,
of any phase of a project or physical alteration of the property, and shall include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and/
or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations; or the
erection of temporary forms. It also includes the placement and/or installation on
the property of accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage trailers and building
materials. For manufactured homes, the actual start means affixing of the
manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement
§ 168-4 MASSENA CODE § 168-4
168:4
§ 168-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena.
§ 168-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood Insurance Study for
the Village of Massena of St. Lawrence County, New York," dated May 5, 1980, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps are
hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and
maps are on file at the Department of Public Works, 85 Robinson Road, Massena, New
York 13662.
§ 168-7. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program, effective October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for
the purpose of establishing and maintaining eligibility for flood insurance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 168-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and
no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has
been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes
of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to commence when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
(2)
§ 168-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-8
168:5
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned
for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Board of Trustees from
taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any
structure found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under
§§ 168-16 and 168-17 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 168-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village of Massena,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 168-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 168-11. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or any other
development within the area of special flood hazard as established in § 168-6.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials; drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing.
A. The following information is required where applicable:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including
the basement or cellar, of all structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure
will be floodproofed.
(3) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 168-13C(1).
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in
§ 168-14.
§ 168-8 MASSENA CODE § 168-11
168:6
§ 168-12. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be
the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level.
The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the floodproofing certificate shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer
or architect and certified by the same. Any further work undertaken prior to
submission and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
A. Permit application review. He shall:
(1) Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permit applications to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the area of special flood hazard. For the
purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means physical damage to
adjacent properties. An engineering study may be required of the applicant for
this purpose.
(a) If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation measures shall
be made a condition of the permit.
(4) Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions of
§ 168-13E, Encroachments.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with § 168-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, including data developed pursuant to § 168-13D(4), in order to administer
§ 168-14, Specific standards for flood hazard reduction, and § 168-15, Floodways.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. He shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
§ 168-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-12
168:7
lowest floor, including basement or cellar, of all new or substantially improved
structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement or cellar.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to
which the structure has been floodproofed; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 168-13 and
168-14.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter, including variances when granted and certificates of compliance.
D. Alteration of watercourses. He shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Director,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New
York, New York 10278.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
(1) The local administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations when
there appears to be a conflict between the limits of the federally identified area
of special flood hazard and actual field conditions.
(2) Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 168-6 and/or § 168-12B,
when available, shall be used to accurately delineate the area of special flood
hazard.
(3) The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the limits of the area
of special flood hazard when base flood elevations are not available.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 168-8 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this
chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall be subject to the
issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall be subject to the penalties described in § 168-8 of this
chapter.
G. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect
shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
§ 168-12 MASSENA CODE § 168-12
168:8
§ 168-13. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify that the development is in compliance with the requirements of
either the development permit or the approved variance.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local
administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard area will
have, upon completion, a certificate of compliance issued by the local
administrator.
(3) All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted subject to
§ 168-12G and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic information,
floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment analysis which may
have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored
to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Manufactured homes shall be
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest
adjacent grade when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
§ 168-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-13
168:9
§ 168-14. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as
set forth in § 168-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, and § 168-12B,
Use of other base flood data, the following standards are required:
flooding. When designed for location below the base flood elevation, a
professional engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments, including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
E. Encroachments.
(1) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood elevation data
is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed to determine the effects
on the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard set forth in
§ 168-12A(3). This may require the submission of additional technical data to
assist in the determination.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data is
available pursuant to § 168-12B or 168-13D(4) and no floodway has been
determined, the cumulative effects of any proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point.
(3) In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is provided or
available pursuant to § 168-12B, the requirements of § 168-15, Floodways,
shall apply.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
§ 168-13 MASSENA CODE § 168-14
168:10
resident structure shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial
or other nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the
structure is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located below
the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(a) If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to automatically (without human intervention)
allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer
or a licensed architect or meet the following criteria:
[1] There shall be a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
[3] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
(b) If the structure is to be floodproofed:
§ 168-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-14
168:11
§ 168-15. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. (See
§ 168-4, Definitions.) The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to high velocity
floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional threats from potential erosion forces.
When floodway data is available for a particular site as provided by §§ 168-6 and
168-12B, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
[1] A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice to
make the structure watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
[2] A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor shall
certify the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the structure is floodproofed.
(2) The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such certificates
noted in this section.
C. Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without base flood
elevations. New construction or substantial improvements of structures, including
manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above the base flood elevation as may be determined in § 168-12B or two feet
above the highest adjacent grade where no elevation data is available.
(1) New construction or substantial improvements of structures, including
manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the proposed
foundation of the structure.
(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically (without human intervention) allow for the entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or openings, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
§ 168-14 MASSENA CODE § 168-15
168:12
and other development, are prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 168-16. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Village of Massena, shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such
decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(6) The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain
management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting
search and rescue operations during periods of flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including search and rescue operations and maintenance and repair
§ 168-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-16
168:13
§ 168-17. Conditions for variance.
of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 168-16D and the purposes of this chapter,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
provided that § 168-16D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures and contributing structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the contributing
structures procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public
safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threat to public safety or extraordinary public
expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor
§ 168-16 MASSENA CODE § 168-17
168:14
below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from lowest floor
elevation.
§ 168-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 168-17
168:15

Chapter 174
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 104.
§ 174-1. Legislative authority; title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the
Village of Massena."
§ 174-2. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as such words
and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, unless otherwise
provided herein or the context requires a different meaning. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OFFICER — The Chief of Police.
VILLAGE — The Village of Massena.
§ 174-3. Conduct of games; restrictions.
§ 174-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately or upon filing with the Secretary of State after
approval thereof by the voters of the Village voting thereon at the next succeeding annual
election to be held on March 20, 1979.5
A. Games of chance may be conducted in the Village by an authorized organization
after obtaining a license therefor, in accordance with the provisions, requirements
and limitations of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, the rules and
regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
B. The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is authorized, except as otherwise
provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
5. Editor's Note: This chapter was approved 3-20-1979 at a special election by a majority of the qualified electors voting
thereon.
§ 168-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 174-4
174:1

Chapter 176
GARAGE SALES
§ 176-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale,"
"rummage sale," "yard sale," "tag sale" or any other similar casual sale of tangible
personal property, owned by the owner of the premises or by any other persons residing
therein, which sale is promoted by any means whereby the public is or can be made
aware of said sale.
§ 176-2. Hours and duration of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only.
The duration of any garage sale cannot last longer than five full calendar days nor be
conducted more than twice per calendar year on the same premises.
§ 176-3. Advertisements; signs.
§ 176-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. No sign shall be placed on the public right-of-way or on property other than where
the sale is being conducted. No lighted signs shall be used.
B. The sign shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be removed within 24
hours after completion of the sale.
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
§ 174-4 GARAGE SALES § 176-4
176:1

Chapter 180
HANDBILLS, NOTICES AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Block parties — See Ch. 106.
Garage sales — See Ch. 176.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 210.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276.
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature:
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, any newspaper duly entered
with the U.S. Postal Service, in accordance with the federal statute or regulation, and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law;
and, in addition, with no less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not
A. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing;
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment,
or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the
interests thereof by sales;
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the
purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection shall not apply
where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition,
or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in
connection with the dissemination of the information which is not restricted under
the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order;
provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the
holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition,
or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by
any law of this state, or under any local law of this municipality; or
C.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for
advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged
as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 176-4 HANDBILLS, NOTICES AND BILLBOARDS § 180-1
180:1
included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or a newspaper.
OBSCENE — Material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable
or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient
interests or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual
conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law, which, taken as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed
or used in whole or part for residential purposes, whether inhabited or uninhabited,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
§ 180-2. Posting notices, placards, bills, etc. prohibited.
No person shall stick, post, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be
done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper
or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way
or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, or telephone pole, or railway structure,
hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, railings, gates or other parts
of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole,
box or fixture of any fire alarm except such as may be authorized or required by the laws
of the United States, New York State, and local laws of this municipality.
§ 180-3. Throwing handbills in public places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place within the
municipality; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out
or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such a handbill.
§ 180-4. Placing handbills in or upon vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting
or distributing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill to the owner or other
occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same.
§ 180-5. Distribution of handbills on uninhabited or vacant private premises
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
uninhabited or vacant.
§ 180-1 MASSENA CODE § 180-6
180:2
§ 180-6. Distribution of handbills where prohibition properly posted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisements," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy
disturbed, or to have any such commercial or noncommercial handbills left upon such
premises.
§ 180-7. Distributing handbills at private premises; exceptions.
§ 180-8. Handbills depicting certain matter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or
any handbill:
§ 180-9. Existing local laws not affected.
This chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any existing local law,
either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient
merchants, or any person using the public streets or places for any private business or
enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered herein.
§ 180-10. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or penalty
of not more than $250, or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
A. No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon private premises except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon
such private premises; provided that except where the premises are posted as
provided in this chapter or where anyone upon the premises requests otherwise, a
person may place or deposit any such commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon such private premises, if such handbill is contained in a plastic bag ventilated
with air holes throughout the surface of the bag, or unventilated plastic bag no
greater than six inches in width, or if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to
secure or prevent such handbills from being blown or drifted about such premises
or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. The provisions of the section shall not apply to the distribution of United States
mail or to newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private property
in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property.
A. Which is reasonably likely to incite or to produce imminent lawless action; or
B. Which is obscene or unlawful.
§ 180-6 HANDBILLS, NOTICES AND BILLBOARDS § 180-10
180:3

Chapter 186
HOUSING CODE
§ 180-10 HOUSING CODE § 180-10
186:1

Part 1
Residential Premises
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 186-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to Residential Premises."
§ 186-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to provide basic and uniform standards, in terms of
performance objectives implemented by specific requirements governing the condition,
occupancy and maintenance of residential premises, and establishing reasonable
safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 186-3. Effective date.
This Part 1 shall take effect on the first day of February 1969.
§ 186-4. Scope.
This Part 1 shall apply to residential premises as follows:
§ 186-5. Nonapplicability.
This Part 1 shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile home courts, or to transient-type
occupancies and uses, including, but not limited to, nursing and convalescent homes,
hotels, motels, tourist camps, farm-labor camps, travel trailers and trailer parks and other
forms of temporary housing.
§ 186-6. Application.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of mixed
occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
dwellings, except as specifically excluded in § 186-5.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
A. The provisions of this Part 1 shall supersede local laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or regulations are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 1, provided that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent the adoption and enforcement of a law,
ordinance, code or regulation which is more restrictive or establishes a higher
standard than those provided in this Part 1, and such more restrictive requirement
or higher standard shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
§ 186-1 HOUSING CODE § 186-6
186:3
§ 186-7. Reference to Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and other laws.
[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises, and materials, assemblies
and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be reasonably safe to persons
and property, and in conformity with applicable statutes of the State of New York and
orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of such work,
materials, assemblies or equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the
same is reasonably safe to person and property.
§ 186-8. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE—A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the
residential building, and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental to the
principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory uses may include,
among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations of this
chapter, or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
BASEMENT—That space of a building that is partly below grade which has more than
1/2 its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average established curb level
or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or showers, or both,
and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes.
B. Where a provision of this Part 1 is found to be in conflict with a provision of a
zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply or sewage
disposal law or ordinance, or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or other local
law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more
restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and playrooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants, and in connection with the
management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and workshops, storage rooms for linen, bedding, furniture, supplies
and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to occupants and
tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof used primarily for
the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
§ 186-6 MASSENA CODE § 186-8
186:4
See definition of "toilet room."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls, or within
exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons, animals or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade, which has
more than 1/2 of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below the average established
curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Building containing not more than one dwelling unit
occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Building containing not more than two dwelling units
occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary
and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT—A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to the exterior at
street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways, corridors, stairways, ramps,
fire escapes and all other elements necessary for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by one or
more persons.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide or
procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and accepted as
authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — Natural surface of the ground, or surface of ground after
completion of any change in contour, abutting building or premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be habitable space. See
definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public space" and "exit."
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit,
lodging house, lodging unit or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
KITCHEN—Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum width of five
feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for cooking or
preparation of food.
LODGING HOUSE—A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of furnishing
lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit, used or
intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use and in
part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
A. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
B. A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by one or two
§ 186-8 HOUSING CODE § 186-8
186:5
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See definition of "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — A city, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE—Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath, toilet, laundry,
rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler rooms, closets and other spaces
for service and maintenance of the building and those spaces used for access and vertical
travel between stories. See definitions of "habitable space," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system, the vent
system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections, devices and
appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and domestic
purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such as lobbies,
lounges, reception hall, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms, banquet and dining rooms
and their kitchens and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or
solution, and which may include industrial wastes and liquids containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TOILET ROOM — Enclosed space, containing one or more water closets, which may
also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing fixtures. See definition
of "bathroom."
UNIFORM — Consistent in color, shape, size, design, texture and form.[Added
11-21-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural or
mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven devices.
families and more than four lodgers residing with either one of such families.
A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or two-family
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying guests or tenants.
C.
A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons, used or
occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or for similar uses.
D.
A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home but not
including private or public hospitals or public institutions. (See § 186-5 for certain
multiple dwellings not within the scope of this Part 1.)
E.
§ 186-8 MASSENA CODE § 186-8
186:6
ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 186-9. General requirements.
§ 186-10. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings for the purpose of this Part 1 shall be classified in respect to their occupancies
as follows:
§ 186-11. Maximum occupancy.
A. Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this Part 1 shall comply with
the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning occupancy, size, light and
ventilation in order to provide safe and healthful environment.
B. The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply in the same
manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all residential buildings.
A. One- and two-family dwellings. Buildings containing one or two dwelling units
with less than four lodgers residing with a family in either one of such dwelling
units.
B. Multiple dwellings. Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than
four lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling units.
C. Multiple dwellings.
(1) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(2) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(3) Lodging houses.
(4) Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons, used or
occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or for similar uses.
(5) Garden apartments.
D. Accessory structures. Garages, carports and similar type structures on residential
premises.
A. In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to the number
determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable rooms, other than kitchens,
as follows:
(1) One occupant per room having floor area of at least 80 but less than 120 square
feet.
(2) Two occupants per room having floor area of at least 120 but less than 180
square feet.
(3) Three occupants per room having floor area of 180 or more square feet.
§ 186-9 HOUSING CODE § 186-11
186:7
§ 186-12. Prohibited uses.
§ 186-13. Habitable space.
B. In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to the number
determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
C. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity houses and
providing sleeping accommodations for more than five persons the maximum
number of occupants so accommodated in any habitable room shall be limited to
the number determined on the basis of the floor area, in square feet, of the room
divided by 50 square feet per occupant.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen, nonhabitable space
or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes any communal
kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area, or any nonhabitable space
or public space other than dining space.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six inches
over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling height is less
than five feet shall not be considered in computing floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a minimum of
150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and other
habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of floor area and
shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking space or foyer,
shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The area of the opening in the
dividing partition between the alcove and the room shall be at least 80% of the
wall area of such partition measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40
square feet. The depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor
area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in determining
light and ventilation requirements for the room. An alcove with an area of 60
square feet or more, but less than the required area of a habitable room, shall
be separately lighted and ventilated as required for habitable space.
B. Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where required
windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the basement space exceeds
four times its clear height.
C. Light and ventilation.
§ 186-11 MASSENA CODE § 186-13
186:8
§ 186-14. Public space.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or more
windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any combinations
thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at least six inches above the
adjoining finished grade, or are above the roof. The amount of light shall be
equivalent to that transmitted through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the
floor area of the habitable space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through openable
parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that face legal open
spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above a roof, or through openable
parts of skylights, providing total clear ventilation area equal to not less than
5% of the total floor area of each habitable space.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation in addition
to natural ventilation.
D. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces
outside the dwelling unit.
(2) Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each other and
from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide privacy.
(3) Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces outside
the lodging units.
(4) A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be accessible to
the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room without going through a
dwelling unit or lodging unit of another occupant.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six inches measured
from finished floor to finished ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways artificial light shall be electric
lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage for occupants and
users. Such lighting shall conform to the following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the distance
between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that no wall is more than
15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt per square
foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp or lamps with
a total of not less than 25 watts.
§ 186-13 HOUSING CODE § 186-14
186:9
§ 186-15. Nonhabitable space.
(c) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt per square
foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp or lamps of a
total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not correspond
to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall be used.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation, conforming to
the requirements for habitable space, or with mechanical ventilation.
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple dwellings
shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall have
provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings shall be
located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible from any sleeping
room without passing through any other sleeping room.
(3) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with sleeping
rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings shall be provided in
each story containing habitable space, and shall be accessible thereto.
(4) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in separate rooms
for each sex where there are five or more employees, shall be readily
accessible to such employees and shall not open directly into any public
kitchen or other public space used for the cooking or preparation of food.
(5) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be
provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with artificial light
appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space shall be
provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with ventilation in
accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that such
openable areas shall be not less than 11/2 square feet for bathrooms or
toilet rooms and not less than three square feet for kitchenettes.
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cubic feet per minute
§ 186-14 MASSENA CODE § 186-15
186:10
§ 186-16. Access and vertical travel between stories.
§ 186-17. Exits.
for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than 100 cubic feet per
minute for kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat producing, airconditioning
and other equipment, shall be ventilated to the outer air, and air
from these spaces shall not be recirculated to other parts of the building.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs and
crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation openings shall be such as
to minimize deterioration of structural members from condensation or other
causes, in conformity with generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in conformity with
generally accepted standards so as to serve the occupant.
B. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and
stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the interior of the
building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that occupants may escape
safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the building,
there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one or more exit
openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings approved exits shall be provided.
§ 186-15 HOUSING CODE § 186-17
186:11

ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 186-18. General requirements.
§ 186-19. Exterior protection.
§ 186-20. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of sustaining
safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil without undue
differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement of the building or of any
structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all structural
members which may become structurally unsound if left unprotected. Causes of
such deterioration include, among others, action of freezing and thawing,
dampness, corrosion, wetting and drying, and termites and other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year shall be
maintained so that ground and surface water will not penetrate into habitable
spaces, basements and cellars.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and to prevent
entrance of moisture, termites and vermin. Such protection shall consist of shoring
where necessary, subsoil drains at footings, grouting of masonry cracks,
waterproofing of walls and joists and other suitable means.
B. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such maintenance shall
consist of painting, installation or repair of walls, copings and flashings,
waterproofing of joints, waterproof coatings, installation or repair of termite
shields, poison treatment of soil or other suitable means.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent leakage into
the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of roofing, flashings,
waterproof coatings or other suitable means.
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture and the flow of air from such
spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to prevent deterioration of
structural members. Such provisions shall consist of maintenance of openings in
foundation walls to provide adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering
the ground in the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade, blocking openings in
stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls, frequent destruction of
termite tubes from the soil to wood floor members above, poison treatment of soil
and other suitable means.
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound. Such
protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement or repair where necessary,
§ 186-18 HOUSING CODE § 186-20
186:13
frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate means.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and to prevent
leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance shall consist of clearing flue
stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing masonry where necessary and other
suitable means.
D. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose or
defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance shall consist of
removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
E. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent leakage of
water through the floor under normal conditions of use and floor washing and
resultant deterioration or defects in structural members and ceilings below.
Maintenance shall consist of repairs which effectively provide the moisture and
waterproof qualities required for the particular floor.
§ 186-20 MASSENA CODE § 186-20
186:14
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety Requirements
§ 186-21. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 186-22. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 186-23. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and decorative
treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and interior trim shall be of materials that
will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 186-24. Fireplaces.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved locations, any
highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning fluids
and similar materials, or any combustible refuse liable to spontaneous combustion,
such as waste paper, boxes, rags or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways or
passageways, at doors or windows, or in any other locations where in the event of
fire such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or interfere with fire-fighting
operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings which would
permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be separated from
residential space by approved fire separations which will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from other spaces
in the building by approved fire separations which will retard the spread of fire and
prevent flammable or toxic vapors originating within the garage from being
transmitted to other parts of the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used, or intended to be used, for burning fuel in
open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and shall be installed so that
nearby or adjacent combustible materials and structural members shall not be
heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to flame shall be of
materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so that they
cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks or embers from the
fire.
§ 186-21 HOUSING CODE § 186-24
186:15

ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 186-25. General requirements.
§ 186-26. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning, refrigerating, cooking,
fire-protection and radiation-production equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters,
escalators and other mechanical additions, installations or systems for the use of the
building shall be installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions
of use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or welfare because
of structural defects, or a source of ignition, or a radiation hazard, and will not
create excessive noise or otherwise become a nuisance. Equipment and systems
include, but are not limited to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers,
pipe covering, wiring, fittings and materials used as part of, or in connection with,
such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be adequately
protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be guarded to
protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable condition.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken structural members
nor cause damage or deterioration to any part of the building through fixture
usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all times in
residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of the building shall
be connected to such approved source, and shall not be subject to
contamination. When available from a public source, the potable water supply
system shall not be connected to private or unsafe water supplies. [Amended
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(2) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to provide at all
times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function
satisfactorily and without undue noise under all normal conditions of use.
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that water used for
purposes of cooling or heating shall not be reintroduced into the domestic
water supply system nor be distributed through such equipment to plumbing
fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices arranged to
relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
§ 186-25 HOUSING CODE § 186-26
186:17
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system and such
system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an adequate and approved
system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to receive
and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or subsurface
waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into a waterway unless it has
first been rendered harmless through subjection to treatment in conformity
with generally accepted standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures, destroy the
pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage disposal process shall
not be discharged into the building drainage system unless it is provided with
approved devices suitable for intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system shall be
equipped with a water seal trap.
(6) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the pipes may be
readily cleaned.
(7) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be maintained so as to
provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes in order that siphonage,
aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of trap seal under ordinary
conditions of use.
(8) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and maintained so as to
minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost closure, the return of foul air to
the building or the creation of a nuisance to adjacent premises.
(9) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus containing food,
water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be equipped with air brakes
adequate to prevent contamination of such contents from any possible backup
of sewage through the direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
(1) Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be drained. Storm
drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and approved system of stormwater
disposal where available. Storm drains shall be discharged in such manner that
water will not flow onto sidewalks.
(2) Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable provision shall
be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of noncombustible material.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing systems
§ 186-26 MASSENA CODE § 186-26
186:18
designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to furnish cold water to
every water closet and urinal, and hot and cold water to every sink, lavatory,
bathtub and shower required therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be
furnished at 130° F. to 140° F. temperature range from 6:00 a.m. to midnight.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures consisting
of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink.
(b) One water closet.
(c) One bathtub or shower.
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged as
individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six sleeping rooms, or fraction
thereof, there shall be provided plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged as a
dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons, or fraction thereof, so
accommodated there shall be provided and located adjacent thereto plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than 1/3 of the
required number of water closets.
(6) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on residential premises.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material and shall be
free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible for their
intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible, lighted and
ventilated.
G. Swimming pools.
(1) Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be clean. Water
§ 186-26 HOUSING CODE § 186-26
186:19
§ 186-27. Fuel gas.
supply shall be protected against potential pollution from all sources, including
cross-connection and backflow.
(2) Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and adequately drained.
Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the swimming pool and
arranged so that water from such areas will drain without entering the pool.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall be
adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each period the pool
is in use. Equipment containing gases or disinfectants capable of giving off
irritating, toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt, sand or other
foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
H. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be watertight,
verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and capable of withstanding
the working pressures under normal operation.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or structures
other than for tank use, except where specially designed for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and maintained in
proper working condition.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or automatic
sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to furnish water in
sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel-gas-piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to remain
gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel-gas-piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to meet the
maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning appliances connected
thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off all
gas supply and such means shall be maintained in good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the piping in
close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas meters and
gas-pressure regulators shall be located so that they are protected from damage.
§ 186-26 MASSENA CODE § 186-27
186:20
§ 186-28. Heating.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be installed with
clearance for ventilation, and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
E. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure in excess of
one psi gauge shall be provided with a device to reduce such pressure to not more
than 1/2 psi gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service supplies
equipment using gas at high pressures.
F. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing open flame
or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be arranged so
that containers can be replaced without shutting off the flow of gas to
equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a hazard to the
premises served, or to the surrounding property.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures
and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such
means shall be located outside the building, and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
A. General requirements.
(1) Residential buildings intended for occupancy between the first day of
September and the first day of June of the following year shall be provided
with heating equipment designed to maintain a temperature of not less than
68° F. at a distance of three feet and more from exterior walls, and at a level of
five feet above the floor, in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet
rooms. The capability of the heating equipment to maintain such indoor
temperature shall be based on the average of the recorded annual minimum
outside temperatures for the locality. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
(2) In multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain the indoor
temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms at
70° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when the outside temperature falls below
55° F.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be installed and
maintained so that the emission or discharge into the atmosphere of smoke, dust
particles, odors or other products of combustion will not create a nuisance or be
detrimental to the health, comfort, safety or property of any person.
§ 186-27 HOUSING CODE § 186-28
186:21
C. Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for heating shall
conform to the requirements of such equipment used for ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water heaters
shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such equipment shall be made with
pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is installed on, or
adjacent to, combustible materials, the location, insulation, clearance and the
control of the equipment shall be such that the temperature on the surface of the
combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which it is located
shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for complete combustion
at the rated gross output of the equipment and for the ventilation of the
enclosure to prevent the accumulation of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air supply provided
by means of one or more openings to the exterior, or by means of fixed
openings to interior spaces which open to the exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to suitable
chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents. Unvented heaters
burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms normally kept
closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or gas vent.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or gas vent
when the discharge of products of combustion into the space where the
equipment is installed would be a hazard.
§ 186-28 MASSENA CODE § 186-28
186:22
§ 186-29. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or temperatures shall be
provided with means to relieve safely such pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heat-producing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel supply shall
be cut off. When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded, the
input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a safe rate. When
the water level in a steam boiler drops below a predetermined level, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of pilot light or main
burner of liquefied-petroleum-gas equipment occurs, the fuel supply to each
pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing multiple
dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that equipment burning gas or
liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage space, shall be permitted in stories at or
above grade where elevated so as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of
flammable gases.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and maintained
so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight, noncombustible, and capable
of withstanding the action of flue gases without softening, cracking, corroding
or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion to the outer
air.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall have
noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas without
softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the temperature to which they will
be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas-vent connections shall be provided with
means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(6) No flue shall have smoke-pipe or gas-vent connections in more than one story
of a building.
(7) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different tenancies shall not
be connected to the same flue.
B. Fire safety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and maintained so that
under conditions of use the temperature of any combustible material adjacent
thereto, insulated therefrom or in contact therewith, does not exceed a safe
§ 186-28 HOUSING CODE § 186-29
186:23
§ 186-30. Incinerators. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Incinerators are prohibited in the Village of Massena.
§ 186-31. Electrical.
temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a chimney or
flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark arrester of
noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have sufficient total clear area to
permit unrestricted passage of flue gases. Openings in spark arresters shall be of
such size as to prevent passage of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity with generally
accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a potential source of ignition
of combustible material or a potential source of electrical hazard.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the surface on
which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations or where
exposed to explosive or flammable gases, or to excessive temperatures, shall
be of a type approved for the purpose and location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against excessive current
by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise protected by
insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the danger of high voltages
from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or sparks shall
be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be installed and
maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity, and
lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide adequate
illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric wiring system shall be
connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in each dwelling
unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and directional signs,
visible from the approach to the exits, except that such signs shall not be
§ 186-29 MASSENA CODE § 186-31
186:24
§ 186-32. Cooking and refrigeration.
§ 186-33. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and two-family
dwellings.
required in those portions of a building which contain dwelling units only, or
in which exit from sleeping rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit doorway
is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the word EXIT
for exit signs and the words TO EXIT, with a suitable pointer or arrow,
indicating the direction of exit, for directional signs. Letters for signs shall be
conspicuous, readily discernible, and at least six inches high, except that for
internally illuminated signs the height of such letters shall be at least 41/2
inches.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or internally by
electric lights, and shall be kept illuminated at all times when the building is
occupied.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good operating
condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and connected
in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall be made with pipe or
tubing of solid metal.
(4) Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining rooms
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain: at least one kitchen sink; at least one kitchen
gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not less than four top burners;
at least one electric or gas-type refrigerator with adequate food storage
capacity, but in no case less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space
and eating facilities where provided in the kitchen area shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and two linear
feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a dining room at any
particular time.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
§ 186-31 HOUSING CODE § 186-34
186:25
§ 186-34. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in multiple dwellings.
A. Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple dwellings.
B. Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall not be used for
air-conditioning purposes.
C. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the rapid spread
of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be prevented, and so that
under conditions of use the temperature of any combustible material adjacent
thereto, or in contact therewith, will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not be used as
plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a fire or smoke
hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction shall be
separated from such construction by a clearance of at least 1/2 inch or by a
noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4 inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior and shall be
quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents emit odors, fumes
or vapors shall not be circulated to other occupied spaces within the building.
D. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and maintained, so
as not to constitute a hazard of nuisance, and so as to prevent the possibility of
fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being drawn into the system.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for incoming
and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake openings shall
provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that also contain
fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed intake openings from the
exterior to supply sufficient air so that the fuel-burning equipment is not
adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not create a
nuisance.
E. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may accumulate and
§ 186-34 MASSENA CODE § 186-34
186:26
§ 186-35. Fuel oil.
§ 186-36. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
become a potential source of hazard or nuisance shall be provided with
adequate means of ventilation to remove such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply for the
maximum number of persons for which such spaces are designed.
F. Safety controls.
(1) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation of all
central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously identified and in
readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(2) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space or more
than one fire area or more than one story of a building shall be provided with
controls arranged so that under abnormal rise in temperature of the air in the
system the fans causing normal circulation shall stop and require manual
restart.
(3) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided with an
emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable sign giving
instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed by means of
fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to the premises
served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be provided
with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed piping. Pipes
to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks. Terminals of fill and vent
pipes shall be located outside buildings at a safe distance from building
openings.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause minimum interference
to effective discharge of water.
§ 186-34 HOUSING CODE § 186-36
186:27
§ 186-37. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple dwellings.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the open
position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all
times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leakage.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall be provided
with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two round-bottom pails filled with
sand.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their designated
locations and in a condition which will permit efficient operation without
delay.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be free from
physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with durable signs
in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a signal
outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not be used for
storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the maintenance of the elevator or
dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or electrical protective
device inoperative, except where necessary during tests, inspections or
maintenance.
§ 186-36 MASSENA CODE § 186-37
186:28
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 186-38. Purpose and general requirements.
The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform property and maintenance
standards governing the condition of all properties within the incorporated Village of
Massena, including residential units. The Board of Trustees finds that properly kept and
maintained properties are essential to the health and safety of the Village, including but
not limited to the aesthetics of the Village and the surrounding community. Poorly kept
and maintained properties can adversely affect the value of nearby properties. Moreover,
certain conditions, as set forth in this chapter as nuisances, endanger the safety of persons
and the security of private property. The Board of Trustees also finds that if not kept or
properly maintained the exterior of the building or structure may constitute a blighting
factor on adjoining property. Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity
with the provisions of this article so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 186-39. Open areas.
§ 186-40. Buildings and structures.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect buildings and
structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch
basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers, approved combined storm and sanitary
sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed
necessary.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and substantial
condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
E. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not inherently resistant
to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating of paint or
other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings shall be
maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
C. All incidental structures shall be built a minimum of three feet from sidewalks.
Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions detrimental
to safety or health. Exterior wood surfaces that are not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating of paint or other
suitable preservative.
§ 186-38 HOUSING CODE § 186-41
186:29
§ 186-41. Infestation and screening.
§ 186-42. Garbage and refuse.
§ 186-43. Nuisances.
The following conditions are hereby declared to be nuisances and the maintenance of
such nuisances is hereby prohibited within the Incorporated Village of Massena. It shall
be unlawful for any owner of real property within the Village or the agent of such owner
and/or any person, firm or corporation lawfully occupying any real property within the
Village to permit:
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and
rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for exterminating insects, vermin
and rodents shall conform to generally accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows and other
openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh
or other suitable materials.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be provided with
self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows and other openings used for
ventilation shall be appropriately screened. Screens shall not be required in rooms
located sufficiently high in the upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of
mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the collection, storage,
handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate garbage or refuse
in public halls and stairways.
A. Whatever is dangerous to human life and health.
B. Uncut grass, weeds, brush or any portion of said growth to obtain a height in excess
of 12 inches.
C. Rubbish or rubble to accumulate thereon.
D. Boats or motor vehicles or portions thereof to be parked or stored for unreasonable
periods of time or to be parked or stored if it is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
junked or substantially damaged and is not intended to be used or in no condition
for legal use upon the public highway.
E. Whatever building or structural part or cellar thereof is overcrowded or not
provided with adequate means of egress or is not sufficiently supported, ventilated,
sewered, drained or cleaned.
F. Whatever renders soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
G. Slaughterhouses, privies, hogpens, accumulations of dung or manure, carcasses,
swill, brine, pigeon coops, urine of animals or any stinking, obnoxious, offensive,
foul or filthy liquids or other matters or conditions.
§ 186-41 MASSENA CODE § 186-43
186:30
§ 186-44. Notice of violation.
The Board of Trustees shall adopt a resolution requiring the owner and/or person in
control of any property found not to be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter to comply with those provisions. A copy of the notice of adoption of said
resolution shall be served upon such owner and/or person in control of said property by
ordinary mail, specifying the manner and time within which to comply, that is, within
seven days from the date of postmark of the notice.
§ 186-45. Failure to comply.
Upon failure to comply with the requirements of such notice, the Board of Trustees shall
authorize the work to be done and pay the cost thereof out of general funds appropriated
by the Board of Trustees for such purpose. In case of such failure to comply, the owner
and/or person in control of the property whereon the violation occurs is deemed to
consent to the right of entry by the Village officials for the sole purpose of inspecting
and correcting such violation.
§ 186-46. Reimbursement of Village.
The Village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or the services
rendered, as herein above provided, by assessment against the lots or parcels of land
where such work was performed or services were rendered for so much of the actual or
complete cost as incurred upon and from each lot or lots by the assessment of all such
cost of such removal, including legal fees against the real property affected.
H. Discarded material of any kind, rubbish, or refuse that is maintained beyond
normally scheduled garbage removal.
I. Accumulations of brush, tree stumps, or other vegetative waste or rubble or
construction waste that is maintained beyond normally scheduled garbage removal
J. Ponds or pools of stagnant water.
K. Pits, holes, excavations, uncovered wells or other declivities of land which are
unsightly or are liable to cause injuries to persons falling therein or therefrom.
L. Barbed wire, razor wire, electrified fences, or such fences as are otherwise
forbidden by the provisions of the Code of the Incorporated Village of Massena.
M. Accumulations of junk, old metals or machinery, rags or newspapers.
N. On private property located within any residence district of the Village, the
maintenance of any container actually accommodating or designed to accommodate
more than one cubic yard of rubbish, refuse or discarded material of any kind or the
maintenance, within any residence district on private property, of any bulk storage
containers for any period of time whatsoever. For the purposes of this chapter, a
"bulk storage container" is defined as a standard Dempster Dumpster Gallon E-Z
Pack front-end-loading-type container or an equal container for garbage and other
waste materials that can be hauled directly to the point of disposal or emptied into
a large compactor-type truck for disposal.
§ 186-43 HOUSING CODE § 186-47
186:31
§ 186-47. Additional duties and responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants.
A. Buildings and structures. The owner, operator or occupant shall maintain each and
every part of the building or structure free of all nuisances and any hazards to the
safety of the occupants, pedestrians and all persons utilizing the premises or
abutting roadways and maintain accessory structures and appurtenant equipment in
suitable condition and good repair, capable of performing the function for which
the same was designed or intended to be used, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures that are not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be sealed and regularly treated with a protective coating of
paint or other suitable preservative sufficient to prevent deterioration. All such
surfaces shall be maintained free of excessive flaking, peeling and crumbling.
(2) Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway shall be kept free from
holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water within any building or
structure.
(3) All buildings and structures shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition, free from litter, debris, rubbish, garbage, junk, vermin, rodents and
health, safety and physical hazards of any kind. No building shall, except in
emergency or ongoing construction, be boarded up in part or whole except by
permission of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Foundations of every building and structure shall be maintained structurally
sound and in good repair so as to prevent the accumulation of moisture within
the space enclosed by such foundation, and such foundation and any window
or door thereon shall be protected against the entrance of rodents.
(5) Roofs of every building or structure used for residence or commercial
purposes shall be maintained weathertight. All roofs, gutters and downspouts
shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
(6) The exterior of every building and structure and all appurtenances thereto,
both above and below the roof line, shall be maintained in good repair, in a
safe condition and weathertight so as to resist decay or deterioration from any
cause.
(7) All exposed surfaces shall be maintained free of damaged, disintegrating,
crumbling, broken or missing materials, excessive pitting or corrosion and
unsafe defects, and all broken or missing glass panes shall be replaced.
(8) The exterior of every building and structure shall be maintained free of
buckled, sagging, broken, partially missing, rotted or decayed walls, doors,
windows, porches, balconies, steps, stairways, railings, balusters, chimneys
and decorative trim. The exterior of every building and structure shall be
maintained so that the appearance of the premises shall not constitute a
blighting factor for adjoining property.
B. Yards and open areas. The owner, occupant or other person having charge of any
§ 186-47 MASSENA CODE § 186-47
186:32
§ 186-48. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
premises shall maintain the yards and open areas thereof in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Fences and retaining walls shall be maintained in a safe condition.
(2) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions.
(3) All snow, ice and other obstruction upon any public sidewalk shall be removed
for the length of the property frontage by the owner or occupant of the
adjoining land as soon as possible following the cessation of snowfall or
frozen precipitation. Whenever any such public sidewalk, or any part thereof,
shall be coated with ice which cannot satisfactorily be removed, the owner and
occupant of the premises abutting thereon shall as an alternative to said
removal of the ice, cause such public sidewalks to be made safe and
convenient for pedestrians by covering the ice with sand or other suitable
substance.
(4) All snow and ice accumulating higher than a point four inches below the
bottom of the lowest outlet on any fire hydrant, and within a radius of three
feet from the center of such hydrant, shall be removed by the owner and
occupant of the premises adjoining the hydrant.
(5) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to
persons in the vicinity thereof shall be removed. Heavy undergrowth and
accumulation of plant growth which is noxious or detrimental to health shall
be eliminated or removed. Trees, hedges, bushes, shrubs and vegetation of any
kind shall be kept pruned or trimmed.
(6) The yards and open areas of any premises shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and
safe condition, free from litter, debris, rubbish, garbage, junk, vermin, rodents
and health and safety hazards of any kind.
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this article shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
article within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50 nor
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
§ 186-47 HOUSING CODE § 186-48
186:33
article.
§ 186-48 MASSENA CODE § 186-48
186:34
Part 2
Mobile Homes And Home Courts
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 186-49. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to Mobile Homes and
Mobile Home Courts."
§ 186-50. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide basic and uniform standards in terms of
performance objectives implemented by specific requirements governing the
construction, occupancy and maintenance of mobile homes and mobile home courts, and
establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the occupants
and users thereof.
§ 186-51. Effective date.
This Part 2 shall take effect on the first day of February 1969.
§ 186-52. Scope.
This Part 2 shall apply to mobile homes used, or intended to be used, for year-round
dwelling accommodations in fixed locations and to mobile home courts.
§ 186-53. Application.
§ 186-54. Reference to Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and other
laws. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. The provisions of this Part 2 shall supersede local laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or regulations are
inconsistent with the provision of this Part 2, provided that nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance or
regulation which is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those
provided in this Part 2, and such more restrictive requirement or higher standard
shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. In a case where a provision of this Part 2 is found to be in conflict with a provision
of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply or
sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or other
local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or requirement which is the
more restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Installations, alterations and repairs to mobile homes and mobile home courts, and
materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and shall comply with applicable statutes
of the State of New York and orders, rules and regulations issued by authority
§ 186-49 HOUSING CODE § 186-54
186:35
§ 186-55. Permit.
No permit shall maintain or operate a mobile home court which falls within the purview
of Chapter VII of the New York State Sanitary Code without first having obtained a
permit from the state, county or city health department office having jurisdiction.
§ 186-56. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Part 2:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of
the mobile home and which is attached thereto or located on the same mobile home lot.
Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, portable, demountable or permanent
enclosures, shade structures and carports.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations of this
chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
COMMUNITY AREA — An area or space within a mobile home court, including
fences, walls and other minor constructions, which is designed for joint use of occupants
or restricted to nonresidential use.
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE — A structure within a mobile home court providing
laundry, toilet, recreation, parking or other common facilities, including management
office and storage buildings.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide or
procedure in the field of construction of mobile homes or mobile home courts or related
thereto, recognized and accepted as authoritative.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking purposes;
excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage spaces and enclosures for
equipment installations.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT — Mobile home electrical, plumbing,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning systems and equipment used for living purposes,
including cooking and refrigeration equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and provided with
the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking
and refrigeration. See "trailer."
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and improved
for the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT—A designated site within a mobile home court for the exclusive
use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
thereof.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this Part 2, conformity of installations, alterations
and repairs of mobile home court buildings and their accessory structures, and of
materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection with such buildings and
structures, with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, shall be prima facie evidence that such work,
material, assembly or equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property.
§ 186-54 MASSENA CODE § 186-56
186:36
MOBILE HOME STAND—That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
PATIO—A paved outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile home living
area.
STORAGE LOCKER — An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliary general
storage space for an individual mobile home.
TRAILER (TRAVEL OR VACATION) — A movable living unit equipped with a
chassis but lacking any of the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "mobile home."
§ 186-56 HOUSING CODE § 186-56
186:37

ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Homes
§ 186-57. General requirements.
§ 186-58. Design and construction.
Mobile homes shall be structurally sound, effectively insulated, and capable of
sustaining designed dynamic loading.
A. Mobile home design and construction shall conform to generally accepted standards
of the mobile home industry.
B. Materials, assemblies and equipment shall conform to generally accepted standards
with respect to strength, durability, corrosion and fire resistance, and other qualities
recognized under such standards.
C. Habitable and nonhabitable space shall be arranged, located, lighted and ventilated
so as to be appropriate for the intended use.
D. Mechanical systems and equipment shall be designed, installed and located so that
under normal conditions of use such systems and equipment shall be capable of
functioning safely and efficiently without being forced to operate beyond the
designed capacity.
E. Equipment requiring operation, inspection or maintenance shall be located so that
easy access to it is provided.
F. Plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall be properly connected to approved
sources of supply when a mobile home is in a fixed location and occupied for living
purposes.
G. Mobile home units, including mechanical systems and equipment, shall be
maintained and operated so as to be free of conditions conducive to personal injury
or detrimental to health or welfare.
A. Body and body framing.
(1) Body frames shall be designed and constructed as complete units. Wall and
floor surfaces shall be firmly attached to body framing members. Doors and
windows shall be securely framed in place. Framing and exterior skin shall be
surface-treated or painted to prevent deterioration.
(2) Roofs shall be pitched for proper drainage and shall be weathertight. Roof
decks shall be of metal or noncombustible materials.
(3) Wood body framing shall be of seasonal lumber and shall provide adequate
support and rigidity. Members shall be joined so as to ensure permanent
attachment to each other.
(4) Metal body framing shall be of structural formed sections, riveted, bolted or
welded together. Where different metals are joined, precaution shall be taken
to prevent electrolytic action.
§ 186-57 HOUSING CODE § 186-58
186:39
§ 186-59. Space requirements.
§ 186-60. Light and ventilation.
(5) Insulation of floors, roof and exterior walls shall consist of noncombustible
materials.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided to minimize deterioration of structural members
from condensation or other causes.
B. Chassis.
(1) Chassis shall extend substantially the length of the body and shall be capable
of supporting the live and dead loads to which subjected.
(2) Tongue or drawbar shall be secured to the chassis and shall be capable of
supporting the weight of the forward end of the mobile home. If designed to
support gas cylinders, the tongue shall be of sufficient strength and shall
permit secure attachment.
(3) Hitch shall be securely attached to the tongue so as to become an integral part
of the tongue.
(4) Axles, spring, assemblies and wheels shall be capable of supporting the
calculated loads.
C. Placement. Placement of mobile home on mobile home stand by jacks or supports
shall be such as to ensure the retention of the mobile home in a fixed position.
A. Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of occupants of a mobile home shall
be limited to the number determined on the basis of the square feet of floor area of
habitable space, exclusive of habitable space used for cooking purposes, in
accordance with the following:
(1) One-hundred and fifty square feet for one or two occupants.
(2) Two-hundred and fifty square feet for three occupants.
(3) Eighty square feet additional for each occupant thereafter.
B. Height of habitable space. Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of
seven feet over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling height is
less than five feet shall not be considered in computing gross floor area.
C. Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have provisions for
privacy, and shall be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
D. Prohibited uses. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes shall not be
used for sleeping purposes.
E. Exits. A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an
emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
A. Habitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with natural light and ventilation
§ 186-58 MASSENA CODE § 186-60
186:40
§ 186-61. Mechanical systems and equipment.
adequate for the intended use of each habitable space in accordance with the
following:
(1) Window area shall equal at least 10% of the floor area of each habitable space.
(2) Openable area of windows and other openings used for natural ventilation of
each habitable space shall equal at least 45% of the required window area, or
mechanical ventilation shall be provided as set forth in § 186-61B(16).
B. Nonhabitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with light and ventilation
adequate for the intended use of nonhabitable space in accordance with the
following:
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with light of
sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions and the safe use of the space and the appliances, equipment and
fixtures.
(2) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with natural
ventilation consisting of openable areas of not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms and toilet rooms, and not less than three square feet for kitchenettes;
or mechanical ventilation shall be provided as set forth in § 186-61B(16).
A. Plumbing.
(1) A mobile home shall contain:
(a) A kitchen sink.
(b) A flush-type water closet.
(c) A bathtub or shower.
(d) A lavatory.
(2) Hot-and cold-water supply shall be provided at kitchen sink, bathtub or shower
and lavatory. Cold water shall be supplied to the water closet.
(3) Plumbing system shall be designed and arranged so as to facilitate connecting
to approved exterior water-supply and sewage-disposal systems, provide
adequate water supply to all plumbing fixtures and dispose of all liquid wastes
therefrom.
B. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
(1) A mobile home shall contain space-heating equipment and water-heating
equipment.
(2) Areas allocated for installation of space-heating and water-heating equipment
shall provide adequate clearance so that the surface of adjacent combustible
materials will not exceed a safe temperature. Curtains and draperies shall not
be used in such areas.
§ 186-60 HOUSING CODE § 186-61
186:41
(3) Space- and water-heating units shall be of an approved type for installation in
a mobile home. Fuel-burning water heaters and furnaces, other than those
having a sealed combustion space, shall not be located in sleeping rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(4) Space-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum
inside temperature of 70° F., based on the average of the recorded annual
minimum outside temperatures for the locality, and shall be provided with
manual or automatic temperature-control devices.
(5) Water-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each hot-water
outlet an ample supply of water at a minimum temperature range of 130° F. to
140° F. and such units shall be provided with safety devices arranged to relieve
hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
(6) Electrical space- and water-heating equipment shall be of an approved type
and shall have adequate circuit-protection devices.
(7) Gas and liquid fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically designed for the
type of fuel used. Flues and vents shall be suitable for the type of fuel used and
shall be installed so that the surface of adjacent combustible materials will not
exceed a safe temperature.
(8) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas shall have
a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to the main burner when
the pilot flame is extinguished.
(9) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using liquefied petroleum
gas shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to the
pilot light and main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
(10) Fuel-burning space and water heating units shall be vented. Other fuel-burning
equipment shall be vented where the discharge of products of combustion into
the space where the equipment is installed would be unsafe.
(11) Liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be provided with
means to prevent spilling of fuel.
(12) Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside the mobile
home, or in a space that is vented to the outside and is vaportight to the inside.
(13) Warm-air-supply ducts and fittings shall be of noncombustible materials.
(14) Return air ducts shall be of noncombustible material where exposed to
temperatures which are unsafe for combustible materials.
(15) Return air grilles in doors and partitions shall be of a permanent nonclosable
type. Openings for return air shall not be located in bathrooms, toilet rooms or
kitchenettes.
(16) Mechanical ventilation, where required, shall exhaust air at rates not less than
the following:
(a) For habitable space -- two air changes per hour.
§ 186-61 MASSENA CODE § 186-61
186:42
§ 186-62. Maintenance.
A mobile home shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
(b) For bathrooms and toilet rooms -- 25 cfm.
(c) For kitchenettes -- 100 cfm.
(17) Air conditioning for habitable space provided in lieu of mechanical ventilation
shall supply an amount of air not less than that set forth in § 186-61B(16), with
at least 25% of the required quantity taken from the outside.
C. Electrical.
(1) A mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service
equipment.
(2) Electrical wiring shall have adequate capacity for designed lighting and
appliance equipment. Individual circuits shall contain overload protection
devices.
(3) At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple of 12 linear
feet of wall space or major fraction thereof in each habitable space and
kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have permanently installed
lighting fixtures and switches located so as not to be an electrical hazard.
(4) Exterior equipment shall be weatherproofed to ensure protection of equipment
from the elements. Service equipment shall have means for quick
disconnection from the source of supply.
(5) Provision shall be made for grounding noncurrent-carrying metallic parts of
the electrical system. Such grounding shall be common to one external supply
point. Provision shall be made for exterior source grounding of electrical
system.
D. Cooking and refrigeration.
(1) A mobile home shall contain cooking equipment and refrigeration equipment.
(2) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an approved type
for installation in a mobile home and shall have adequate circuit-protection
devices.
(3) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an approved type
for mobile home installation and connections to rigid pipe shall be made with
approved flexible metal gas appliance connectors.
(4) Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for heating.
A. Interior. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall be maintained free of obstructions.
B. Garbage and refuse. Suitable containers shall be provided for the temporary storage
of garbage and refuse within the mobile homes.
§ 186-61 HOUSING CODE § 186-62
186:43
C. Screening. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to the mobile home shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows and other
openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
D. Extermination. Mobile home shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and
rodents. Extermination shall be effected in conformance with generally accepted
practice.
E. Flammable materials. Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable materials
shall be stored in a safe, approved manner.
§ 186-62 MASSENA CODE § 186-62
186:44
ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Courts
§ 186-63. General requirements.
§ 186-64. Utilities.
A. Design and construction.
(1) Design and construction of mobile home courts shall conform to applicable
zoning and building regulations and generally accepted standards for mobile
home courts.
(2) Open areas shall be adequate to assure privacy, natural light and ventilation for
each mobile home and sufficient for essential outdoor uses.
B. Stormwater drainage.
(1) Mobile home courts shall have adequate facilities for drainage of surface and
subsurface water.
(2) Grading of the entire property shall be such as to facilitate the safe and
efficient drainage of surface water.
(3) Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers, approved
combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems
shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
C. Surfacing. Walks, driveways and parking spaces shall be provided with paved and
durable surfacing so as to provide safe and easy access under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Overhead wires. Wires installed above driveways and parking spaces shall have a
clearance of not less than 18 feet.
E. Exterior lighting. Artificial lighting shall be provided to illuminate walks,
driveways and parking spaces for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at
night.
F. Maintenance. Mobile home court shall be properly maintained so as to assure the
desirable residential character of the property.
G. Travel or vacation trailers. No occupied travel or vacation trailer or other form of
temporary-type living units shall be permitted in a mobile home court.
A. Water, sewage, gas and electricity.
(1) A mobile home court shall be provided with the following utilities:
(a) A water supply system.
(b) A sewage disposal system.
(c) An electrical system.
§ 186-63 HOUSING CODE § 186-64
186:45
§ 186-65. Mobile home lots.
(2) Utilities, including gas-piping system where provided, shall have sufficient
capacity to supply the requirements of the mobile home court and for the
maximum number of connected mobile homes.
B. Water supply system. Water supply system shall be designed to provide a sufficient
supply of potable water, under adequate pressure, to outlets servicing mobile
homes, community structures, drinking fountains, hose connections, hydrants, etc.
C. Private water system. Where a public water supply system is not available, an
adequate private water supply system, approved by the state, county or Village
health department having jurisdiction shall be provided.
D. Sewage disposal system.
(1) Sewage disposal system shall provide each mobile home and community
structures containing plumbing fixtures with an adequate and safe method of
sewage disposal.
(2) No sewage from a plumbing system shall be disposed of into the waters of the
State of New York, except where specially approved by the authority having
jurisdiction, in accordance with Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation
Law. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
E. Private sewage disposal system. Where a public sewage disposal system is not
available, an adequate private sewage disposal system, approved by the state,
county or Village health department having jurisdiction, shall be provided.
F. Gas piping system. Gas piping system shall be designed to provide a supply of gas
sufficient to meet the maximum demand without undue loss of pressure at the
connection to the mobile home farthest from the source of supply.
G. Electrical system. Electrical system shall be designed to provide adequate capacity
to supply the connected load without exceeding the allowable current-carrying
capacity of the conductors.
A. Mobile home stand.
(1) A mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand capable of retaining the
mobile home in a fixed position.
(2) Mobile home stand shall be adequately compacted and at such elevation,
distance and angle, in relation to the accessway, as to facilitate the safe and
efficient placement and removal of the mobile home.
B. Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be of durable construction and
appropriate for intended use and location.
C. Patios. Patios shall be located so as to provide safe and easy access from the mobile
home.
D. Storage lockers. Storage lockers shall be designed to provide adequate storage
facilities convenient to the mobile home.
§ 186-64 MASSENA CODE § 186-65
186:46
§ 186-66. Community areas.
§ 186-67. Community structures.
Community structures shall be structurally sound and appropriate for intended use and
location.
§ 186-68. Community fuel storage.
A mobile home court shall be provided with facilities for the safe and efficient storage
of required fuels.
E. Utility connections.
(1) A mobile home lot shall be provided with the following utility connections:
(a) A water supply connection.
(b) A sanitary drainage connection.
(c) An electrical receptacle.
(2) Utility connections, including gas connection where provided, shall be readily
accessible at the mobile home stand and shall have means for safe and efficient
hookup to the mobile home.
(3) Water supply connection shall be located a safe distance from sanitary
drainage connection and shall not be subject to surface drainage. Means shall
be provided for a suitable watertight connection, without cross connection and
danger of freezing.
(4) Sanitary drainage connection shall be at proper location relative to the mobile
home, and piping shall have a continuous grade to the point of disposal.
Drainage connection shall be provided with suitable fittings to permit a
watertight junction to be made with the mobile home outlet.
(5) Gas connection shall provide a suitable gastight connection to the mobile
home.
(6) Electric system connection receptacle or terminal box shall be of an approved
weatherproof type. Such receptacle shall have provision for an equipment
ground.
A. Community areas, including community facilities, shall be appropriate for intended
use and location.
B. Fences, walls and other minor constructions shall be capable of sustaining
anticipated loads.
C. Swimming pools, playground equipment, etc., shall be designed so as not to be a
potential hazard.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas. Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers having a
capacity exceeding 125 gallons shall be located not less than 25 feet from the
§ 186-65 HOUSING CODE § 186-68
186:47
§ 186-69. Property maintenance.
nearest mobile home, structure, building and lot line, and shall not be subject to
damage from moving vehicles.
B. Fuel oil. Fuel oil and other flammable materials shall be stored so as not to be a fire
hazard.
A. General. A mobile home court shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and orderly
condition.
B. Premises. Premises shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
C. Brush and weed control. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowths. Accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to
health shall be eliminated.
D. Infestation. Grounds and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and
rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for purposes of extermination shall
conform to generally accepted practice.
E. Structures. Exterior wood surfaces of structures that are not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating of paint or other
suitable preservative.
F. Garbage and refuse. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
§ 186-68 MASSENA CODE § 186-69
186:48
Part 3
Administration And Compliance
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 186-70. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known as "Administration and Compliance Provisions
Supplementary to Applicable Housing Standards."
§ 186-71. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 3 is to provide basic and uniform administration of, and
compliance with, applicable housing standards and to establish the responsibilities of
parties concerned therewith.
§ 186-72. Effective date.
This Part 3 shall take effect on the first day of February 1969.
§ 186-73. Scope.
This Part 3 shall apply to administration of and compliance with applicable housing
standards.
§ 186-74. Nonapplicability.
This Part 3 shall not apply to premises which are not within the scope of applicable
housing standards.
§ 186-70 HOUSING CODE § 186-74
186:49

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 186-75. Administrative agency.
§ 186-76. Powers and duties.
A. There shall be established or designated by the Board of Trustees a Code
Enforcement Office to administer and secure compliance with the applicable
housing standards. Such office is hereinafter referred to as the "Agency."
[Amended 10-16-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
B. The Agency shall be under the direction and charge of a chief officer who shall
have as his representatives such assistants and inspectors as may be necessary to
carry out effectively the powers and duties of the Agency.
C. All personnel of the Agency shall be qualified and appointed as prescribed by local
law, and shall be furnished with appropriate official badges or identification cards.
D. All personnel of the Agency shall be free from personal liability for acts done in
good faith in the performance of their official duties.
A. The Agency shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable housing
standards and securing compliance therewith, and shall be empowered to adopt
rules and regulations necessary for securing such compliance, and for its own
organization and internal management, provided that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the applicable housing standards.
B. The Agency shall be authorized to conduct surveys of housing in any area of the
municipality to determine the condition of premises, extent of deterioration, lack of
facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, extent of
overcrowding, land use and other relevant factors.
C. It shall be the duty of the chief officer:
(1) To cause periodic inspections to be made not less than once every five years
of all premises within the scope of applicable housing standards.
(2) To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing violations or
other unsafe or insanitary conditions.
(3) To order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in or on any
premises in violation of provisions of the housing standards or of rules and
regulations adopted by the Agency, to state in the violation order a reasonable
time limit for compliance therewith and, where necessary, to order the
vacation of premises found unfit for human habitation.
(4) To request the chief legal officer of the municipality to take appropriate legal
action in the name of the Agency upon failure of the responsible party to
comply with such violation order within the time specified therein.
(5) To cause a search of the Agency's recorders of housing violations existing on
any premises and to issue a certified statement thereof upon receipt of written
§ 186-75 HOUSING CODE § 186-76
186:51
§ 186-77. Inspection.
§ 186-78. Records.
The Agency shall keep records of all complaints received, inspections made and
violations found regarding premises regulated by the housing standards. Records shall
be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by local law and shall be available for public
inspection.
§ 186-79. Judicial review. [Amended 10-16-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984]
Any person or persons justly or severally aggrieved by any final order of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Agency under Part 3 of this chapter may seek to have such order
reviewed by the Supreme Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the New York
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 186-80. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Every person who shall fail to comply with a violation order issued by the Agency within
the time limit stated thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall
be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than one
year, or both.
request and payment of any fees required by local law or ordinance.
(6) To study housing conditions in the municipality.
(7) To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private agencies
engaged in the study and improvement of housing conditions.
(8) To publish an annual report of housing conditions in the municipality,
accomplishments of the Agency and recommendations for the future.
D. Where violations of the housing standards exist and pose an immediate hazard or
danger to the health, safety or welfare of building occupants or of the public, the
chief officer may issue an order citing the violation and directing such action by
such municipal agency as is necessary to remove or abate the immediate hazard or
danger.
A. Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance of their duties,
to enter any premises during normal business hours and in emergencies whenever
necessary to protect the public interest.
B. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for providing access
to all parts of the premises within their control to authorized agency personnel
acting in the performance of their duties.
§ 186-76 MASSENA CODE § 186-80
186:52
ARTICLE XII
Compliance
§ 186-81. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 186-82. Responsibilities of lodging house operators.
Lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance with the housing standards
in regard to the following:
§ 186-83. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the housing
standards in regard to the following:
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the housing standards,
and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact that this chapter may
also place certain responsibilities on operators and occupants, and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which party shall
assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance, condition and
operation of service facilities, and for furnishing adequate heat and hot-water
supply in multiple dwellings.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the housing standards.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodging house premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
D. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and appliances
within his control, as well as other building equipment and facilities, in an
operative, clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls to
the maximum permitted by the housing standards.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and appliances, as
well as other building equipment and storage facilities in that part of the premises
which he occupies or controls, in a clean and sanitary condition, and providing
§ 186-81 HOUSING CODE § 186-83
186:53
reasonable care in the operation and use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and sanitary
manner.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his dwelling unit if his unit
is the only one infested in the premises.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
§ 186-83 MASSENA CODE § 186-83
186:54
Chapter 190
IN-LINE SKATING
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
IN-LINE SKATES — Shoes, skates or footwear with a single row of roller wheels.
ROLLER SKATES—Shoes, skates or footwear with two or more rows of roller wheels.
SKATEBOARD —A narrow board of wood, plastic, fiberglass or similar material with
roller skate or other type of wheels attached to each end and used for gliding or moving
on any hard surface, without a mechanism or other device for steering while being used,
operated or ridden.
§ 190-2. Unlawful activities.
No person shall use or operate a skateboard or in-line skate or roller skates upon any
public streets, including the entire paved and improved surfaces thereof, including gutter
areas, from curb to curb, where curb exists, sidewalks or on any public lands within the
Village of Massena:
§ 190-3. Precautions.
A. In a careless manner without due caution and circumspection.
B. While endangering, or in any manner to create a risk or danger to, any person or
property.
C. In any manner to impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
A. Every person operating a skateboard or in-line skates or roller skates shall operate
the same in strict observance of Article 34 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law
related to the operation of bicycles and play vehicles, except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application.
B. The operator of a skateboard or in-line skates or roller skates emerging from an
alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the right-ofway
to all pedestrians approaching said walk.
C. Whenever any person shall operate a skateboard or in-line skates or roller skates
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
D. No person shall operate a skateboard or in-line skates or roller skates at nighttime
unless he or she is wearing reflective clothing, which shall be visible from a
distance of not less than 50 feet and a maximum of 300 feet from the front, side and
rear when directly in front of the lawful beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
Reflective clothing shall be defined, for the purpose of this chapter, as any shirt,
vest or jacket or any other readily visible piece of apparel equipped with a reflective
surface.
§ 186-83 IN-LINE SKATING § 190-4
190:1
§ 190-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $25 for the first offense and
not more than $50 for each offense thereafter.
§ 190-4 MASSENA CODE § 190-4
190:2
Chapter 200
NOISE
§ 200-1. Legislative intent.
The making and creating of disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises within the
jurisdictional limits of the Village of Massena is a condition that has persisted, and the
level and frequency of occurrences of such noises continues to increase. These noise
levels are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare of
the citizens. Every person is entitled to an environment in which disturbing, excessive, or
offensive noise is not detrimental to his or her life, health, or enjoyment of property. The
chapter is to be construed liberally, but it is not intended to be construed to discourage
the enjoyment by residents of normal, reasonable and usual activities.
§ 200-2. Prohibited acts.
A. No person, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or
recklessly creating a risk thereof, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made
unreasonable noise. For purposes of this chapter, unreasonable noise is any
disturbing, excessive, or offensive sound that disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities.
B. The following acts are declared to be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter. This enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive.
(1) Any unnecessary noise from any source between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. the following day.
(2) Noise from a dog or other pet animal that is continuous and exceeds 15
minutes.
(3) Noise from a burglar alarm or other alarm system of any building, motor
vehicle, or boat that is continuous and exceeds 15 minutes.
(4) Noise from any sound reproduction system, operating or playing any radio,
portable radio or tape player, television, tape deck or similar device that
reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be heard 60 feet from its
source or over any property line.
(5) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building other than between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in case of a public
safety and emergency.
(6) The operation of power equipment in residential zones outdoors between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, and on weekends
between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(7) The sounding of any horn or signaling device of an automobile, motorcycle or
other vehicle for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(8) The making of improper noise or disturbance or operating an automobile or
§ 190-4 NOISE § 200-2
200:1
§ 200-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following acts:
§ 200-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by imprisonment for not
more than three days for each violation, except that:
motorcycle in such a manner as to cause excessive squealing or other
excessive noise of the tires.
(9) Offering for sale anything by shouting or outcrying upon the public streets and
sidewalks.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored celebrations or events.
C. Noise from individually sponsored events where a permit for public assembly or
other relevant permission has been obtained from the Mayor.
D. The operation or use of any organ, radio, bell, chimes or other instrument,
apparatus, or device by any church, synagogue, or school licensed or chartered by
the State of New York, provided such operation or use does not occur between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
E. Noise generated by the installation and maintenance of utilities.
A. When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50 nor more than
$100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each violation; and
B. When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations within
the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more than $250
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation. These penalties
shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter.
§ 200-2 MASSENA CODE § 200-4
200:2
Chapter 202
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Block parties — See Ch. 106.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 210.
Solicitation — See Ch. 238.
Special events — See Ch. 242.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276.
§ 202-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MASS GATHERING — A gathering in a public area or park at which more than 25
person are or can be reasonably expected to be in attendance.
MOTORCADE—An organized procession, except funeral procession, upon any public
street, sidewalk or alley.
PARADE — Any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles or
combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or
alley which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — An assembly of persons upon any public street, sidewalk or
alley which impedes or tends to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 202-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, motorcade, public assembly
or mass gathering in or upon any public property, public street, sidewalk or alley in
the Village or knowingly participate in any such parade, motorcade, public assembly
or mass gathering unless and until a permit to conduct such parade, motorcade, public
assembly or mass gathering has been obtained.
§ 202-3. Participation; interference.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade, motorcade, public assembly
or mass gathering conducted under permit in violation of any terms of said permit nor
knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade, motorcade, public assembly or
mass gathering without the consent and over the objection of the permittee nor in any
manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
§ 202-4. Permit application process; information required.
A. Any person who desires to conduct a parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass
gathering shall apply for a permit at least 14 days in advance of the date of the
§ 200-4 PARADES § 202-4
202:1
§ 202-5. Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
proposed parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering.
B. Said application shall be made to the Mayor.
C. The application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the
Board of Trustees. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper
policing of the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering, the
application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade, motorcade,
public assembly or mass gathering chairman and the address and telephone
number of each.
(2) The purpose of the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering, the
date when it is proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area,
the location of the disbanding area, the route to be traveled and the
approximate time when the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass
gathering will assemble, start and terminate.
(3) A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles and bands,
including a description of any sound amplification to be used.
(4) Such other information as the Village Chief of Police may deem reasonably
necessary.
A. Standards for issuance. The permit shall be issued for a parade, motorcade, public
assembly or mass gathering, conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to
comply with the terms of such permit, unless it is found that:
(1) The time, route and size of the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass
gathering will disrupt, to an unreasonable extent, the movement of other
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(2) The parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering is of a size or
nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to
properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that
allowing the parade, motorcade, public assembly and mass gathering would
deny reasonable police protection to the Village.
(3) Such parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering will interfere with
another parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering for which a
permit has been issued.
B. Standards for denial. The permit shall be denied for a parade, motorcade, public
assembly or mass gathering and the applicant notified of such denial where:
(1) There is a finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance
of a permit.
(2) The information contained in the application is found to be false or nonexistent
in any material detail.
§ 202-4 MASSENA CODE § 202-5
202:2
§ 202-6. Contents of permit.
The contents of the permit shall be as follows:
§ 202-7. Appeal procedure.
(3) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the
permit.
A. The parade or assembly area and time.
B. The starting time.
C. The minimum and maximum speeds (for motorcade only).
D. The route of the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering.
E. What portions of the streets, sidewalks or alleys to be traveled may be occupied by
such parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering.
F. The disbanding area and disbanding time.
G. The number and type of vehicles, if any (motorcade only).
H. That the Village advise all participants in the parade, motorcade, public assembly
or mass gathering, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of
the permit prior to the commencement of such parade, motorcade, public assembly
or mass gathering.
I. That the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering continue to move at
a fixed rate of speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade,
motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering, except when reasonably required
for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass
gathering, shall constitute a violation of the permit.
J. That the amplification of sound to be emitted from sound trucks or bullhorns be
fixed and not variable.
K. Such other requirements as are found to be reasonably necessary for the protection
of persons or property.
A. Upon denial of an application made pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may
appeal from the determination of the panel within five days thereafter to the Village
Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal for hearing by the Village
Board at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the Village Board may reverse, affirm
or modify, in any regard, the previous determination.
B. In the event that an application is not filed within the required time, as specified in
§ 202-4, the applicant may request a waiver of such requirement by the Mayor, and
if he finds unusual circumstances and in the exercise of his sound discretion, the
Mayor may waive such requirement.
§ 202-5 PARADES § 202-8
202:3
§ 202-8. Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade, motorcade, public assembly or
mass gathering, the Village Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 202-9. Compliance with conditions of permit required.
All conditions of the permit shall be compiled with so far as reasonably practicable.
§ 202-10. Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade, motorcade, public assembly or mass gathering pursuant to this
chapter may be summarily revoked by the Chief of Police or the Mayor at any time
when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, it is determined
that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such action
revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the applicant by certified mail or by
such other notice as may be reasonably appropriate under the emergency circumstances.
§ 202-11. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. Chief of Police.
B. Fire Chief.
C. Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 202-8 MASSENA CODE § 202-11
202:4
Chapter 204
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 130. Noise — See Ch. 200.
§ 202-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 202-11
204:1

ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 204-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Massena as an exercise of its police power, to promote
the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the Village
by enacting this article, since it is the finding of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Massena that the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons
on certain public lands, except under controlled conditions, is detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village in that such possession contributes to
the development of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances, including but
not limited to littering and raucous or other disorderly behavior. It is further the intent of
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena that this article not be considered as a
traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles or the operation thereof.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall have the meanings ascribed to them.
All other word shall have the meanings normally ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and all such
beverages as defined in § 3 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New
York.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or used to hold
any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS —
Any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, school, park or playground, public parking lot
or public building.
A.
The parking lot of shopping centers, schools, churches or other religious
institutions.
B.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any other place to which the public
or a substantial group of persons has access.
C.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall not be deemed "public places"
for the purpose of this article:
Any public place or transportation facility wherein the use and consumption of
alcoholic beverages is authorized pursuant to a license or permit issued under
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
(1)
The interior of the building premises of any firehouse within the Village of
Massena.
(2)
(3) The premises of any business establishment within the Village of Massena.
The interior of any building occupied for use as a church, synagogue or other
house of worship.
(4)
D.
§ 204-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 204-2
204:3
VILLAGE — The Village of Massena, New York.
§ 204-3. Consumption or possession of open containers.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to:
§ 204-4. Presumption.
An open container containing an alcoholic beverage in any vehicle shall be presumptive
evidence that the same is in possession of all occupants thereof and in violation of this
article.
§ 204-5. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply nor be a violation of this article in the
following circumstances:
§ 204-6. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all persons on public lands in the Village except as provided
in § 204-5 above and shall not apply to any person drinking an alcoholic beverage while
operating a motor vehicle upon a public highway within the Village in violation of
§ 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
The parks and playgrounds of the Village of Massena during the times and
in accordance with the rules and regulations prepared by the Superintendent
of Recreation and approved by the Recreation Commission and filed with the
Village Board.
(5)
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the Village.
B. Have in his possession any open container containing any alcoholic beverage on
any public lands within the Village.
C. Have within his possession for the purposes of consumption on public lands, by
either himself or another person, any open container containing an alcoholic
beverage on any public lands within the Village.
A. At a fair, picnic, or other community gathering for which special permission for an
exception under this section has been granted by the Mayor or Board of Trustees.
B. On the exterior grounds of any firehouse with respect to members of the Fire
Department only.
C. On the premises of a church in connection with an activity sponsored and conducted
by the church.
D. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to the transportation of an unsealed but not
open container across public lands of the Village from one point to another with no
intent to consume the contents of such open container while upon public lands.
§ 204-2 MASSENA CODE § 204-7
204:4
§ 204-7. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions contained in this article shall constitute an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by imprisonment for not
more than three days for each violation, except that:
A. When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this article
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50 nor more than
$100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each violation; and
B. When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations within
the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more than $250
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation. These penalties
shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this article.
§ 204-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 204-7
204:5

Chapter 210
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 280.
§ 204-7 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 204-7
210:1

ARTICLE I
License
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 42, Art. I, of the 1969 Code]
§ 210-1. Definitions. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Any person, firm or corporation who or which either, as
principal or agent, from any boat or car on a railroad track or any street or place or by
going from house to house or place of business to place of business, on foot or on or
from any animal or vehicle, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers,
pushcarts or wagons, sells or barters, offers for sale or barters or carries or exposes for
sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, except milk, newspapers and periodicals.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations,
partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies and all other entities of any
kind capable of being sued.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from place to place or house to house or
who stands in any street or place taking or offering to take orders for goods, wares and
merchandise, except milk, newspapers and periodicals, or for services to be performed
in the future or by making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatsoever
for future delivery.
SPECIAL EVENT — A preplanned single event or series of events that, because of
its nature, interest, location, promotion or any combination of similar influences, is
expected, or later found, to draw a large number of people, sponsored by an individual
or entity other than the Village, proposed to be held on public property or on private
property but affecting public property or requiring Village support services, for the
purpose(s) of entertainment, celebration, amusement, cultural recognition, arts and crafts
displays and/or sales, amateur sports demonstration or competition, or similar activities
generically considered recreational in nature. Examples include, but are not limited
to, ethnic festivals, street fairs, street art shows, public celebrations, outdoor concerts,
parades, road races and walk-a-thons.
§ 210-2. License required; license fees. [Amended 8-2-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983;
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. No person shall engage in hawking, vending, peddling or soliciting orders of goods,
wares, merchandise or other commodities, except meat, fish, fruit and farm produce
by farmers and persons who produce such commodities, in the streets and public
places and by going from house to house in said Village without first obtaining a
license therefor from the Village Clerk of said Village and paying the license fee
hereinafter imposed.
B. There is hereby imposed on the trade or occupation of hawking, vending and
peddling a license fee of $250 per year.
C. There is hereby imposed on the trade or occupation of soliciting orders in the streets
and public places and by going from house to house in said Village a license fee of
$250 per year.
§ 210-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-2
210:3
§ 210-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person violating any of the provisions contained in this article shall be liable to a
fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. Any vendor wishing to conduct business at a special event shall apply to the Clerk
for a temporary vending permit. Application for such a permit must be made at least
seven days prior to the beginning of the event for which the permit is sought. The
permit shall be valid only for the duration of the special event. Fees for such permit
shall be $25 for each day of vending permitted. Any vendor to whom a temporary
permit is granted shall be subject to the same operating regulations as all other
vendors, except where otherwise specified. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 210-2 MASSENA CODE § 210-3
210:4
ARTICLE II
Stands and Carts
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 42, Art. II, of the 1969 Code]
§ 210-4. License required. [Amended 8-2-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983; 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
No person shall set up or erect a stand or booth or use any stand, booth, wagon, cart or
other device upon any of the streets or public grounds in said Village for the purpose
of selling or vending goods or merchandise of any kind without first obtaining a license
therefor from the Village Clerk of said Village and paying the license fee hereinafter
imposed.
§ 210-5. License fee. [Amended 8-2-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
On each stand, booth, wagon, cart or other device so erected or used, there is hereby
imposed a license fee of $250 per year.
§ 210-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person violating any of the provisions contained in this article shall be liable to a
fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-7. Bond required. [Added 8-2-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
Prior to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall deposit with the Village Treasurer
the sum of $2,500 or, in lieu thereof, a bond to the Village in the amount of $2,500,
which bond shall be executed by the proposed licensee as principal in a surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New York, which bond shall remain in force for
the term of the license to be issued and shall be conditioned as follows:
A. To indemnify and pay the Village for any penalties or costs incurred in the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article and to indemnify or reimburse
any purchaser of personal property from the licensee in a sum equal to at least the
amount of any payment such purchaser may have been induced to make through the
misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of the personal property, whether
the misrepresentations were made by the licensee or said licensee's agents, servants
or employees either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement
printed or circulated with reference to such personal property or any parts thereof.
B. The aforesaid bond shall be declared forfeited upon proof of falsification in the
application for a license.
C. Said bond shall be deemed forfeited upon proof of violation of any of the provisions
of this article by the applicant or his agents, servants or employees.
§ 210-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-7
210:5

ARTICLE III
Restrictions
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 42, Art. III, of the 1969 Code; amended in its entirety
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 210-8. Peddling on public lands; stopping vehicles.
§ 210-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions contained in this article shall be liable to a
fine and penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days for each violation. Each incident for which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Peddling shall be prohibited on any public lands owned by the Village of Massena
other than public streets. In addition, no vehicle shall be permitted to park or stop
for the purpose of hawking, peddling or vending wares and merchandise in any
congested area or where such peddling might impede or obstruct public traffic or
pedestrian flow on Village streets or sidewalks. The judgment of a Police Officer
and/or Code Enforcement Officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded.
B. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale nor offer for sale any
unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise. [Added 10-2-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 210-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-9
210:7

ARTICLE IV
Exemptions
[Adopted 9-17-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
§ 210-10. Exemptions to license requirement.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any of the following:
§ 210-11. Construal.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to unlawfully burden or interfere with interstate
commerce.
A. Sales conducted pursuant to statute.
B. Sales conducted pursuant to the order of any court.
C. Any person selling articles at wholesale to dealers in such articles.
D. The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and similar produce by farmers and persons who
produce such commodities or to dealers in milk, baked goods, heating oil, fuel
wood and newspapers.
E. Any honorably discharged member of the United States Armed Forces who has
procured a license under Article 4 of the General Business Law of the State of New
York.
F. Persons soliciting, collecting or operating a sale on behalf of any bona fide
charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious, patriotic or other organization
of worthy causes deemed to be in the public interest.
G. Sales conducted by individuals for their own benefit on or in the residential or
agricultural real property owned or rented by such individuals.
H. Any person selling Christmas trees.
I. Flea market operators or dealers.
J. Sales conducted by persons under the age of 18 years, in an individual capacity for
their own benefit.
K. Sales conducted by any person from a place of business located within the Village
which is owned or rented by such person and intended to be operated on more than
a temporary basis.
§ 210-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-11
210:9

ARTICLE V
Suspension and Revocation of License
[Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 210-12. Basis for suspension; notice.
§ 210-13. Appeals.
If the Clerk denies the issuance of a license or permit, or if the Code Enforcement
Officer suspends or revokes a license or permit, or orders the cessation of any part of
the business operation conducted under the license or permit, the aggrieved party may
appeal the Clerk's decision to the Mayor.
A. In addition to the penalties contained in this chapter, a license issued pursuant
hereto may be suspended for:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement contained in the
application for the license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement in the course of
carrying on the business of vending;
(3) Conducting the business of vending in any manner contrary to the conditions
of the license;
(4) Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public
nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to the public health,
safety, welfare or morals, or interfere with the rights of abutting property
owners; or
(5) Cancellation of health authorization for a food or beverage vending unit due to
uncorrected health or sanitation violations.
B. The Clerk shall provide written notice of the suspension or revocation in a brief
statement setting forth the complaint, the grounds for suspension or revocation, and
notifying the licensee or permittee of his right to appeal. Such notice shall be mailed
to the address shown on the license holder's application by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
C. If the Village revokes a vending license or permit, the fee already paid for the
license or permit shall be forfeited. A person whose license or permit has been
revoked under this section may not apply for a new license for a period of one year
from the effective date of revocation.
§ 210-12 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-13
210:11

Chapter 216
PLUMBING
§ 210-13 PLUMBING § 210-13
216:1

Chapter 218
PUBLIC NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — Ch. 92.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 142.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 204.
Plumbing — See Ch. 216.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 218-0. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace, health, public
welfare and good order in the Village of Massena by reducing the threat toward the
quality of life of our citizens and preventing the spread of blight and nuisance.
§ 218-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes, but shall not be limited to:
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal use,
possession or distribution of a controlled substance or marihuana [marijuana] as
defined by the state Penal Law.
A.
Any building, structure or real property used for the purposes of prostitution as
defined by the state Penal Law.
B.
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of indecency, obscene
performances and/or promotion of obscene material as defined by the state Penal
Law and this Code.
C.
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of illegal gambling
activity as defined in the state Penal Law.
D.
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of the commission of
illegal possession, use or sale of firearms or weapons as defined by the state Penal
Law.
E.
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal sale,
manufacture or consumption of alcohol beverages as defined by the state Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law.
F.
G. Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has occurred a
§ 210-13 PUBLIC NUISANCES § 218-1
218:1
§ 218-2. Nuisance forbidden.
No owner, operator, manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier of a building, structure
or real property shall knowingly conduct, maintain, permit or allow the existence of a
public nuisance at the building, structure or real property.
§ 218-3. Presumption of knowledge.
Notice by first class mail or personal service of activities entailing a public nuisance to
the property owner, operator, manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier of a building,
structure or real property shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge of the public
nuisance.
§ 218-4. Criminal convictions as presumption of existence of public nuisance.
The existence of two or more criminal convictions for any of the activities set forth
in the definition of a public nuisance in § 218-1 at any building, structure or real
property within a two-year period prior to the commencement of a civil action and/
or an administrative hearing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of a public
nuisance. For the purposes of this chapter, a criminal conviction shall be defined as the
entry of a plea of guilty to, and/or a verdict of guilty for, one or more counts set forth in
an accusatory instrument.
§ 218-5. Other evidence of prohibited conduct as presumption of existence of
public nuisance.
The existence of two or more incidents of the following activities at any building,
structure or real property within a one-year period prior to the commencement of a civil
action and/or an administrative hearing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of
a public nuisance:
criminal nuisance as defined by the state Penal Law.
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of loitering as defined by
the state Penal Law.
H.
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has occurred any
violation of this Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 92 (regarding animal
control), Chapter 300, Zoning, and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, including the Property Maintenance Code of New York State,
and any subsequent amendments or superseding provisions thereto, all of which
have been previously adopted and incorporated into this Code by reference.
I.
Any building, structure or real property wherein an occupant, guest or business
invitee commits criminal activities involving assault, gang assault, harassment or
disorderly conduct, as said criminal activities are defined by the state Penal Law.
J.
A. Conviction for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in
§ 218-1 occurring on or near the property.
B. Arrest for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in
§ 218-1 occurring on or near the property.
§ 218-1 MASSENA CODE § 218-5
218:2
§ 218-6. Summons and complaint for civil action.
C. Service of an accusatory instrument charging any of the activities set forth in the
definition of a public nuisance in § 218-1 occurring on or near the property. For the
purposes of this chapter, an accusatory instrument shall include, but not be limited
to, any criminal information, misdemeanor and/or felony complaint filed in a court
of competent jurisdiction, and/or, with regard to unfit, unsafe and/or fire-damaged
structures on or near the property, a notice of violation issued by the Village of
Massena Code Enforcement Office, Police or Fire Departments and/or other
authorized entity with jurisdiction in the Village of Massena and/or any order issued
pursuant to Chapters 120, 142, or 216 of this Code.6
D. Service of a search warrant on the building, structure or real property where
controlled substances, marihuana [marijuana], and/or weapons are seized.
E. Finding of illegal controlled substances or illegal firearms or weapons on the
building, structure or real property.
F. Investigative purchases of illegal controlled substances on the building, structure or
real property by law enforcement agencies or their agents.
A. The Corporation Counsel may bring and maintain a civil action in the name of the
Village to abate a public nuisance and shall commence the civil action by the filing
of a summons and complaint in the manner required by state Civil Practice Laws
and Rules.
B. The summons and complaint shall name as defendants the building, structure or real
property by describing it by tax map number and/or street address and shall name
as defendants at least one of the owners of some portion of or some interest in the
property.
C. The summons and complaint may also name as defendants any owner, operator,
manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier of the building, structure or real property.
D. The complaint shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
E. The complaint shall be accompanied by affidavits for purposes of showing that the
owner or his agent had notice of the nuisance and had an opportunity to abate the
nuisance.
F. The venue of the action shall be in the county where the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed.
G. In rem jurisdiction over the building, structure or real property shall be completed
by affixing the summons to the building, structure or real property and by mailing
the summons and complaint by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
to the person in whose name the real property is recorded at the office of the Village
Assessor.
H. Defendants other than the building, structure or real property shall be served with
the summons and complaint in the manner required by the state Civil Practice Law
6. Editor's Note: See Chapter 120, Buildings, Unsafe, Chapter 142, Electrical Standards, and Chapter 216, Plumbing.
§ 218-5 PUBLIC NUISANCES § 218-6
218:3
§ 218-7. Civil penalty.
If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for summary
judgment, a finding is made that defendants have conducted, maintained, permitted or
allowed a public nuisance, a penalty may be awarded in an amount not to exceed $1,000
for each day it is found that defendants conducted, maintained, permitted or allowed the
public nuisance after notice to abate had been given by the Village. Upon recovery, such
penalty shall be paid into the general village fund.
§ 218-8. Permanent injunction.
§ 218-9. Closing of building, structure or real property.
and Rules.
I. With respect to any action commenced or to be commenced, the corporation
counsel may file a notice of pendency pursuant to the state Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
A. If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for summary
judgment, a finding is made that defendants have conducted, maintained, permitted
or allowed a public nuisance, a permanent injunction may be granted.
B. A permanent injunction may prohibit defendants from conducting, maintaining,
permitting or allowing the public nuisance.
C. A permanent injunction may authorize agents of the Village to remove and correct
any conditions in violation of this Code. The judgment may further order that the
costs of removing and correcting the violations, plus a charge of 50% as
compensation to the Village for administering, supervising and handling such work,
shall be charged against defendants and awarded to the Village. The judgment may
further order that the costs of removing and correcting the violations, plus a charge
of 50% as compensation to the Village for administering, supervising and handling
such work, shall constitute a lien against the real property and shall be collected in
the same manner provided by law for the collection of real property taxes within
the Village.
D. A judgment ordering a permanent injunction may direct the closing of the building,
structure or real property by the Village Police Department, to the extent necessary
to abate the nuisance.
E. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction shall provide for all costs and
disbursements allowed by the state Civil Practice Law and Rules and for the actual
costs, expenses and disbursements of the Village in investigating, bringing and
maintaining the action.
A. If the judgment directs the closing of the building, structure or real property, the
Village Police Department shall serve the judgment upon defendants in the manner
required by the state Civil Practice Laws and Rules and shall post a copy of the
judgment upon one or more of the doors at entrances of the building, structure or
real property or in another conspicuous place on the building, structure or real
property.
§ 218-6 MASSENA CODE § 218-9
218:4
§ 218-10. Preliminary injunction.
Upon a motion or order to show cause from the Corporation Counsel and pending an
action for a permanent injunction, a preliminary injunction enjoining the public nuisance
may be granted for any of the relief obtainable by a permanent injunction.
§ 218-11. Temporary restraining order.
Pending a motion or order to show cause for a preliminary injunction, a temporary
restraining order or a temporary closing order may be granted, without notice to
defendants, for any of the relief obtainable by a permanent injunction.
§ 218-12. Administrative hearing.
Whenever there is prima facie evidence of a public nuisance at any building, structure
or real property within the Village of Massena, the Corporation Counsel may initiate an
administrative hearing.
B. In addition, the Village police department shall affix upon one or more of the doors
at entrances of the building, structure or real property or in another conspicuous
place on the building, structure or real property, a printed notice stating "CLOSED
BY COURT ORDER" in block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone
intending to enter the premises.
C. Mutilation or removal of such posted judgment or notice while it remains in force
will be considered a separate violation under the state Penal Law and shall be
punishable by a fine of no less than $100 but not exceeding $500, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day any violation of any
provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, local law or resolution shall
continue shall constitute a separate violation.
D. The Village Police Department may then command all persons present in the
building, structure or real property to vacate the property forthwith. After the
building, structure or real property has been vacated, the Village Police Department
may secure the premises.
E. The closing directed by the judgment shall be for such period as the court may
direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of more than a year from the
posting of the judgment.
F. A closing by the Village Police Department shall not constitute an act of possession,
ownership or control by the Village.
A. Service of notice. A notice of the hearing shall be served on all owners of the
building, structure or real property and may also be served on any known tenants or
lessees or other occupiers of the building. The notice shall be served in the manner
required by New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. Content of notice. The notice shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
The notice shall further contain a time and place for a hearing to be held before a
panel.
§ 218-9 PUBLIC NUISANCES § 218-12
218:5
§ 218-13. Administrative remedies.
C. Hearing panel. The panel shall consist of a member to be appointed by the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer, a member to be appointed by the Chief of Police and a
member to be appointed by the Foreman of the Fire Department. Each appointing
authority shall be authorized to appoint himself/herself or any member of his/her
staff to the hearing panel.
D. Hearing. At the time and place designated in the notice, the Corporation Counsel or
his/her designee shall present all relevant evidence and/or witnesses demonstrating
the existence of a public nuisance at the building, structure or real property, and as
to appropriate remedies. The owners of the building, structure or real property, or
their representatives, shall have the right to examine such evidence and crossexamine
any witnesses presented by the Corporation Counsel or his/her designee.
The owners of the building, structure or real property, or their representatives, may
present any relevant evidence and/or witnesses in their defense. The Corporation
Counsel, or his/her designee, shall have the right to examine such evidence and
cross-examine any witnesses presented by the owners of the building, structure or
real property, or their representatives.
E. Panel's finding and recommendation. Within five business days of the hearing, the
panel shall provide a finding of fact to the Mayor or the mayor's designee. The
finding of fact shall state whether there is prima facie evidence of the existence of
a public nuisance at the building, structure or real property. The panel shall further
provide a written recommendation of remedies to abate the public nuisance.
A. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee, upon receipt of a finding of fact and
recommendation from the panel, shall have the following powers in furtherance of
the abatement of public nuisances:
(1) To issue a decision and order suspending or revoking, for a period not to
exceed one year, the certificate of occupancy for the building, structure or real
property.
(2) To issue a decision and order directing the closing of the building, structure or
real property by the Massena Police Department, to the extent necessary to
abate the nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth above in § 218-9.
(3) In conjunction with, or in lieu of, the foregoing powers, to issue a decision and
order that various measures be taken by the owner, tenant and/or lessee of the
property to the extent necessary to both abate the existing nuisance and ensure
the prevention of future nuisance actions from occurring at or near the
property, which shall include, but not be limited to, requiring the owner to
modify and improve the usage and features of the premises to deter further and
future public nuisance activity; mandating compliance will all applicable
building, housing and property maintenance codes and regulations pursuant to
this Code and/or State law; and/or directing subsequent purchasers to comply
with the provisions of any issued order of revocation or suspension for the
certificate of occupancy unless or until the subsequent purchaser appears
before the hearing panel to provide an appropriate plan for the panel to review
and make recommendations, wherein said plan will set forth measures to avoid
§ 218-12 MASSENA CODE § 218-13
218:6
§ 218-14. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this chapter shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part thereof,
directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 218-15. Effect of conflict of provisions.
If a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the Village, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people shall prevail. If a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
the provisions of any other ordinance or code of the Village which establishes a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are repealed
to the extent that they may be in conflict with this chapter.
further incidents of public nuisance.
B. The decision and order shall be served upon the owner, tenant and/or lessee of the
property in a manner similar to that described in § 218-12A herein.
C. Nothing within this section shall limit the authority of the Mayor or Mayor's
designee to take such other and further actions deemed necessary to abate any
existing public nuisance to the extent necessary to ensure the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public.
§ 218-13 PUBLIC NUISANCES § 218-15
218:7

Chapter 220
RAILROADS
§ 220-1. Trains standing on crossing. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
No officer or employee of a railroad corporation shall intentionally obstruct any farm
or highway crossing with any locomotive, train or car for a longer period than five
consecutive minutes. Each occurrence shall be considered a separate violation of this
chapter.
§ 220-2. Shunting at crossings.
No railroad company, nor person in its employ, shall cause or permit any car or train to
cross any street in this Village by its own momentum or by shunting.
§ 220-3. Switching across streets.
No railroad company, nor any person in its employ, shall use any portion of any street
for switching on or switching off any car or cars without first obtaining permission in
writing from the Board of Trustees or Mayor of the Village.
§ 220-4. Loading railroad cars on streets.
No railroad company, nor person in its employ, shall use or occupy any portion of any
street for the purpose of, or during the process of loading or unloading any car or cars,
or occupy the same while the train is not in motion in such a manner as to hinder the
free passage of such street without first having obtained permission in writing from the
Board of Trustees or the Mayor of the Village.
§ 220-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to a fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for
not more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 218-15 RAILROADS § 220-5
220:1

Chapter 224
RECORDS
§ 220-5 RECORDS § 220-5
224:1

ARTICLE I
Public Access
[Adopted 1-6-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
§ 224-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Freedom of Information Act of the Village of
Massena."
§ 224-2. Purpose and scope.
§ 224-3. Designation of records access officer.
A. The peoples' right to know the process of government decisionmaking and the
documents and statistics leading to such determinations is basic to our society.
Access to such information should not be thwarted by shrouding it with the cloak
of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. This chapter provides information concerning the procedures by which records may
be obtained from agencies and municipalities. No Village regulation shall be more
restrictive than this chapter.
C. Village personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records required
by the Freedom of Information Law and those records which were furnished to the
public prior to its enactment.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be construed in
favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Village Board of Trustees shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with
the regulations herein, and shall designate the Village Clerk as the records access
officer. The records access officer shall have the duty of coordinating Village
response to public requests for access to records. However, the public shall not be
denied access to records by Village personnel who have in the past been authorized
to make records or information available.
B. The records access officer is responsible for assuring that Village personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records promptly available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in writing, the
reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay established fees, if
any.
§ 224-1 RECORDS § 224-3
224:3
§ 224-4. Designation of fiscal officer.
§ 224-5. Location of records.
The Village hereby designates the Town Hall as the location where records shall be
available for public inspection and copying.
§ 224-6. Hours for public inspection.
The Village shall accept requests for public access to records and produce records during
all hours that the Town Hall is regularly open for business.
§ 224-7. Access or denial of access to records.
Those Village records to which access may be had and those Village records to which
access may be denied shall be governed by the provisions of Article 6 of the Public
Officers Law of the State of New York (Freedom of Information Law).
§ 224-8. Request for records.
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a transcript is a true copy of records copied.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Village is not the legal custodian for such records.
(b) The records of which the Village is a legal custodian cannot be found.
A. The Village Board of Trustees shall designate the Village Treasurer as the fiscal
officer. He shall respond to requests for an itemized record setting forth the name,
address, title and salary of every officer or employee of the Village.
B. The fiscal officer shall make the payroll items listed above available to any person,
including bona fide members of the news media as required under Public Officers
Law § 87, Subdivision 3(b). [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. Where a request for records is required, such request must be in writing. However,
written request shall not be required for records that have customarily been
available without written request.
B. Time limit for response to request.
(1) Village personnel shall respond promptly to a request for records. Except
under extraordinary circumstances, this response shall be made no more than
five working days after receipt of the request by the records access officer.
(2) If for any reason more than five days is required to produce records, the
Village official shall acknowledge receipt of the request within five working
days after the request is received. The acknowledgment should include a brief
explanation of the reason for delay and an estimate of the date production or
denial will be forthcoming.
§ 224-3 MASSENA CODE § 224-8
224:4
§ 224-9. Denial of access; appeals.
C. List of available records.
(1) Each department, agency, board or commission of the Village shall maintain
and make available for public inspection and copying a current list, by subject
matter, of all records produced, filed or first kept or promulgated after
September 1, 1974. The list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit the
requester to identify the file category of the records sought.
(2) The subject matter list shall be updated periodically and the date of the most
recent updating shall appear on the first page. The updating of the subject
matter list shall not be less than semiannual.
D. So that Village personnel can locate records within a reasonable period of time, a
request for access to records should be sufficiently detailed to identify the records.
Where possible, the requester should supply information regarding dates, titles, file
designations or other information which may help identify the records.
E. A request for any or all records falling within a specific category shall conform to
the standard that records be identifiable.
F. No records may be removed by the requester from the office where the record is
located without the permission of the records access officer.
A. The Village Board of Trustees shall hear appeals for denial of access to records
under the Freedom of Information Law.
B. Denial of access shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and advising the
requester of his right to appeal to the Board of Trustees.
C. If the Village fails to provide requested records promptly, as required in § 224-8B
of this chapter, such failure shall be deemed a denial of access by the agency or
municipality.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the Village Board of Trustees shall commence
upon receipt of written appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of requests for records.
(2) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(3) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The Village Board of Trustees shall inform the requester of its decision, in writing,
within 10 business days of receipt of an appeal. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
F. A final detail of access to a requested record, as provided for in Subsection E of this
section, shall be subject to court review, as provided for in Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
§ 224-8 RECORDS § 224-10
224:5
§ 224-10. Fees.
Except where fees or exemptions from fees have been established by law, rule or
regulation prior to September 1, 1974:
§ 224-11. Public notice.
The Village shall publicize, by posting in a conspicuous location wherever records are
kept:
§ 224-12. Application of provisions; definitions; Police Department records.
A. There shall be no fee charged for the following:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Village may charge a fee for copies of records, provided that:
(1) The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for photocopies
not exceeding 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches. This section shall not be construed to
mandate the raising of fees where the Village in the past has charged less than
$0.25 for such copies.
(2) The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsection B(1) of this section
shall not exceed the actual copying cost which is the average unit cost for
copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the agency, such as operator
salaries.
A. The location where public records shall be made available for inspection and
copying.
B. The name, title, business address and business telephone number of the designated
records access officer and fiscal officer.
C. The right to appeal by any requester denied access to a record for whatever reason
and the name and address of the person or persons or body to whom an appeal is to
be directed.
A. This chapter shall be binding upon all elected officers, appointed officers,
employees or agency members of the Village of Massena.
B. The words "Village official" and "Village personnel" as used in this chapter shall
include elected officers, appointed officers, employees or agency members of the
Village, as defined above.
C. Notwithstanding any other inconsistent provision of this chapter, the Police
Department of the Village of Massena shall have its own records access officer who
shall be designated by the Chief of Police, and all Police Department records shall
be made available at Police Headquarters, during all hours that the Police
Department Records Division is regularly open for business, for public inspection
§ 224-10 MASSENA CODE § 224-12
224:6
and copying. The maximum fee for copying any such Police Department records
shall be $2 per report, regardless of length.
§ 224-12 RECORDS § 224-12
224:7

ARTICLE II
Retention and Disposition
[Adopted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 224-13. Adoption of Schedule MU-1.
A. Adoption of schedule. Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued
pursuant to Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law, and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby adopted
for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal government records
listed therein.
B. Disposal of records. In accordance with Article 57-A:
(1) Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records Retention
and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the minimum retention
period prescribed therein.
(2) Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 224-13 RECORDS § 224-13
224:9

Chapter 230
SEWERS
§ 224-13 SEWERS § 224-13
230:1

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
§ 230-1. Applicability; general provisions; purpose.
§ 230-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Applicability. This chapter shall apply to the Village of Massena and to persons
outside the Village who are, by contract or agreement with the Village, users of the
Village wastewater sewers or wastewater treatment facilities.
B. General provisions.
(1) The definitions of terms used in this chapter are found in Article I, § 230-2.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater to
facilities of the Village of Massena.
(3) This chapter provides for use of the Village's wastewater facilities, regulation
of sewer construction, control of the quantity and quality of wastewater
discharged, wastewater pretreatment, equitable distribution of costs, assurance
that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, approval of sewer
construction plans, issuances of wastewater discharge permits, minimum
sewer connection standards and conditions, and penalties and other procedures
in cases of violation of this chapter.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the Village wastewater facilities and to prevent public
health problems through regulation of sewer construction, sewer use and
wastewater discharges. This chapter shall also provide for equitable distribution of
the costs of the Village wastewater facilities, including cost incurred through
enforcement of this chapter, and provide procedures for complying with the
requirements contained herein.
A. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER —A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
§ 230-1 SEWERS § 230-2
230:3
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by
waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — A pipe which is used to carry and/or transfer sewage from the
residence, business or other structure and connects to the public sewer
main.[Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program,
whether administered by the Environmental Protection Agency or by the State of
New York.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
other duly authorized official of said Department.
OWNER — The person or persons who legally own, lease or occupy private
property with wastewater facilities which discharge or will discharge to the
Village's wastewater facilities.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works, as defined by § 212 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 12912); includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW but
does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6, General Pretreatment Regulations
for Existing and New Sources of Pollution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
§ 230-2 MASSENA CODE § 230-2
230:4
PUBLIC SEWER—A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by public authority.
RESIDENTIAL USER — All premises used only for human residency and which
are connected to the wastewater facilities.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground-,
surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS—All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-fourhour
concentration of flow during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods for
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, Water Pollution Control Federation and American Water Works
Association.
STATE — The State of New York.
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER")—A sewer which
carries storm- and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of
Massena or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory
All industries subject to promulgated categorical pretreatment standards
(Categorical Industries); 40 CFR 403, Appendix C.
(1)
Industries having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries on the operation of the treatment works.
(2)
Manufacturing industries using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds
and/or 1,000 gallons of raw material containing priority pollutants/substances
of concern and discharging a measurable amount of these pollutants to the
sewer system from the process using these pollutants.
(3)
Those industries discharging more than 5% of the flow or load carried by the
treatment plant receiving the waste.
(4)
§ 230-2 SEWERS § 230-2
230:5
§ 230-3. Use of public sewer required; prohibited discharges.
filtering.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of
said Agency.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Village of Massena, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of Massena,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the Village and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the Village is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that
said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
E. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
F. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such culverts
and pipes as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural drainage
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water (unprocessed) or
unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to
a storm sewer or natural drainage outlet. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
G. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewers any
substances, materials, waters or wastes in such quantities or concentrations which
will:
(1) Create fire or explosion hazard, including but not limited to gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or any
liquid, solid or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are sufficient
§ 230-2 MASSENA CODE § 230-3
230:6
either alone, or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion
or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW.
At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system, be more than
5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter.
(2) Allow any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any sewer treatment process, to constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance or to create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to
cyanides in excess of 0.2 milligrams per liter in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer.
(3) Cause corrosive damage.
(a) Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel
of the wastewater facilities, but in no case discharges with the following
properties:
[1] Having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 10.0 for more than 10%
of the time in a twenty-four-hour period.
[2] Having a pH lower than 3.5 or greater than 12.0 for any period
exceeding 15 minutes.
(b) These requirements may be modified for facilities designed to
accommodate greater ranges.
(4) Solid or viscous materials in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of wastewater facilities due to the accumulation of solid or viscous
materials, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
H. No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming
his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.) and/or
any liquid or vapor containing heat in amounts which will accelerate the
§ 230-3 SEWERS § 230-3
230:7
biodegradation of wastes, causing the formation of excessive amounts of
hydrogen sulfide in the wastewater sewer, or inhibit biological activity in the
wastewater treatment facilities, but in no case shall the discharge of heat cause
the temperature in the Village wastewater sewer to exceed 65.5° C. (150° F.)
or the temperature of the influent to the treatment facilities to exceed 40° C.
(104° F.) unless the facilities can accommodate such heat.
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or nonbiodegradable oils of
mineral or petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100
milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.)
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower
(0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such degree that any such materials received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceed the limits established by the
Superintendent for such materials.
(6) Any substances which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of
the POTW such as residues, sludge or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation
process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no
case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal development pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(7) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established
by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction.
(8) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
(9) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(10) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited
to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids,
such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
§ 230-3 MASSENA CODE § 230-3
230:8
(b) Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(c) Unusual BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs, as
defined herein.
(11) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
(12) Water or wastes containing noxious, malodorous gas or a substance which is
present in quantities that create a public nuisance or a hazard to life.
I. Handling of prohibited discharges.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in § 230-3H of this chapter and which, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(a) Reject the wastes.
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers and meeting United States Environmental Protection
Agency and New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
pretreatment standards when enacted.
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge.
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of Subsection H(11) of this section.
(2) If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
J. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 230-3 SEWERS § 230-3
230:9
K. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner, at the owner’s expense. Required oil and/or grease
separators, or other pretreatment processes, shall be maintained and cleaned as
needed on a regular basis not to exceed a thirty-day interval. Maintenance and
cleaning records shall be kept within the facility and registered with the Code
Enforcement Office. These records shall be available for review, upon request
during normal business hours, by Village of Massena Code Enforcement Officers
and Department of Public Works employees responsible for the Village wastewater
system. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
L. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
M. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to
which reference is made in this enactment shall be determined in accordance with
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-fourhour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas
pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
N. Discharges from industrial and commercial users to the POTW shall be controlled
by pretreatment standards adopted by USEPA or NYSDEC. When pretreatment
regulations are adopted by USEPA or NYSDEC for any industry, then that industry
must immediately conform to the USEPA or NYSDEC timetable for adherence to
federal or state pretreatment requirements and any other applicable requirements
promulgated by USEPA or NYSDEC in accordance with Section 307 of PL95-217.
If and when the Village is required to develop a POTW pretreatment program (40
CFR 405), then the POTW will control, through permit, contract, order or similar
means, the contribution to the POTW by each industrial user to ensure compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Additionally, such a
pretreatment program shall require industries to comply with any more stringent
standards necessitated by local conditions as determined by the Village.
O. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial concern whereby
§ 230-3 MASSENA CODE § 230-3
230:10
§ 230-4. Private sewage disposal; permit required.
§ 230-5. Building sewers and connections.
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village
for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 230-3D, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system
complying with the provisions of this section.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent of Public
Works. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
Village, which the applicant shall supplement by the plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of $100 shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
C. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall
comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State
of New York. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in § 230-4D, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable materials.
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a
sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the Village.
G. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
H. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to
said sewer within 60 days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 230-3 SEWERS § 230-5
230:11
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and commercial
service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by
the Village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent.
C. The following costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner: For properties located within the
Village, the charges determined by the Superintendent of Public Works will be an
amount equal to 50% of the actual cost of installation. For properties located in the
Town outside the Village, the charges determined by the Superintendent of Public
Works will be an amount equal to 100% of the actual installation costs. For largerdiameter
installations and installations that require special equipment, the property
owner, whether located inside or outside the Village, will be charged at 100% of
the actual cost. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
[Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 9-7-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010;
10-21-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building,
except where a building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, courtyard or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer;
however, each structure shall be charged appropriate minimums conducive to each
structure. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements
of this enactment.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the
methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and
backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials
and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is
too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and
§ 230-5 MASSENA CODE § 230-5
230:12
§ 230-6. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewer works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 230-7. Powers and authority of inspector.
regulations of the Village or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the American Society of Testing Materials and the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
J. All new or reconstructed sewers built after the adoption of this chapter shall be
equipped with an approved backwater valve. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
K. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection with the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his
representative.
L. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
A. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village and duly
authorized employees of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, observation measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Subsection A above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
Village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Village
employees, and the Village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by Village employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in § 230-3L.
§ 230-5 SEWERS § 230-7
230:13
§ 230-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 230-9. Hearing Board.
The Village Board shall act as a Hearing Board as needed for arbitration of differences
between the Superintendent and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and
execution of the provisions of this enactment by the Superintendent. The cost of the
hearing will be divided equally between the municipality and the sewer user.
§ 230-10. Repealer.
All enactments or parts of enactments in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
C. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewer works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. The Village shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations.
The Village may, at reasonable times, have access to and copy any records, inspect
any monitoring equipment or method by Village wastewater discharge laws and
sample any effluents which the owner or operator of such source is required to
sample. Where a user has security measures in force, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the Village will be permitted to enter without delay.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except § 230-6, shall
be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in
Subsection A above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. These penalties shall be in
addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village may also seek injunctive
relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter. [Amended 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this enactment shall become liable to
the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of
such violation.
§ 230-7 MASSENA CODE § 230-10
230:14
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
§ 230-11. Sewer system.
The sewer system of the Village of Massena, for which sewer rents are hereinafter
established and imposed, shall include the sewers, manholes, intercepting sewers,
sewage pumping, treatment and disposal works and any other plants, works or
equipment and accessories within the Village which are used or useful in connection
with the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage and waste and which are owned,
operated or maintained by the Village as part of the public system.
§ 230-12. Payment of sewer rent.
A. In addition to any other fees or charges provided by law, the owner of any parcel of
real property connected with the sewer system, including real property connected
with the sewer system by means of a private sewer or drain emptying into the sewer
system, shall pay a sewer rent for the use of the sewer system based upon the
quantity of water used as the same is measured by the Village water meters in use
on the premises. Sewer rent shall be as follows: [Amended 5-18-1982 by L.L. No.
2-1982; 4-29-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987; 5-21-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991;
12-20-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 10-21-2003 by
L.L. No. 5-2003; 7-15-2008 by L.L. No. 8-20087]
(1) Minimum charge.
(a) User charge, sewer system: $9.33 per month per unit, $18.66 every two
months per unit; or $27.99 quarterly per unit.
(b) Maple and Orvis Streets (Route 37B Project) capital recovery fee: $1.50
per month per unit; $3 every two months per unit; or $4.50 quarterly per
unit. [Added 11-5-2008 by L.L. No. 11-20088]
(c) User charge, sewer plant: $3 per 1,000 gallons, with a minimum usage
charge of $9 (3,000 gallons) per month per unit; $18 (6,000 gallons)
every two months per unit; or $27 (9,000 gallons) quarterly per unit.
[Amended 5-19-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009; 5-8-2010 by L.L. No.
2-20109]
(2) All sewer rents shall be payable in monthly, bimonthly (every two months), or
quarterly installments as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. The Village of Massena will review not less often than every two years the
wastewater contributions, total costs of operation and maintenance and user charge
system.
C. Minimum rates for public housing (one- or two-room apartments) with one electric
7. Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 9-1-2008.
8. Editor's Note: This local law renumbered former Subsection A(1)(b) as A(1)(c). Said local law also provided an effective
date of 12-1-2008.
9. Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 6-1-2010.
§ 230-11 SEWERS § 230-12
230:15
§ 230-13. Failure to pay. [Amended 11-21-1989 by L.L. No. 12-1989]
§ 230-14. Delinquent rents. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
On or before the first day of May in each year, the Village Treasurer shall submit to
the Board of Trustees a statement showing the names of the owners of property who
have not paid the sewer rent as provided or prescribed herein and the amount of such
delinquency. Such amounts shall be levied as taxes upon the several properties owned
by the persons named in such statement and shall be shown in a separate column in the
tax roll under the name of "Sewer Rents." Such sewer rents may also be collected in the
manner prescribed in Subdivision 4 of § 452 of the General Municipal Law. The Village
of Massena shall not reimburse any owner or person retroactively if timely notification
to the Village of Massena has not occurred.
§ 230-15. Service to areas outside the Village. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
meter and/or one water meter, shall be based on a ratio of 1:1 (apartments to billing
units), e.g., 100 apartments equals 100 units to be billed. [Added 5-18-1982 by
L.L. No. 2-1982]
D. In the event that a structure has multiple electric meters but there is a permanent
discontinuance of separate units, then, upon application to the Superintendent and
upon his certification that the separate uses have been permanently discontinued,
the Village may waive the requirement as to charges for separate minimums.
[Added 5-18-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
E. Unit. A "single unit" shall be defined as meaning the use of a structure for a separate
function, whether or not owned or utilized by the same person or persons, which
has individual water/sewer service. In the circumstance where there are separate
units utilizing common water/sewer facilities, each separate common water/sewer
facility shall constitute one unit. [Added 5-18-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
A. In the event that any previous sewer rent bill, whether the same is rendered monthly,
bimonthly (every two months), or quarterly, has not been paid in full, a penalty of
10% of the amount of the most recent unpaid bill will be assessed and added to the
sewer rent bill. [Amended 10-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
B. Said penalty of 10% shall go into effect on the 11th day of the month following the
date of the bill. However, if payment is made by mail, payment shall be presumed
timely if the envelope containing said payment is postmarked before the 10th day
of the month following the date of the bill. [Amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
5-1997]
C. If payment is made by use of the Village night deposit box, payment shall be
presumed timely if the payment is removed by 8:00 a.m. the morning after the due
date of the bill. It is then backdated one business day and posted with such date.
[Added 5-21-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; amended 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997;
1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
A. Any contract between the Village of Massena and any sewer district outside the
§ 230-12 MASSENA CODE § 230-15
230:16
§ 230-16. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1980.
Village of Massena must embody, and does so by reference, the terms and
conditions of the Sewer Use Law for the Village of Massena as it may be amended
from time to time. The Board of Trustees may consent to the extension of Village
sewer mains beyond the Village limits upon such terms and conditions as the
Trustees may agree; provided, however, that ownership of all mains and equipment
(including but not limited to pump stations), except laterals from the street or rightof-
way to the building, shall be owned by the Village; the laterals by the property
owner.
B. The Village of Massena may accept septic discharge from third parties ( outside
septic vendors or other third parties seeking to discharge septic waste), provided all
permitting criteria has been approved, as determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works. The fee shall be $0.10 per gallon. [Added 12-5-2017 by L.L. No.
6-2017; amended 2-18-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
C. The Village of Massena may accept nonseptic waste from third parties, to be
determined in the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works. If the such
nonseptic discharge is accepted, the Superintendent of Public Works may negotiate
rates and services for the acceptance of such nonseptic discharge, providing that
such rates shall in all instances cover, at a minimum, the incremental full costs of
providing said service. [Added 2-18-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
§ 230-15 SEWERS § 230-16
230:17

Chapter 233
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 204, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 233-1. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any speech, including sexually
oriented speech. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to speech protected by the First Amendment and New York
Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented speech to their intended market; neither is it the intent nor effect of this
chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. The Mayor and members of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Massena are all residents of the Village. The Mayor and members of the Board are
familiar with the Village, the locations of sexually oriented businesses in the
Village, and the issues raised by those types of businesses in the Village and
throughout the country. The Mayor and Board are also cognizant that AIDS,
hepatitis and other sexually transmitted diseases are serious health concerns in the
local community. Based on the Mayor and Board's local knowledge and evidence
concerning the impacts or "secondary effects" of adult uses on the community, as
presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Board on findings
involving the effects of sexually oriented businesses and public nudity incorporated
in judicial decisions such as, but not limited to, Town of Islip v. Caviglia, 73 N.Y.2d
544 (1989); Stringfellow's of New York, Ltd. v. City of New York, 91 N.Y.2d 382
(1998); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 146 L. Ed.2d 265 (2000); City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres. Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres,
426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); and on
studies in other communities, including, but not limited to, Kansas City, Missouri;
Newport News, Virginia; St. Paul, Minnesota; Whittier, California; Phoenix,
Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; and Tucson,
Arizona; and from manuals and books such as "An Educational Manual on How to
Regulate the Location of Adult Businesses Through Zoning," developed by the
Massachusetts Chapter of the American Planning Association and the
Massachusetts City Solicitors and Town Counsel Association; "Location of Adult
Businesses, 2000 Edition," by Jules B. Gerard (West Group 1999); "Protecting
Communities from Sexually Oriented Businesses," by Len L. Munsil (Southwest
Legal Press, Inc. 1996); and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney
§ 230-16 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-1
233:1
General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June
6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Mayor and Board find:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities that are not properly controlled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there are not adequate legal provisions making the
owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
(2) Employees of sexually oriented businesses engage in or may be requested to
engage in sexual behavior as a result of the type of employment in which they
are engaged.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, occur at sexually oriented businesses,
especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
(4) The "entertainment" offered at sexually oriented businesses often encourages
sexual activities, which create unhealthy conditions.
(5) Persons frequent certain sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activities within the premises of such sexually oriented
businesses.
(6) Communicable diseases may be spread by sexual activities, including, but not
limited to, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), AIDS, hepatitis B, and
venereal diseases.
(7) AIDS, HIV, hepatitis B and venereal diseases are serious health concerns in
the local community.
(8) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in
part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because
of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the
operators of the facilities to regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
(9) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in certain
areas of sexually oriented businesses, particularly where persons view "adult"
oriented films or "adult" entertainment.
(10) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be
reasonably regulated in order to protect the substantial governmental concerns
raised by the various findings herein.
(11) A licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented
businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the
operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner
consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as
well as the citizens of the Village. It is appropriate to require reasonable
assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented
business, and fully in possession and control of the premises and activities
§ 233-1 MASSENA CODE § 233-1
233:2
occurring therein.
(12) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information
regarding current employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or participants
and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.
(13) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible
for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant
governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in assuring that
the sexually oriented business is operated appropriately.
(14) It is desirable, in the prevention of illegal activities and the spread of
communicable diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
(15) The fact that an applicant for an adult license has been convicted of a sexually
related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in
that conduct in sexually oriented businesses in which sexual activities often
occur.
(16) The barring of such individuals from association with adult uses for a period
of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to unwanted
sexual activities.
(17) Regulations separating the performers who appear nude or seminude in
sexually oriented businesses from the patrons or customers protect the
performers, reduce the opportunity for illegal activities between performers
and patrons or customers and do not interfere with the content of any
performance.
(18) The Board has determined that body rubs should only be conducted for
compensation by certain licensed professionals or athletic trainers.
(19) The Board further determines that sexual encounter centers, as defined herein,
do not serve a legitimate purpose, offer a location at which sexual activities
and acts of prostitution can readily occur, and provide a location at which
sexually transmitted diseases may be spread. The Board thus determines that
sexual encounter centers should be prohibited.
(20) The Board further determines that adult hotels or motels, as defined herein,
offer a location at which sexual activities and acts of prostitution can readily
occur due to the offering of short-term or hourly rooms with beds, and provide
a location at which sexually transmitted diseases may be spread. The Board
thus determines that adult hotels or motels should be prohibited.
(21) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the Village
will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
§ 233-1 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-2
233:3
§ 233-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT ARCADE—A business enterprise which offers or maintains one or more adult
video viewing booths.
ADULT CABARET — A business enterprise which regularly features or offers, to the
public, customers or members, performances by persons who appear nude or seminude
or live performances that are characterized by their emphasis on the exposure, depiction
or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified
sexual activities.
ADULT HOTEL or ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar business enterprise
which offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours or
allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time
that is less than 10 hours.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER—A business enterprise which regularly features or offers
to the public the presentation of motion-picture films, movies or sound recordings
which are characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and which are presented to a common
audience of more than five persons in an enclosed common area or are presented in a
common area of more than 150 square feet.
ADULT RETAIL STORE — A business enterprise which meets any of the following
tests:
Offers for sale or rental items from any two of the following categories:
(1) Sexually oriented materials;
(2) Lingerie; or
Leather goods which are marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(3)
A.
Offers for sale sexually oriented toys and novelties, except a business enterprise
which devotes less than 10% of its stock-in-trade and sales and display area to
sexually oriented materials, with all sexually oriented toys and novelties separated
from other sales and display areas by an opaque wall at least eight feet in height
with a management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the
age of 18 years are allowed to enter the area.
B.
Devotes more than 10% of its stock-in-trade or sales and display area to sexually
oriented materials without having all sexually oriented materials separated from
other sales and display areas by an opaque wall at least eight feet in height with a
management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the age
of 18 years are allowed to enter the area.
C.
Devotes more than 40% of its stock-in-trade or sales and display area to sexually
oriented materials.
D.
Offers sexually oriented materials and advertises or holds itself out in signage
visible from the public right of way as "X," "adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually
E.
§ 233-2 MASSENA CODE § 233-2
233:4
ADULT RETAIL STORE, LIMITED — A business enterprise which offers for sale
or rental sexually oriented materials, and which devotes at least 10% and not more
than 40% of its stock-in-trade or sales and display area to sexually oriented materials,
provided that:
ADULT VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH — Coin- or slug-operated, or electronically or
mechanically controlled, still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices which present visual or audio material of any kind which is
characterized by its emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities and which are designed to be viewed by five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time or are located in a room or booth of less than 150
square feet. No part of this definition shall be construed to permit more than one person
to occupy an adult video viewing booth at any time.
BODY RUB PARLOR — A business enterprise where body rub services are provided
in order to induce relaxation or for other purposes, and which is not a massage
establishment.
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — Any business or place where, for consideration, goods,
merchandise, services or entertainment are offered.
CONSIDERATION — The payment of money or the exchange of any item or services
of value for:
CUSTOMER — Any person present in a sexually oriented business when open for
oriented business.
The following items are not also offered for sale:
(1) Lingerie; or
Leather goods which are marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
All sexually oriented materials are separated from other sales and display areas by
an opaque wall at least eight feet in height with a management-controlled system of
access to ensure that only persons over the age of 18 years are allowed to enter the
area; and
B.
The business enterprise does not advertise or hold itself out in signage visible from
the public right-of-way as "X," "adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually oriented
business.
C.
A. The right to enter the business premises, or any portion thereof;
B. The right to remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof;
The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the
business premises, or any portion thereof.
C.
The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the business
premises, or any portion thereof; or
D.
The right to obtain any services, buy or rent any items or view any entertainment in
a sexually oriented business.
E.
§ 233-2 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-2
233:5
business, except an employee of the business or a person making deliveries or
performing maintenance or repairs to the premises.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who works or performs in or at, or renders any services
directly related to the operation of, a sexually oriented business, whether such person
is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise, and whether
or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the
business.
LICENSEE -- A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business
has been issued, as well as individuals listed as applicants on the application for a
license; and in the case of a manager or employee, a person in whose name a sexually
oriented business manager license or a sexually oriented business employee license has
been issued authorizing such employment.
MANAGER — Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs or conduct of any activity occurring at a sexually oriented business, either in
conjunction with a licensee or in the absence of the licensee.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A business enterprise offering massage conducted
by persons engaged in the practice of medicine, nursing, osteopathy, physiotherapy,
chiropractic, podiatry or massage therapy for which they are licensed by the State of
New York, or persons under the direct supervision and control of such licensed persons.
NUDE — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OPERATOR — A licensee or any person operating, conducting or maintaining a
sexually oriented business.
PERSON—An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other
legal entity.
PREMISES — The building in which a sexually oriented business is conducted as well
as its surrounding yard and parking area and any additional parking areas required for
compliance with Chapter 300, Zoning.
SEMINUDE — The showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the showing of the male or
female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female
breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel,
provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business enterprise in which a person may
view, or may participate in, specified sexual activities.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BOOKS AND VIDEOS — Books, magazines, pamphlets,
pictures, drawings, photographs, videotapes, digital video disks, motion-picture films
or sound recordings, or printed, visual and audio material of any kind, which are
characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult retail store, adult arcade, adult
cabaret or adult movie theater and, except for purposes of business and manager
§ 233-2 MASSENA CODE § 233-2
233:6
licensing, a limited adult retail store. For purposes of the definitions of "employee"
and "manager" and the regulations found in §§ 233-22 and 233-23, a sexually oriented
business shall also include any business enterprise where activities prohibited in
§§ 233-22 and 233-23, are occurring, or a business enterprise which offers at any time
to the public, customers or members performances by persons who appear nude or
seminude or live performances that are characterized by their emphasis on the exposure,
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities, whether such business is licensed or unlicensed and whether
such activities occur regularly or on one occasion only.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS—All sexually oriented toys and novelties and
sexually oriented books and videos.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS AND NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female
breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs,
except medical devices approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of
the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses, as defined in
the New York State Penal Law, or any similar offenses under the criminal or penal
code of other states or countries: prostitution offenses; obscenity and related offenses;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; offenses
against public sensibilities; sex offenses; unlawfully dealing with a child; for which less
than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is of a misdemeanor offense; a felony conviction; or less than five years have elapsed
since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any
two-year period. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral
or anal copulation; fondling of another's genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breasts,
whether clothed or unclothed; human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; or excretory functions or sexual acts with animals.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 233-2 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-3
233:7
§ 233-3. Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
§ 233-4. License required.
A. Sexually oriented businesses which are required to be licensed hereunder are
classified as follows:
(1) Adult retail stores.
(2) Adult arcades.
(3) Adult cabarets.
(4) Adult movie theaters.
B. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification.
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the Village pursuant to this chapter.
(2) For any person who operates or manages a sexually oriented business to
employ or allow to work or perform in a sexually oriented business a person
who appears nude or seminude who is not licensed as required by this chapter.
(3) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to allow the business
to be open without a designated manager on duty, which manager shall be
licensed by the Village if the business is an adult cabaret. The name of the
manager on duty at any time shall be prominently displayed at or near the
manager's station in the public area of the sexually oriented business. For
sexually oriented businesses other than adult cabarets, the operator shall with
reasonable diligence investigate the background of its managers and shall
certify to the Village, within five days of employment, that its managers are at
least 18 years of age and have not been convicted of a specified criminal
activity; or within five days of employment, the operator shall provide the
Chief of Police or his or her designee with the name, date of birth and social
security number of its managers so that the Chief of Police or his or her
designee can investigate the background of the managers. No person shall
serve as a manager of a sexually oriented business unless the person is at least
18 years of age and has not been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
(4) For any person to act as a manager of an adult cabaret without having secured
a sexually oriented business manager license pursuant to this chapter.
(5) For any employee to appear nude or seminude at a sexually oriented business
without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
(6) For any person who operates an adult cabaret to employ or allow to work in an
adult cabaret a manager who is not licensed as required by this chapter.
B. The requirement to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license shall not
apply to a person residing outside the Village of Massena who appears nude or
§ 233-3 MASSENA CODE § 233-4
233:8
§ 233-5. Application for sexually oriented business license.
seminude at a sexually oriented business for a single engagement in any year
extending fewer than 10 consecutive days. Such person shall supply to the licensee
and manager of the sexually oriented business his or her name, address, date of
birth, social security number and dates of engagement. The licensee and manager
shall maintain a record containing such information which is secured in the
premises of the sexually oriented business so that it may be immediately retrieved
and shown to a police officer upon demand during all hours that the sexually
oriented business is open.
A. An application for a sexually oriented business license must be made to the Village
Clerk on a form provided by the Village.
B. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as to
enable the Village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.
C. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified according to the provisions of this chapter, and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
D. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the
following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases
and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of age.
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the
names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of
its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all
officers and directors, and the name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name
other than that of the applicant, he or she must state the sexually oriented
business's fictitious name and submit copies of the registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, and
the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant has had a previous personal or business license under
this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business chapters from another
village, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
§ 233-4 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-5
233:9
§ 233-6. Application for manager or employee license.
location of any sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer or director of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant holds any other personal or business licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business chapter from another
village, city or county and the names and locations of any such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal
description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address.
(9) The applicant's social security number.
A. An application for a sexually oriented business manager license or a sexually
oriented business employee license must be made to the Village Clerk on a form
provided by the Village.
B. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as to
enable the Village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.
C. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business manager license or
a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit, on a form
to be provided by the Village, the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases
used by the individual.
(2) Age and date of birth.
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color.
(4) Present business address and telephone number.
(5) Social security number.
(6) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
D. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business manager license
or a sexually oriented business employee license shall be the following:
(1) Not fewer than four unmounted, unretouched colored photographs of the
§ 233-5 MASSENA CODE § 233-6
233:10
§ 233-7. Entertainment center and amusement licenses.
A licensee holding a sexually oriented business license shall not also be required to
obtain an entertainment center license or a dance license for the same premises, but shall
obtain any necessary amusement center and amusement game licenses.
§ 233-8. Issuing authority.
The Chief of Police shall be the issuing authority for a sexually oriented business license,
a sexually oriented business manager license and a sexually oriented business employee
license.
§ 233-9. Grant or denial of manager or employee license.
applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, taken within 30 days preceding
the filing of the application. Each photograph shall be two inches by three
inches in size.
(2) Whether the applicant has had a previous personal or business license under
this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business chapters from another
village, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of any sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer or director of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(3) Whether the applicant holds any other personal or business licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business chapter from another city
or county and the names and locations of any such other licensed businesses.
(4) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, and the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business manager license
or a sexually oriented business employee license, the Chief of Police shall authorize
the Village Clerk to issue a temporary license to said applicant unless it can be
immediately determined that the applicant does not meet one or more of the
requirements that would justify a denial.
B. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the date the
completed application for a sexually oriented business manager license or a
sexually oriented business employee license is filed. After the investigation, the
Chief of Police shall authorize the Village Clerk to issue a license, unless it is
determined that one or more of the following is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
§ 233-6 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-9
233:11
§ 233-10. Grant or denial of sexually oriented business license.
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
(4) The license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or
state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of
this chapter.
(5) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(6) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license, a sexually oriented
business manager license or a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the Village within two years of the date of the current application.
C. If the license is denied, a temporary license previously issued is immediately
deemed null and void.
D. The denial of a license shall be subject to the restriction set forth in § 233-17.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be referred to the Police Department and Code Enforcement Office
for an investigation to be made for compliance with this chapter and with applicable
fire, building, zoning, property conservation, health and safety codes. The
investigation process shall be completed within 30 days from the date the
completed sexually oriented business application is filed. After the investigation,
the Chief of Police shall authorize the Village Clerk to issue a license, unless it is
determined that one or more of the following is true:
(1) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(2) An applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(3) An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
(4) The license is to be used for a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter.
(5) An applicant has had a sexually oriented business license, a sexually oriented
business manager license or a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the Village within two years of the date of the current application.
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is in violation of
applicable fire, zoning, building, property conservation or health and safety
laws and ordinances.
(7) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(8) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 233-9 MASSENA CODE § 233-10
233:12
§ 233-11. Fees.
§ 233-12. Inspections.
An applicant, licensee or manager shall permit representatives of the Police Department,
Fire Department, and Code Enforcement Office to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter and
applicable fire, building, zoning, property conservation, health and safety codes, prior to
its initial opening for business and at any time it is occupied or open for business.
§ 233-13. Expiration of license.
B. The sexually oriented business license shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually
oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to
§ 233-3.
C. The denial of a license shall be subject to the restriction set forth in § 233-17.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new
license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by the following
fee:
Floor Space
(square feet) Annual Fee
Not exceeding 2,400 $325
Over 2,400 $375
B. Every application for a sexually oriented business manager license or a sexually
oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an
existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual fee of $30.
C. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Village Clerk.
D. The fee for replacement of a license which has been lost or destroyed shall be $10.
A. Each license shall expire on January 31 following the date of issuance and may be
renewed by making application for renewal at least 30 days and not more than 45
days before the expiration date. When application for renewal is made less than 30
days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal unless
the Chief of Police finds information since the last time the license had been
approved which would constitute grounds to deny an initial license application or
that there have been violations of this chapter since the last time the license was
approved or an accumulation of violations within the last two license years which
would be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The renewal of the
license shall be subject to the payment of the renewal fee.
C. When the Chief of Police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. This provision shall not apply
§ 233-10 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-13
233:13
§ 233-14. Procedure for denial of license or renewal.
If the investigation reveals cause to believe that a license or renewal of a license may be
denied in accordance with this chapter, the Chief of Police shall, within 30 days after a
completed application is filed, inform the applicant in writing, sent by first-class mail to
the address provided by the applicant in the application, of the possible reasons for the
denial, and provide the applicant with 10 days within which to review evidence, respond
in writing and provide documentary evidence to the contrary. The Chief of Police may
extend the time limit for response upon request of the applicant and for good cause. If no
response is made in a timely fashion, the Chief of Police shall make a final determination
within five days after the expiration of the time to reply. If response is made in a timely
fashion, the Chief of Police shall make a final determination within five days after the
response is received. The final determination shall be in writing and provide specific
reasons for the denial. The status quo shall be maintained until the final determination is
made.
§ 233-15. Suspension of license.
§ 233-16. Revocation of license.
if the reason for the denial relates to the business premises or location and all
specified problems have been corrected.
D. The denial or renewal of a license shall be subject to the restriction set forth in
§ 233-17.
A. The Chief of Police may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 90 days, after
a hearing, if he or she determines that a licensee, manager or employee of a licensee
has, within one year, violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter.
B. A suspension determination shall be subject to the restriction set forth in § 233-17.
A. The Chief of Police may revoke a license, after a hearing, if he or she determines
that a licensee, manager or employee of a licensee has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this chapter and the license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Chief of Police may also revoke a license, after a hearing, if he or she
determines that:
(1) A licensee, within two years, gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee, manager or employee of a licensee has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this chapter within one year; or
(3) There has been an accumulation of violations of this chapter within two years.
C. When the Chief of Police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for two
years, within which time the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license, sexually oriented business manager license or sexually oriented
§ 233-13 MASSENA CODE § 233-16
233:14
§ 233-17. Determinations no broader than necessary.
Determinations resulting from a person's background, or activities at a sexually oriented
business, with respect to the denial, suspension or revocation of a license, which
incidentally burden free expression, shall be no broader than needed to achieve Village
goals. The Chief of Police is authorized to issue warning notices and/or grant conditional
licenses as a means of allowing expression while curbing unwanted activities where
violations are found but denial, suspension or revocation is deemed not justified.
§ 233-18. Notices.
All notices required to be sent by the Village shall be in writing, sent by first-class mail
to the address provided by the applicant in the application.
§ 233-19. Prompt judicial review.
Upon denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of a license, or suspension or
revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of
such administrative action pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
The denial of a renewal of a license, or suspension or revocation of any license, shall
be stayed for a period of 20 days and, if a proceeding is brought to challenge the
administrative action, throughout the pendency of the proceeding in the trial court. The
administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
§ 233-20. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
§ 233-21. Additional regulations.
business employee license. This provision shall not apply if the reason for the
revocation relates to the business premises or location and all specified problems
have been corrected.
D. A revocation determination shall be subject to the restriction set forth in § 233-17.
A. No person in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business shall engage in any
specified sexual activities.
B. No person shall appear seminude in or on the premises of a sexually oriented
business unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be on a stage
or platform in the premises, which is at least 18 inches above the immediate floor
level, and which is removed at least six feet from the nearest customer.
C. No person shall appear nude in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business
unless the person is an employee who, while nude, shall be on a stage or platform
in the premises permanently anchored to the floor at least 18 inches above the floor
level of the areas to which customers have access and separated from the areas to
which customers have access by a continuous permanently affixed barrier at least
three feet in height and located at least six feet from the areas to which customers
§ 233-16 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-21
233:15
§ 233-22. Additional regulations for licensees and managers.
have access, which barrier shall consist of horizontal or vertical members spaced
no more than nine inches apart and no more than nine inches from the floor or the
walls to which it is attached.
D. No person shall be permitted or allowed to view another person in a sexually
oriented business who is nude or seminude from within a room or booth in the
premises which is not continuously open and visible to persons in an adjacent
public area of the premises, or from a viewing area that is not at least 150 square
feet in size.
E. No person shall appear nude or seminude, or knowingly allow another to appear
nude or seminude, in an area of a sexually oriented business that can be viewed
from off the premises.
F. No person in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business shall, while nude or
seminude, touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.
G. No employee in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business shall, while nude
or seminude, solicit any compensation or gratuity from any customer.
H. No person shall pay or give a gratuity to an employee in or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business by giving the payment or gratuity to, or placing the
payment or gratuity on the body of, or inside the clothing of, the employee, while
the employee is nude or seminude.
I. No person shall allow a person under the age of 18 years in or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
J. No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in or on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, other than an alcoholic beverage legally sold in the
sexually oriented business for on-premises consumption pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
K. No person shall bring any animal, except a guide dog, hearing dog, service dog or
police work dog, in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
L. No employee, whether clothed or unclothed, shall sit in the lap of or lay or lean
against a customer and rub his or her genital or pubic area, or her female breasts,
against the customer; nor, whether clothed or unclothed, allow the customer to
touch his or her genital or pubic area, or her female breasts.
A. No licensee or manager of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or through
reckless disregard:
(1) Allow or permit persons to appear or act on the premises of the sexually
oriented business in violation of the regulations set forth in § 233-21.
(2) Allow or permit any building on the premises of the sexually oriented business
to be occupied by more than the number of persons established by the Village
as the legal occupancy.
§ 233-21 MASSENA CODE § 233-22
233:16
§ 233-23. Body rub parlors prohibited.
(3) Allow or permit the possession, use or sale of controlled substances,
marijuana, hypodermic instruments or drug paraphernalia in or on the licensed
premises.
(4) Allow or permit prostitution in or on the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
(5) Operate the sexually oriented business without a sexually oriented business
license.
(6) Allow or permit any specified sexual activities to occur in or on the premises
of the sexually oriented business.
(7) Allow or permit alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of the sexually
oriented business, other than alcoholic beverages offered or sold pursuant to
an on-premises license issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
of the State of New York.
(8) Allow or permit illegal or excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages to
occur in or on the licensed premises.
(9) Allow or permit gambling to occur in or on the licensed premises.
(10) Allow or permit the premises of the sexually oriented business to become the
focal point for fighting, assaults or other illegal activities.
(11) Allow or permit amplified noise in or on the premises of the sexually oriented
business in accordance with § 200-2 of the Municipal Code.
(12) Allow or permit animals, except guide dogs, hearing dogs, service dogs or
police work dogs, in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
(13) Allow or permit a sexually oriented business to be open unless the sexually
oriented business license is posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any
time.
(14) Allow or permit a sexually oriented business to be open unless a list of all
employees, with managers designated, and copies of all required sexually
oriented business manager and employee licenses are secured in the premises
of the sexually oriented business so that they may be immediately retrieved
and shown to a police officer upon demand during all hours that the sexually
oriented business is open.
B. For purposes of the denial of the renewal of a sexually oriented business license, or
the suspension or revocation of such a license, the licensee shall be deemed
responsible for the actions of the managers and employees of the sexually oriented
business.
A. No person shall own, operate or maintain a body rub parlor in the Village.
B. No person shall give a body rub to another person in the Village for compensation.
§ 233-22 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 233-23
233:17
§ 233-24. Sexual encounter centers prohibited.
No person shall own, operate or maintain a sexual encounter center in the Village.
§ 233-25. Adult hotels and adult motels prohibited.
No person shall own, operate or maintain an adult hotel or adult motel in the Village.
§ 233-26. Conflicting provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be controlling in the event of any conflict between
the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of the Municipal Code.
§ 233-27. Penalties for offenses.
A person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $200 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the offense
is continued shall constitute a separate and distinct violation hereunder.
C. The prohibitions found in this section shall not apply to persons engaged in the
following activities for which they are licensed by the State of New York or persons
under the direct supervision and control of such licensed persons:
(1) Persons engaged in the practice of medicine, nursing, osteopathy,
physiotherapy, chiropractic podiatry or massage.
(2) The practice of that massage which is customarily given in barbershops or
beauty parlors for the purpose of beautification by a licensed barber or beauty
culturist.
(3) Persons enrolled in a program of a school or institute registered by the state to
provide training for any of the occupations enumerated in this section.
(4) The practice of massage by any person duly employed as a trainer by an
athletic association, club or team, or as a member of the physical education
department of a university, college or school.
(5) The practice of massage by any person employed by a corporation or
association organized exclusively for the moral or mental improvement of
men, women or children.
§ 233-23 MASSENA CODE § 233-27
233:18
Chapter 238
SOLICITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 176.
Handbills, notices and billboards — See Ch. 180.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 204.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 210.
Special events — See Ch. 242.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276,
§ 238-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER —
Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another
person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent.
A.
Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is:
Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or
(1)
Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited
into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
(2)
B.
Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person
has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is:
Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or
(1)
Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited
into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
(2)
C.
Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being
solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action
to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized
as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts
authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this Code, shall not constitute obstruction
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
D.
Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures:
(1) Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
E.
§ 233-27 SOLICITATION § 238-1
238:1
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE — A device, linked to a financial institution's
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to:
account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan
payments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY—The area comprised of one or more
automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking
customers after regular banking hours.
BANK — Any banking corporation.
CHECK-CASHING BUSINESS — Any person duly licensed by the Superintendent
of Banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for
consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.
PUBLIC AREA — An area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has
access and includes, but it not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking
lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public and the
doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
SOLICIT — To request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from
another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other
thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or
printed word, or by other means of communication.
§ 238-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit
the sale of goods or services:
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or
Words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into
responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
(2)
Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that:
Is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or
(1)
Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited
into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
(2)
F.
A. In an aggressive manner in a public area;
B. In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or bus station or stop;
C. Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check-cashing businesses or
within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such
bank, automated teller machine or check-cashing business without the consent of
the owner or the other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided,
however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated
teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of
§ 238-1 MASSENA CODE § 238-2
238:2
§ 238-3. Penalties for offenses.
the automated teller machine facility;
D. On private property of an owner, tenant, or lawful occupant who has asked the
person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that
solicitations are not welcome on the property; or
E. From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in
exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or
reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking
space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered
in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of
such vehicle.
A. A violation of this chapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or by both. If the person has been
convicted of a violation of this chapter within the previous period of one year, the
person shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days,
or both.
B. In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a person in violation
of this chapter may be required to perform community service work as described by
the court.
§ 238-2 SOLICITATION § 238-3
238:3

Chapter 240
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds; dumping — See Ch. 110.
§ 238-3 SOLID WASTE § 238-3
240:1

ARTICLE I
Storage, Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 4-30-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986; amended in its entirety 4-17-2018 by L.L.
No. 6-2018]
§ 240-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of waste material, such as appliances, furniture, and
auto parts.
COMMERCIAL — Any private business operation generating not more than six thirtytwo-
gallon containers per week and each container not weighing any more than 50
pounds.
CONTAINERS — Metal or plastic cans or plastic bags (minimum 1.5 mil thickness);
each container shall hold a maximum of 34 gallons and not weigh more than 40
pounds.[Amended 9-17-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The refuse collection and disposal
department of the Incorporated Village of Massena.
FAMILY UNIT — One family unit living independent of any other.
GARBAGE — Animal, vegetable, fruit or similar organic wastes liable to become
putrid, including wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or storage of
foods.
MIXED PAPERS — Catalogs, junk mail, NCR paper, envelopes, file cards and folders,
glossy newspaper inserts, magazines, computer printouts and nonmetallic wrapping
paper, kept dry and clean.
NONRECYCLABLE REFUSE — Rags, sweepings, rubber, leather, crockery, shells,
clothing, dirt, ashes, wastewater, light bulbs, batteries, dishes, mirrors and similar waste
material,
PREMISES — Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or parts thereof
upon or in which refuse is stored.
RECYCLABLE REFUSE — Clean metal food containers, clean glass bottles (caps
removed), dry newspaper, dry mixed papers and plastic containers [SPI coding system
No. 1, PET (polyethylene terephthalate), No. 2, HDPE (high-density polyethylene), No.
3, PVC (polyvinyl chloride), No. 4, LDPE or PE-LD (low-density polyethylene), No. 5,
PP (polypropylene), No. 6, PS (polystyrene), and No. 7, OTHER or D (other plastics,
such as acrylic, nylon, polycarbonate, and polylactic acid, and multilayer combinates of
different plastics)].
REFUSE — All solid wastes, including garbage and yard waste, but not including
human wastes.
YARD WASTE — Refuse resulting from the collection and disposal of natural items
§ 240-1 SOLID WASTE § 240-1
240:3
indigenous to the exterior portions or yards of residential premises, such as branches,
tree trimmings, hedge clippings, grass cuttings, leaves and other such natural material.
§ 240-2. Administration.
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works which shall be under the
supervision and control of the Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent of
Public Works shall have the responsibility for the operation and for the collection and
disposal of refuse by the Department of Public Works. The Superintendent of Public
Works is hereby empowered to make and publish regulations implementing this article
concerning such matters as the days for the collection of garbage and rubbish, the
location of refuse containers and all other matters relating to the storage, collection and
disposal of refuse which he deems advisable, provided that such regulations are not
contrary to the provisions of this article.
§ 240-3. Restrictions.
A. No person shall place, deposit or store any refuse on or in any street, highway,
avenue, drain, ditch, watercourse or body of water or other public place within the
Incorporated Village of Massena except in containers for such purpose by the
Superintendent of Public Works, and in no event upon the premises of another
except with the consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
B. Any person responsible for refuse on premises not served by the Department of
Public Works or for refuse not acceptable for collection by the Department of
Public Works shall make suitable arrangements for the collection and disposal of
such refuse.
C. In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this section which shall, in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Superintendent of Public Works,
be a hazard to the health, safety or well-being of the community, a notice directed
to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such violation occurs may be
served, either personally or by posting the same on said premises, directing the
removal of all material upon the premises in violation of this section within 24
hours. In the event that such material is not removed within 24 hours from the date
of service or posting of said notice, the Village Department of Public Works may
enter upon the premises, remove said material and charge the entire cost of said
removal against the premises.
D. Notwithstanding anything contained in this article to the contrary, the occupants of
residential and commercial premises served by the Department of Public Works
shall place or cause to be placed at the street or curbline of their premises yard
waste, garbage and recyclable refuse originating on said premises, subject to the
following rules and regulations:
(1) All grass cutting and leaves shall be placed in closed, clear bags, paper bags or
in other DPW-approved container(s).
(2) Public works shall collect branches, tree trimming and hedge clippings during
the months of April, May, September and October When a special event
occurs impacting a number of properties, at the discretion of the
§ 240-1 MASSENA CODE § 240-3
240:4
§ 240-4. Storage of refuse.
No household waste, commercial waste or building waste shall be stored or accumulated
on any premises within the Village except as permitted by this article. Refuse may not be
placed or stored in the street or gutters. Refuse may not be stored on sidewalks, rights-ofway
or in any public place except as directed herein or by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 240-5. Maintenance of refuse containers.
Refuse containers shall be maintained free from excessive odor and in clean and good
condition by the owner thereof. In the event that a container on premises served by
the Department of Public Works becomes dangerous or is liable to injure or hinder the
person collecting the contents thereof, said container shall be replaced by the owner
thereof with a proper and safe container within one week after the receipt of a written
notice from the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 240-6. Service by Department of Public Works.
Superintendent of Public Works, additional collections may occur. All
branches, tree trimmings and hedge clippings shall be cut into lengths no
greater than 10 feet with the butt end placed towards the road. The largest
diameter of limb allowed shall be no larger than eight inches. The amount of
brush to be placed at curbside for DPW collection shall not exceed eight cubic
yards, loose. No branches, tree limbs and hedges removed by a commercial
business shall be placed at curbside for collection by DPW. Root balls shall be
removed from all brush and hedges and disposed of by owner.
(3) No more than five thirty-four-gallon containers of garbage, waste or recycle
shall be placed out for collection at any one time. No item or container shall
weigh more than 40 pounds. [Amended 9-17-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
(4) Litter baskets provided by the Village are to be used for deposit of litter
generated on the public right-of-way by pedestrians and motorists. The placing
into litter baskets of refuse originating from homes, commercial or industrial
establishments is prohibited.
A. The Department of Public Works shall collect and dispose of all refuse acceptable
for collection from all single-family and multifamily dwellings occupied
exclusively for residential purposes by not more than five families living
independently of each other. Every owner or occupant of such premises is hereby
required to make use of the refuse collection and disposal system provided by the
Incorporated Village of Massena.
B. The Department of Public Works may also collect from business so long as items
are placed in approved containers.
C. All refuse for collection shall be placed in clear plastic bags to allow full view of
contents. Refuse in tinted or other bags will not be collected, and a violation notice
shall be applied stating the reason for the violation. Refuse not collected shall be
retrieved (within 12 hours) by the owner/occupant and disposed of properly. Refuse
§ 240-3 SOLID WASTE § 240-6
240:5
§ 240-7. Unacceptable refuse.
The following refuse shall not be considered acceptable by the Department of Public
Works during regular weekly collection:
§ 240-8. Collection.
not retrieved within 12 hours will be collected by the DPW, and the owner/occupant
will be charged an additional fee for collection. The amount shall include but not
be limited to labor, equipment, and tip fees.
D. In all cases where the Village has performed and provided a service, an
administrative charge (8.0%) of the aggregate bill amount shall be added to the
total.
A. Materials resulting from the repair, construction, alteration or excavation of
buildings or structures, streets or sidewalks, such as earth, plaster, mortar, concrete,
bricks, lath and roofing materials.
B. Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected
materials, explosives, ashes, medical waste, hazardous waste and household sharps
(including needles, syringes and lancets).
C. Materials which have not been prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
D. Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes.
E. Large items such as furniture, rugs, mattresses and appliances.
F. Raw garbage, such as food scraps, not wrapped or not placed in a container, such
as a plastic bag.
G. Should the Village of Massena remove the unacceptable refuse (up to 1,000
pounds), after giving proper notification to owner of the property, there shall be a
minimum charge of $200 assessed to said owner(s). Additionally, charges shall be
assessed as the weight exceeds 1,000 pounds.
A. All refuse shall be collected by the Department of Public Works according to the
following schedule:
(1) Garbage, refuse and recyclables shall be placed at curbside for collection by
6:00 a.m. on your scheduled day of collection; days as set by the
Superintendent.
(2) Bulky waste. The Village will conduct one annual cleanup period per year on
days to be designated by the Superintendent.
B. During the annual cleanup days designated by the Superintendent of Public Works:
(1) Village residents will take their bulky waste to the local transfer station. The
resident shall provide two proofs of Village residency (photo ID and utility bill
of property or approved equal to prove residency).
§ 240-6 MASSENA CODE § 240-8
240:6
§ 240-9. Service charges.
§ 240-10. Discontinuance of service.
(2) The resident shall separate trash, metal, electronics, fabric and tires (four
maximum) as directed by the Superintendent. Construction debris such as, but
not limited to, toilets, sinks, wood, sheetrock, etc. will not be approved or
accepted, no exception.
(3) No commercial dumping. Residents shall be allowed to unload a maximum of
1/2 ton (defined as a pickup truck load) of debris one time, only, Multiunit
complexes within the Village of Massena utilizing Village refuse service shall
be allowed to dump 1/2 ton maximum of debris per unit.
(4) Debris shall not be placed along curbside in the Village or be visible to the
public.
(5) Once the end date of the scheduled cleanup date has expired, no other trash/
debris shall be allowed to be unloaded as part of the program.
A. The charge for the collection and disposal of refuse by the Department of Public
Works shall be according to the following schedule:
Type of Dwelling Monthly Charge Bimonthly Charge Quarterly Charge
Each family unit $21.50 $43.00 $64.50
Commercial unit $21.50 $43.00 $64.50
B. Refuse service charges shall be due and payable monthly, bimonthly (every two
months), or quarterly at the same time water and sewer charges are payable,
regardless of the occupancy of the premises.
C. The charge for any premises within the scope of this article for which a certificate
of occupancy is issued after the effective date of this article shall be prorated for the
period commencing from the first day of the month following the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy to the last day of the following May.
D. Refuse service charges shall be billed to the owners of the premises and shall be
payable at the collections office.
E. The Superintendent may negotiate rates and services for commercial and public
agencies within the Village, provided that such rates shall in all instances cover at a
minimum the incremental full costs of providing said service,
A. In the event that the owner has discontinued the use of Village water, then the refuse
service charge shall automatically terminate.
B. Owners of single-family houses may have garbage service temporarily
discontinued for a minimum of two months and maximum of four months by
applying, in writing, for discontinuance of such service. Application must be filed
with the Water Billing Department at least two weeks prior to the discontinuance
date and must include the date of resumption. One request per twelve-month period
will be accepted. The intent of this subsection is to recognize the fact that residents
§ 240-8 SOLID WASTE § 240-10
240:7
§ 240-11. Delinquency charges.
§ 240-12. Lien of refuse service charge.
All refuse service charges, penalties and interest thereon shall be a lien upon the real
property benefited by the refuse collection and disposal service from the date that the
refuse service charge is due and payable, and such lien shall be prior and superior to
every other lien or claim, except the lien of an existing tax or local assessment. The
Board of Trustees may certify to the Village Clerk the amount of any such lien which has
not been paid at the time and in the manner prescribed by such Board, with a description
of the real property affected thereby, and the Board of Trustees may include such amount
in the annual tax levy and shall levy the same upon the real property in default.
§ 240-13. Refuse service vehicles.
§ 240-14. Disposal of refuse.
may be away from their home during portions of the year.
A. In the event that the refuse service charge bill is not paid in full, a penalty equal to
10% of the most recent bill shall be added to the bill. Said penalty of 10% shall go
into effect the 11th day of the month following the date of the bill. However, if
payment is made by mail, payment shall be presumed timely if the envelope
containing said payment Is postmarked before the closing of the 10th day of the
month following the date of the bill.
B. If payment is made by use of the Village night deposit box, payment shall be
presumed timely if the payment is removed by 8:00 a.m. the morning after the due
date of the bill. It is then backdated one business day and posted with such date.
A. Every vehicle used for collection and/or disposal of refuse shall have an enclosed
body or suitable provision for covering the body. Provision and use of a tarpaulin
or canvas to enclose the open body of such a vehicle may be permitted when
specifically approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. Every vehicle used for the collection and/or disposal of garbage or of refuse
containing garbage shall have a watertight body and shall be kept clean and sanitary
and in good running order and shall have the licensee's name plainly painted on
each side in letters at least four inches high.
C. No vehicle used for the collection and/or disposal of refuse shall be operated on any
street, avenue or highway in the Incorporated Village of Massena in an overloaded
condition or in such a manner as to spill the contents thereof onto the street, avenue
or highway.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works or any other person authorized by the Board
of Trustees shall make inspection of the vehicles used for the collection and/or
disposal of refuse whenever he deems necessary, but in no event less than once
every six months.
A. No refuse shall be disposed of within the Incorporated Village of Massena except
at such place or places as may be permitted by the Board of Trustees.
§ 240-10 MASSENA CODE § 240-14
240:8
§ 240-15. Recycling.
§ 240-16. Penalties for offenses; when effective.
B. No refuse collected from outside the Incorporated Village of Massena shall be
disposed at the place or places designated except with the permission of the Board
of Trustees.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all the residents, any commercial establishment and
public entities using the Village collection service to separate recyclables from all
solid waste and place them out for collection at the curb or walk.
B. No person shall place any recyclable material at or near the curb, sidewalk or street
for purposes of collection by the Department unless that person.
(1) Separates recyclable material from any refuse or waste placed for collection.
(2) Places cans, bottles, dry mixed paper and crushed plastic containers in a
container separate from what is used for nonrecycle refuse. Said container
shall be within the guidelines set forth in the Village code.
(3) Cleans all glass bottles, jugs, jars and plastic containers. Paper labels may be
left on bottles.
(4) Cleans all metal cans.
(5) Removes caps from plastic containers.
C. Recyclable material shall be newspapers, bottles, cans, mixed paper and plastic
containers. All paper must be dry.
D. Ownership of recyclables set out for collection shall thereupon vest with the
Village. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of recyclables
which are the property of the Village.
E. The property owner shall furnish their own refuse and recycle container(s). Said
container(s) shall be no larger than 34 gallons and have a detachable lid/cover.
Containers should be clearly and visibly marked using stickers, paint, permanent
marker or other to reference the contents (i.e., "RECYCLE"). [Amended 5-18-2021
by L.L. No. 2-2021]
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as follows:
(1) First violation: a fine of $100.
(2) Second violation within one year of the previous violation: a fine of $250.
(3) Third and additional violations within one year of the previous violation: a fine
of $500.
B. Garbage/refuse that has been dropped off in the Village limits that has been
generated outside Village of Massena limits shall be collected by said party placing
or causing to have placed all material in addition to the fine above. Failure to collect
garbage/refuse within 24 hours of notice will force the Village of Massena to collect
§ 240-14 SOLID WASTE § 240-16
240:9
§ 240-17. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
said garbage/refuse, and all charges incurred shall be borne by the parties placing
or causing to be placed said material.
§ 240-16 MASSENA CODE § 240-17
240:10
Chapter 242
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Block parties — See Ch. 106.
Garage sales — See Ch. 176.
Handbills, notices and billboards — See Ch. 180.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Parades — See Ch. 202.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 204.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 210.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 276.
§ 242-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and the Village Board find that streets and other public places in the Village
are from time to time temporarily closed and used as sites for ethnic festivals, art shows,
neighborhood celebrations and other public events which are privately sponsored but
open to the public. Events of this kind serve to improve the quality of life of the residents
of the Village and often result in large numbers of people congregating within the
confines of the temporarily closed streets and public places, and the resulting crowd
conditions create concerns for police and fire access and control and other concerns
relating to health, safety and welfare of the public and of persons and property in the
closed area. It is therefore essential that a policy be established for governing these
events which shall facilitate control over them by the sponsor and by Village officials
from departments involved with the events to safeguard persons and property.
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BLOCK PARTY—An event held by the residents of a defined section of the Village to
be attended by the residents of that particular section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Property which is owned, operated, maintained, and/or
controlled by the Village which is not rental in nature. Examples of public property
include, but are not limited to, parking lots, streets, sidewalks and parks.
SPECIAL EVENT — A preplanned single event or series of events that, because of
its nature, interest, location, promotion or any combination of similar influences, is
expected or later found to draw a large number of people, sponsored by an individual
or entity other than the Village, proposed to be held on public property or on private
property but affecting public property or requiring Village support services, for the
purpose(s) of entertainment, celebration, amusement, cultural recognition, arts and crafts
displays and/or sales, amateur sports demonstration or competition, or similar activities
generically considered recreational in nature. Examples include, but are not limited
to, ethnic festivals, street fairs, street art shows, public celebrations, outdoor concerts,
parades, road races and walk-a-thons.
SPONSOR — The individual, group of individuals, corporation or other entity
§ 240-17 SPECIAL EVENTS § 242-2
242:1
responsible for organizing the event.
SUPPORT SERVICES — Those which can or must be provided by the Village to
ensure that a special event is conducted in such a manner as to protect the safety, health,
property and general welfare of its citizens. Examples include fire protection, crowd
management and control and traffic management and control.
§ 242-3. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, group or organization
within the corporate limits of the Village of Massena to conduct a special event or to act
as a special event vendor as herein defined without first having obtained and paid for and
having in force and effect a valid, current permit or license therefor.
§ 242-4. Application and cost estimates.
§ 242-5. Fees.
Fees for the event will be determined in accordance with § 242-4.
§ 242-6. Approval process.
The Mayor will review all special event applications and shall be authorized to either
approve or deny said applications.
§ 242-7. Additional requirements; deadlines.
§ 242-8. Event guidelines.
A. Application for special event permit. The sponsor of the special event must submit
a completed application form to the Village Clerk. All applications are to be
submitted on the forms provided by the Village Clerk. Any application submitted
less than 30 days prior to the event shall be subject to late fees.
B. Village costing process. The completed forms shall be distributed to the appropriate
Village departments, which will estimate the additional costs that would be incurred
as a result of the event. This information may be used in establishing terms and
conditions under which an event may be conducted when the use of police or other
Village personnel is appropriate, possible and not in conflict with any other
administrative polices and procedures and/or labor agreements.
A. Permits and licenses. Approval to conduct a special event by this process does not
relieve the sponsor or any participant, including but not limited to food stands,
vendors, peddlers or exhibitors, from the responsibility of applying for any other
permits or licenses or meeting any other requirements which may be applicable.
B. Due date. All required permits, licenses, security deposits and insurance policies
must be obtained no later than seven days prior to the due date of the event.
A. Daily time restriction. The hours of operation for any special event taking place on
the streets of the Village shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day of
the week.
§ 242-2 MASSENA CODE § 242-8
242:2
§ 242-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 242-10. Exclusion from policy.
B. Site maintenance. All areas used must be left in a clean condition.
C. Services available from the Village. The Village will provide certain equipment and
materials to facilitate comfort and control over the event, subject to availability and
the Village's prior need for such equipment and materials.
(1) Temporary parking signs. All temporary signs for restricting parking must be
posted 24 hours in advance and maintained by the sponsor. Requests for the
necessary materials should be directed to the Massena Police Department,
which shall have responsibility for the initial posting of the temporary signs
either through physical placement or directive as to locations. Any usage of
temporary signs without the authorization of the Police Chief or his designee
will be neither recognized nor enforced. Upon the event's completion, all signs
must be taken down by the sponsor and returned to the Police Department.
(2) Barricades. Moveable barricades shall be delivered to the site where the
sponsor or its designated representative shall sign for their receipt. The cost of
replacing lost or damaged barricades lies with the sponsor.
(3) Fees. A fee for providing police officers above the number normally scheduled
may be charged. Said fee is to be determined by the Chief of Police and shall
not be in excess of the actual cost.
A. Fine. Special events shall not be held without the authorization of the Mayor nor
held in contravention of the terms and conditions set forth by the Village Board of
Trustees. Violation of this chapter may subject the sponsor to a fine of $500 in
addition to any other penalty provided in the ordinances or in any other law on
account of commencement of said special events without required permits, licenses
or authorization.
B. Closing of unauthorized special events. The Police Chief or his designee may close
any special event conducted without authorization of the Mayor, and the sponsors
and participants may be subject to arrest.
C. Closing of events due to public safety hazard. The Police Chief, the Fire Chief or
their designated representative(s) may close any special event or any portion of a
special event that is subsequently determined to be an imminent hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare.
A. Block parties. Block parties as herein defined are excluded from the provisions of
this policy (see Chapter 106).
B. Village events. Events initiated by and/or sponsored or cosponsored by the Village
are excluded from the provisions of this policy.
C. Events solely within parks. Events that are held entirely within the jurisdiction of
the Recreation Commission that do not require the intervention of any other Village
department shall be deemed to be an event sponsored or cosponsored by the Village
§ 242-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 242-10
242:3
for the purposes of this chapter and shall be regulated by the Recreation
Commission.
§ 242-10 MASSENA CODE § 242-10
242:4
Chapter 246
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 202. Street trees — See Ch. 278.
§ 242-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 242-10
246:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 67 of the 1969 Code]
§ 246-1. Playing games on streets.
No person shall play baseball or football or any other open or field sport upon the
streets or public grounds within said Village at any time or engage thereon in any act,
amusement or practice endangering property or persons.
§ 246-2. Coasting and sliding.
No person shall coast, slide or skate upon, into or over or across any of the streets or
sidewalks in said Village.
§ 246-3. Permit for parades.10
All parades, processions, exhibitions and the playing of bands or music upon the streets
or public grounds in said Village are hereby prohibited unless a permit or license therefor
in writing shall be granted by the Board of Trustees.11
§ 246-4. Trimming trees. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 10-2-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007]
The owner or occupant of any lot adjoining any of the streets or public places of said
Village shall keep the trees adjoining the sidewalk in front of said premises trimmed up
to at least 15 feet above the sidewalk. If any person neglecting or refusing to trim such
trees within 10 days after written notice requiring such trimming has been served upon
said owner or occupant, it shall be the duty of the Village Engineer to cause such trees to
be trimmed, and the expense thereof shall be assessed against the adjoining land, which
shall be paid by such owner in addition to the penalty hereinafter prescribed. Limbs
overhanging road shall have a minimum clearance of 15 feet.
§ 246-5. Piling rubbish on streets and sidewalks.12
No person shall pile up before any door or on any sidewalk or street in said Village any
boxes, casks, barrels, cases, rubbish or other material.
§ 246-6. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No owner or occupant of any lands in said Village shall allow any obstruction to the free
and proper use by the public of the sidewalks adjacent thereto to be or to remain thereon.
§ 246-7. Telephone booths.
No provision contained herein shall prohibit or prevent the erection and maintenance of
10. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 202, Parades.
11. Editor's Note: Former §§ 246-4, Driving animals on sidewalks, and 246-5, Leaving horses untied, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
12. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 110, Brush, Grass and Weeds; Dumping.
§ 246-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-7
246:3
public telephone booths located at places approved by the Board of Trustees and erected
in accordance with the provisions of a permit granted by the Board of Trustees for
each such telephone booth and location. The consent in writing of the abutting property
owner shall be required in each case. A written undertaking of the telephone company to
indemnify and save harmless the Village of Massena against liability resulting from the
installation and maintenance of telephone booths pursuant to such permits shall be filed
with the Board of Trustees as a prerequisite to the granting of any permit hereunder.
§ 246-8. Refuse baskets.
No person shall place or leave any papers, dirt, ashes or litter of any description or any
refuse whatever from any of the stores or offices located along the business section in
said Village in the baskets placed upon the street in the business section for the purpose
of providing means of disposing of street refuse.13
§ 246-9. Materials on streets.
§ 246-10. Street excavations.
No person shall make any excavations or dig for any ditch, trench or hole in any of the
public streets or sidewalks in said Village without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Board of Trustees, and all such excavations shall be properly guarded by barriers and
lights to protect persons using said street or sidewalk from damage or injury.
A. No person shall place or deposit any lumber or other building materials on any
street or sidewalk in said Village, except as hereinafter provided. The Board of
Trustees may grant permission, in writing, to any person to place and keep any
building materials in any of the public streets in said Village for the purpose of
building or repairs, but such permit shall not authorize the obstruction of more than
1/2 of the sidewalk and 1/2 of the street opposite the lot on which the erection of a
building or the repairs are being made and the person receiving such permit shall
properly guard the public from all damages or injuries resulting therefrom by the
erection of proper barriers and the maintenance of lights at night.
B. Placement of materials on streets. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(1) No property owner shall allow or person shall place, deposit nor push any
material, to include but be not limited to, snow, dirt, grass, leaves or any other
substance into or across any Village-owned or -maintained roadway.
(2) Any person who drops or permits to be dropped any material upon such
roadways shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(3) Every property owner and/or person failing to comply with the above shall be
liable to the penalty hereinafter prescribed and in addition thereto shall pay the
cost incurred by the Village to remove material.
13. Editor's Note: Former § 246-11, Cutting grass between sidewalk and curb, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 246-7 MASSENA CODE § 246-11
246:4
§ 246-11. Disturbing pavements.
No person shall break or disturb any pavement on any of the streets of said Village
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Board of Trustees, and any person
breaking or disturbing such pavement shall be liable for all costs of replacement and
damages sustained thereby in addition to the penalty hereinafter prescribed.
§ 246-12. Changing sidewalk grades.
No person shall, without the consent of the Board of Trustees, in writing, alter the
grade of any sidewalk, and all sidewalks hereafter constructed in said Village shall be
built on grades established by the Village Engineer and shall be constructed under his
supervision.
§ 246-13. Cost of sidewalk construction and maintenance. [Amended 10-2-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007; 12-5-2017 by L.L. No. 7-2017]
All sidewalks ordered to be built or repaired by the Board of Trustees shall be so built
or repaired at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises along which the
same shall be built or repaired. Additionally, responsibility and costs associated with
maintenance of sidewalks are solely borne by the property owner of the premises of
which same shall be maintained. The maintenance of sidewalks shall also mean the
removal of snow, dirt, ice, brush, limbs, grass and any other material considered a hazard
by the Superintendent of Public Works. The hazard shall be removed within 24 hours of
the event causing such hazard.
§ 246-14. Sidewalks of concrete. [Amended 6-5-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984;
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
All new sidewalks hereafter constructed in said Village shall be constructed of concrete
or concrete paving brick. The use of asphalt, sod, topsoil or other materials shall not be
allowed.
§ 246-15. Failure to repair sidewalks.
Every person who shall refuse or neglect to build or repair the sidewalk in front of his
premises after being notified to do so, according to the provisions of the Village Law of
this state and these ordinances, shall be liable to the penalty hereinafter prescribed and
in addition thereto shall pay the cost incurred by the Village in building or repairing any
such sidewalk, which cost shall be assessed on the adjoining land benefited thereby and
shall be collected in the same manner as all other Village assessments.
§ 246-16. Projections over sidewalks; penalty.
No person shall put up, erect or suffer to remain any sign, showcase or other thing
projecting into or hanging over the streets or sidewalks of said Village for a distance of
more than one foot from the premises of any such person, without having first obtained
permission, in writing, therefor from the Board of Trustees. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this section shall be liable to the penalty hereinafter prescribed and
the further penalty of $10 for every 24 hours that such obstruction shall be suffered to
remain after notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises to remove
§ 246-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-16
246:5
the same.
§ 246-17. Display of fruits and vegetables.
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, at any time to keep, sell,
offer for sale or display any fruits, vegetables or other foodstuffs intended for human
consumption on any portion of a sidewalk, established by law, adjacent to any building,
enclosure, lot or private market used for the purpose of retail or wholesale trade between
the building and the curbline.
§ 246-18. Projections over street.
No person shall erect, construct or place or cause to be erected, constructed or placed
any building or structure extending or projecting into or over any street in said Village.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to the penalty
hereinafter prescribed and, in addition thereto, the further penalty of $25 for every 24
hours that the same shall be allowed to remain after notice to the owner or occupant of
said premises requiring such removal; provided, however, that such penalty shall not be
incurred by reason of any swinging awning attached to such building for the purpose of
shade, which awning shall not project into the street to a greater distance than is occupied
by the sidewalk and shall be not less than seven feet in the clear above such sidewalk.
§ 246-19. Washing vehicles in streets.
No person shall wash, clean or spray any motor vehicle, wagon, truck or other vehicle
within any of the public streets of said Village or permit any such motor vehicle, wagon,
truck and other vehicle to remain in any such public street for the purpose of being
washed, cleaned or sprayed at any time of day or night.
§ 246-20. Driveway construction.
The construction of driveways in any of the public streets of the Village of Massena at
variance with the street and/or sidewalk grade is hereby prohibited.
§ 246-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. If any owner or occupant shall fail to comply with any of the requirements set forth
in this article, the Board of Trustees may cause such work to be done and assess the
cost thereof upon such land to be collected the same as other Village assessments,
which shall be paid by such owner or occupant in addition to the penalty hereinafter
prescribed.
B. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than three days for each violation, except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
§ 246-16 MASSENA CODE § 246-21
246:6
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation.
C. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
article.
§ 246-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-21
246:7

ARTICLE II
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 49 of the 1969 Code]
§ 246-22. Written notice to precede civil action.
Section 341-a of the Village Law as added thereto by Chapter 650 of the Laws of
1927,14 as it applies to the Incorporated Village of Massena, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Section 341-a: Liability of Village in certain actions.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Incorporated Village of
Massena for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or in consequence of the existence or accumulation of
snow or ice upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk, unless
written notice of the existence of such condition, relating to the particular place had,
prior to the happening of the event causing the damages or injuries to persons or
property, actually been given to the Board of Trustees of the incorporated Village of
Massena and there had been a failure or neglect on the part of said Village to cause such
condition to be corrected or such snow or ice to be removed, or the place otherwise
made reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 246-23. Limitations on actions.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause of
action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of limitations nor to waive
any existing limitation now applicable to any claim or cause of action against the
Incorporated Village of Massena.
14. Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 6-628.
§ 246-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-23
246:9

ARTICLE III
Complete Streets
[Adopted 2-21-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 246-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPLETE STREETS—Streets designed and operated to provide safe and convenient
access for all roadway users, regardless of age, ability or mode of transportation. This
includes pedestrians, cyclists, transit users, motorists, emergency responders, and freight
users. It considers the needs of children, the elderly and persons with disabilities.
§ 246-25. Policy.
The Village supports the development of a complete transportation network for all
modes of travel that promotes access, mobility and safety for all users.
§ 246-26. Applicability.
§ 246-27. Exceptions.
A. All Village-owned transportation facilities in the public right-of-way, including
streets, bridges and paths, shall be planned, designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained so that users of all ages and abilities can travel safely and independently.
B. Privately constructed streets and parking lots shall adhere to this policy.
C. The Village shall foster partnerships with the New York State Department of
Transportation (NYS DOT), St. Lawrence County, neighboring communities,
businesses, and school districts to develop facilities and accommodations that
further the Village's Complete Streets Policy and continue such infrastructure
beyond the Village's borders.
D. The Village shall approach every transportation improvement as an opportunity to
create safer, more accessible streets for all users. This includes planning,
programming, design, right-of-way acquisition, construction, reconstruction,
operation, and maintenance.
A. Any exception to this policy, whether for public or private projects, must be
approved by the Village Board with documentation of the reason for the exception.
Such documentation shall be recorded and made publicly available.
B. Exceptions may be considered when:
(1) The project involves a roadway where nonmotorized use is prohibited by law,
such as interstate freeways. In these cases, efforts shall be made to
accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists elsewhere while minimizing detours;
(2) The Department of Public Works concludes that the cost of accommodation is
excessively disproportionate to the need or probable use; and/or
(3) There is documented absence of current or future need.
§ 246-24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-28
246:11
§ 246-28. Design standards.
The Village should follow accepted design standards whenever possible. These
standards include:
§ 246-29. Performance measures and reporting.
§ 246-30. Implementation.
A. Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Designing Walkable Urban
Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach;
B. American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials' (AASHTO)
Guide for Planning, Designing and Operating Pedestrian Facilities;
C. AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities;
D. National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) Street Design
Guide; and
E. The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.
A. The Village shall measure the success of this Complete Streets Policy using the
following performance measures (Village to select):
(1) Miles of bike lanes/paths striped or built.
(2) New linear feet of pedestrian accommodation.
(3) Number of crosswalk and intersection improvements.
(4) Changes in crash data for all modes.
B. The Village of Massena shall appoint a Complete Streets Advisory Committee to
identify strategic opportunities to make streets more complete and oversee the
implementation of this policy.
C. The Complete Streets Advisory Committee shall present an annual report to the
Massena Village Board showing progress made in implementing this policy. The
report shall detail the annual increase or decrease for each performance measure
contained in this article compared to the previous year(s). The report shall be posted
online for public review.
A. The Village of Massena shall view complete streets as integral to everyday
transportation decisionmaking practices and processes. To this end:
(1) The Department of Public Works, the Massena Planning Commission, and
other relevant departments and committees shall incorporate complete streets
principles into all existing plans, manuals, checklists, decision trees, rules,
regulations, and programs as appropriate.
(2) The Department of Public Works, the Massena Planning Commission, and
other relevant departments and committees shall review current design
standards, including subdivision regulations which apply to new roadway
§ 246-28 MASSENA CODE § 246-30
246:12
§ 246-31. Complete Streets Advisory Committee.
construction, to ensure that they reflect the best available design standards and
guidelines, and effectively implement complete streets, where feasible;
(3) When available, the Village shall offer workshops and other educational
opportunities on complete streets and nonmotorized modes to transportation
professionals, community leaders, and residents; and
(4) The Village shall actively seek sources of appropriate funding to implement
complete streets.
A. There is hereby created a Complete Streets Advisory Committee for the Village of
Massena.
B. The Advisory Committee shall consist of five members holding staggered threeyear
terms appointed by the Mayor. The committee may include members of the
Department of Public Works and representatives of various street users and other
advocacy organizations, as relevant.
C. The purpose of the Complete Streets Advisory Committee is to promote health
through physical activity and active transportation for all users, specifically the
most vulnerable: children, older adults, and those with disabilities within the
Village of Massena.
§ 246-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 246-31
246:13

Chapter 252
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 59.
Building construction — See Ch. 114.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 252-1. Authority of Commission; adoption of certain provisions by reference.
§ 252-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, which shall be known and may be cited as the
"Village of Massena Subdivision Regulations," certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
MASTER OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan which indicates the general
locations recommended for various functional classes of public works, places and
structures and for general physical development of the Village and includes any unit or
part of such plan separately prepared and any amendment to such plan or parts therein.
PLAT — A plan for developing a piece of undeveloped property.
STREET AND ALLEY —
A. By a local law adopted by the Board of Trustees on the fifth day of August 1975,
pursuant to the provisions of § 7-728 of the Village Law, the Planning Commission
of the Village of Massena has power and authority to approve plats for subdivisions
within the Village of Massena. As a basis for such approval, the Board of Trustees
prescribes the following regulations governing subdivisions.
B. All references herein to §§ 7-728, 7-730 and 7-732 of the Village Law are only for
the purpose of incorporating by reference all of the provisions contained in such
sections of the Village Law as though the same were set forth herein in full length,
and adopting the contents of such provisions of the Village Law as a part hereof.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for its
consideration.
A.
FINAL PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan
of subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission for approval, and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
B.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, road, throughway, parkway, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
however otherwise designated.
(1) ARTERIAL STREETS and HIGHWAYS — Those streets which are used
A.
§ 246-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-2
252:1
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, who shall
lay out any subdivision or part thereof, as defined herein, either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is
involved, any division of a parcel of land, provided that a division of land for agricultural
purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall
not be deemed a "subdivision." The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate
to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
§ 252-3. Procedure.
primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
COLLECTOR STREETS or FEEDER STREETS — Those streets which
carry traffic from minor systems or streets to the major system of arterial
streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
(2)
MINOR STREETS—Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
ALLEY — A minor street or way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
B.
A. Preapplication procedure.
(1) Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Planning
Commission plans and data as specified in § 252-6. This step does not require
formal application, fee or filing of plat with the Planning Commission.
(2) Within 15 days the Planning Commission shall inform the subdivider that the
plans and data as submitted, or as modified, do or do not meet the objectives
of these regulations. When the Planning Commission finds that the plans and
data do not meet the objectives of these regulations, it shall express its reasons
therefor.
B. Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat.
(1) On reaching conclusions informally, as recommended in § 252-3, regarding
his general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared
a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other supplementary
materials as specified in § 252-6. The preliminary plat, topographic map, street
profiles, etc., and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full
compliance with the provisions of §§ 7-728, 7-730 and 7-732, as amended, of
the Village Law and these regulations, except where variation therefrom may
be specifically authorized in writing by the Commission.
§ 252-2 MASSENA CODE § 252-3
252:2
(2) Three copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with written application for
conditional approval at least one week prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered.
(3) The Commission shall then study the preliminary plat and supplementary
material in connection with the topography of the area, existing requirements
of Chapter 300, Zoning, etc., and shall take into consideration the general
requirements of the community and the best use of the land to be subdivided.
Particular attention shall be given to matters enumerated in § 7-730, as
amended, of the Village Law, as well as to specific requirements for parks,
playgrounds, school sites, boulevards and main thoroughfares, the adequacy
of street connections and the suitability of the land for development. Following
such review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for
conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the subdivider
on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be
made by him, the Planning Commission shall hold a formal public hearing in
compliance with § 7-728, as amended, of the Village Law. Within 62 days
after the public hearing for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the
Planning Commission shall communicate in writing its decision on the
application as submitted or modified, and if approved, the Planning
Commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the
conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its
disapproval and its reasons therefor. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(4) The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the Planning
Commission.
(5) Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall specify the conditions
prerequisite to the approval of the final plat, listing the specific changes which
will be required for approval of the final plat which, upon fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of conditional approval,
if any, will be submitted for approval of the Planning Commission and for
recording.
C. Procedure for approval of final plat.
(1) The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved,
and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the
time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of
these regulations.
(2) Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the
Planning Commission at least one week prior to the meeting at which it is to
be considered.
(3) Three copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be
prepared as specified in § 252-6 and shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat;
§ 252-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-3
252:3
§ 252-4. Design standards.
otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of
time is applied for and granted in writing by the Planning Commission.
(4) The final plat shall be properly endorsed and approved by the County Planning
Agency, and any other local, county or state agency that may be required. Final
plats requiring the County Planning Agency's approval are those lying within
a distance of 500 feet from the boundary of any city, village or town, or from
the boundary of any existing or proposed county or state park or other
recreational area, or from the right-of-way of any existing or proposed county
or state parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway, or from the existing
or proposed right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by the
county or for which the county has established channel lines, or from the
existing or proposed boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a
public building or institution is situated. The term "proposed" shall be deemed
to include only those recreation areas, parkways, thruways, expressways,
roads or highways which are shown on any adopted county plan.
(5) A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission within 62 days
after the time of submission of the final plat for approval. This hearing shall
be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least five
days before such hearing. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(6) The Planning Commission shall then, within 62 days of the public hearing,
approve, modify and approve, or disapprove such final plat. The action of the
Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the final plat. One copy
shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the Planning
Commission. If disapproved, reasons shall be stated in writing. [Amended
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(7) Within 62 days after receiving final approval, the developer must file the plat
with the County Clerk; otherwise such approval shall expire as provided in
§ 7-728, as amended, of the Village Law. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
(8) No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any final plat
after approval has been given by the Planning Commission and endorsed in
writing on the plat, unless the said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning
Commission and such Commission approves any modifications. In the event
that any such final plat is recorded without complying with this requirement,
the same shall be considered null and void, and the Commission shall institute
proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County Clerk.
D. Coordination with the State Environmental Quality Review Act. The Planning
Commission shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and its
implementing regulations. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
§ 252-3 MASSENA CODE § 252-4
252:4
shall conform to the Master Plan and shall be considered in their relation
to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the Master Plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
(a) Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(b) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuation or conformance to existing streets
impractical.
(3) Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
(4) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate
districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(5) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited, except where
their control is definitely placed in the Village under conditions approved by
the Planning Commission.
(6) Minor or secondary street openings into collector or major arterial roads shall,
in general, be at least 500 feet apart.
(7) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
(8) In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each other at any one
point by more than 10°, shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which
for the center line of the street shall not be less than 400 feet on major streets,
200 feet on collector streets and 100 feet on minor streets.
(9) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles,
and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60°.
(10) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 10 feet,
or of a greater radius where the Planning Commission may deem it necessary.
The Planning Commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
(11) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the Master Plan and where not
shown therein shall be not less than as follows:
§ 252-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-4
252:5
Street Type
Right-of-way
(feet)
Arterial 75
Collector 66
Minor, for row houses and apartments 66
Minor, for other residences 60
(12) Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of subdivisions in conformity with other requirements of these
regulations and where the Planning Commission finds that it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(13) Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 400
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter
of at least 100 feet.
(14) No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the
names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission.
(15) Street grades, wherever feasible, shall conform to the terrain but shall not
exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves:
Street Type Grade
Arterial 5%
Collector 7%
Minor 10%
(16) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(17) Driveway grades between the street and the setback line shall not exceed 10%.
(18) The approval by the Planning Commission of a final plat shall not be deemed
to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Village of any street,
easement or other open space shown on such final plat.
B. Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(2) The width of an alley right-of-way and pavement shall be not less than 20 feet.
(3) Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where
§ 252-4 MASSENA CODE § 252-4
252:6
necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular
movement.
(4) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by
the Planning Commission.
C. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on the rear or side lot lines shall be provided
for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-ofway
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
D. Blocks.
(1) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
(d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 500 feet.
(3) A pedestrian right-of-way at least 10 feet wide shall be provided near and
through the center of every block over 800 feet long and shall be paved with a
walk at least five feet wide.
(4) Each block shall be planned to provide two rows of lots, but irregularly shaped
blocks indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be
acceptable when properly designed and covered by agreements as to
maintenance of interior parks.
E. Lots.
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the
type of development and use contemplated.
(2) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 300, Zoning.
Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and
parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
§ 252-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-4
252:7
(3) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public
street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street.
(4) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of the residential development from topography
and orientation.
(5) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(6) Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the minimum size
required in the zoning district in which a subdivision is located, the
Commission may require that streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future
resubdivision in accordance with the requirements contained in these
regulations.
F. Public sites, open spaces and natural features.
(1) Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in a
Master Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, in those cases in
which the Planning Commission deems such requirements to be reasonable,
the Commission's approval shall be subject to such requirement.
(2) Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission, upon consideration of
the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and especially
in large-scale neighborhood unit developments not anticipated in the Master
Plan, the Planning Commission may require the dedication or reservation of
such other areas or sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs
created by such development for schools, parks and other neighborhood
purposes.
(3) Areas for parks and playgrounds shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood
playgrounds or other recreation uses. No arbitrary percentage of area shall be
insisted upon by the Commission, but in general developers should set aside
not less than 10% of the area for these purposes.
(4) When a park, playground or other recreation area shall have been shown on a
final plat, the approval of said plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the
Village of such area. The Planning Commission shall require the plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Commission may
also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the
Village Board of Trustees covering future deed and title, dedication and
provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment and maintenance of
any such recreation area.
(5) The Planning Commission shall, wherever possible, establish the preservation
of all natural features which add value to residential developments and to the
community, such as large trees or groves, watercourses and falls, beaches,
historic spots, vistas and similar irreplaceable assets. No tree with a diameter
of one foot or more as measured three feet above the base of the trunk shall be
removed unless such tree is within the right-of-way of a street as shown on the
final plat. Removal of additional trees shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission. In no case, however, shall a tree with a diameter of one
§ 252-4 MASSENA CODE § 252-4
252:8
§ 252-5. Required improvements.
foot or more as measured three feet above the base of the trunk be removed
without prior approval by the Planning Commission.
G. Drainage improvements.
(1) The subdivider may be required by the Planning Commission to carry away by
pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to
or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the
street right-of-way, where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of
appropriate width.
(2) A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether
inside or outside the subdivision. The Village Engineer shall approve the
design and size of facility based on anticipated runoff from a ten-year storm
under conditions of total potential development permitted by Chapter 300,
Zoning, in the watershed.
(3) The subdivider's engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on the
existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision.
This study shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer. Where it is anticipated
that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will
overload an existing downstream drainage facility during a five-year storm,
the Planning Commission shall notify the Village Board of Trustees of such
potential condition. In such case, the Planning Commission shall not approve
the subdivision until the provision has been made for the improvements of said
condition.
(4) Land subject to flooding or land deemed by the Planning Commission to be
uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood
hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall
not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or improved in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission to remedy said hazardous
conditions.
A. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in
streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer. The
monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the
Village Engineer.
B. Utility and street improvements. Utility and street improvements shall be provided
in each new subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements
described in the following schedules.
(1) The standards and specifications for each general type of development shall be
as follows:
(a) For apartment, row house, and similar multifamily residential types,
improvements shall be in accord with Standard A.
§ 252-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-5
252:9
(b) For one-family detached dwellings with typical lot widths of 120 feet or
less, improvements shall be in accord with Standard B.
(c) For country homes with typical lot widths greater than that specified in
Subsection B(1)(b) above, improvements shall be in accord with Standard
C.
(d) For commercial, industrial and other types, improvements shall be as
determined by the Planning Commission with the advice of the Village
Engineer.
(2) Schedule of required utilities and street improvements.
Standard
A B C Utility and Street Improvements
X X Public water per §§ 1115, 1116, 1117 and 1118 of the
Public Health Law of 1953, as amended, and per
Massena Village Board water regulations
X X Public sewer per §§ 1115, 1116, 1117 and 1118 of the
Public Health Law of 1953, as amended, and per plans
approved by Village Engineer
X X X Storm sewer system and other drainage improvements,
per plans approved by Village Engineer
X X X Arterial streets: cross sections in accordance with the
Master Plan as determined by the Village Engineer and
the Planning Commission
Collector streets:
X 75-foot right-of-way; 36-foot roadbed; 36-foot
pavement, if required by Village Board; and if
installed, 5-foot sidewalks on each side per Village
specifications
X X 66-foot right-of-way; 36-foot roadbed; 36-foot
pavement, if required by Village Board; and if
installed, 5-foot sidewalks on each side per Village
specifications
Minor streets:
X 66-foot right-of-way; 28-foot roadbed; 28-foot
pavement, if required by Village Board; and if
installed, five-foot sidewalks on each side
X 60-foot right-of-way; 28-foot roadbed; 28-foot
pavement, if required by Village Board; and if
installed, 5-foot sidewalks on each side
X 50-foot right-of-way; 28-foot roadbed; and 28-foot
pavement if required by Village Board
§ 252-5 MASSENA CODE § 252-5
252:10
§ 252-6. Plats and data.
Standard
A B C Utility and Street Improvements
X X X Streets along development boundaries and streets
connecting development with existing improved street
systems; cross sections as determined by Village
Engineer and Planning Commission
X X X Alleys: as determined by Village Engineer and
Planning Commission
X X X Grading and gradients: per plans and profiles
approved by Village Engineer
X X X Pavement base: per Village specifications
A. Preapplication plans and data.
(1) General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to
supplement the drawings required below. This information may include data
on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities
and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as
number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business
areas, playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
(2) The location map shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
the existing community facilities which serve or influence it and shall include
the development name and location; main traffic arteries; shopping centers;
schools; parks and playgrounds; other community features, such as hospitals
and churches; title; scale; North arrow; and date.
(3) The sketch plan on the topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form
the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on
a print of the topographic survey. In any event, the sketch plan shall include
either the existing topographic data listed in Subsection B(1) below or such of
these data as the Planning Commission determined is necessary for its
consideration of the proposed sketch plan.
B. Plats and data for conditional approval. (NOTE: All of the information set forth
below is required by the Commission for the purpose of complying with §§ 7-728
and 7-730, as amended, of the Village Law and the Health Law and for the
information of the public at public hearings. Due care in the preparation of this
material will expedite the process of passing upon the plats and data for final
approval.)
(1) Topographic data required as a basis for study of the preliminary plat, in
Subsection B(2) below, shall include existing conditions as follows, except
when otherwise specified by the Planning Commission:
§ 252-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-6
252:11
(a) Boundary lines: bearings and distances.
(b) Easements: location, width and purpose.
(c) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-of-way width and
location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established
center-line elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
(d) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert elevation of
sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and streetlights. If
water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
direction and distance to and size of nearest ones, showing invert
elevation of sewers.
(e) Ground elevations on the tract, based on a datum plane approved by the
Village Engineer: for land that slopes less than approximately 2%, show
spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or
swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all
directions; for land that slopes more than approximately 2%, either show
contours with an interval of not more than five feet if ground slope is
regular and such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or show
contours with an interval of not more than two feet if necessary because
of irregular land or need for more detailed data for preparing plans and
construction drawings.
(f) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface
soil, rock and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless test
pits are dry to a depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation
tests if individual sewage systems are proposed.
(g) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter,
buildings, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features.
(h) Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient
slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby
nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land. For adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by
name, recordation date and number, and show approximate percent
buildup, typical lot size and dwelling type.
(i) Photographs, if required by the Planning Commission: camera locations,
direction of views and key numbers.
(j) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(k) Proposed public improvements: highways or other major public
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or
near the tract.
§ 252-6 MASSENA CODE § 252-6
252:12
(l) Key plan showing location of the tract.
(m) Title and certificates: present tract designation according to official
records in office of appropriate recorder; title under which the proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of record owners,
subdivider and designer of preliminary layout, notation stating acreage,
scale, North arrow, datum, benchmarks, certification of registered civil
engineer or surveyor and date of survey.
(2) The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of 200 feet to one inch, or larger. It
shall be submitted on a permanent medium such as Mylar or its equivalent 20
inches wide by 20 inches long or 20 inches wide by 40 inches long. It shall
show all existing conditions required in Subsection B(1), topographic data, and
shall show all proposals including the following: [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L.
No. 2-2001]
(a) Streets: names; right-of-way and roadway widths; approximate grades
and gradients; similar data for alleys, if any.
(b) Other rights-of-way or easements: location, width and purpose.
(c) Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
(d) Connection with existing water supply or alternative means of providing
water supply to subdivision, as provided in § 89, as amended, of the
Public Health Law.15
(e) Connection with existing sanitary sewerage system or alternative means
of providing water supply to a subdivision, as provided in § 89, as
amended, of the Public Health Law.
(f) Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage.
(g) Lot lines and dimensions, lot numbers and block numbers.
(h) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses, exclusive of single-family dwelling.
(i) Minimum building setback lines.
(j) Improvements, including proposed location of sidewalks, streetlighting
standards, if any, and species of street trees, if any.
(k) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and acres
in parks, etc.
(l) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other
public uses.
(m) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, name of village and
county in which subdivision is located, scale, true North arrow and date.
15. Editor's Note: See now Public Health Law §§ 1115, 1116, 1117 and 1118.
§ 252-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-6
252:13
(3) Other preliminary plans. When required by the Planning Commission, the
preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable
distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections
of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plan of
proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All
elevations shall be based on a datum plane approved by the Village Engineer.
(4) Draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land
use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development.
C. Plats and data for final approval.
(1) Final plat shall be submitted on a permanent medium such as Mylar or its
equivalent 20 inches wide by 20 inches long or 20 inches wide by 40 inches
long and shall be a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger. Where necessary,
the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in continuous sections satisfactory to the Planning
Commission. The final plat shall show the following: [Amended 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
(a) Primary control points, approved by the Village Engineer, or descriptions
and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings
and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
(b) Sufficient data acceptable to the Village Engineer to determine readily
the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary
line, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practicable,
these should be referenced to monuments, and in any event should be tied
to primary control points approved by the Village Engineer.
(c) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
(d) The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length of
curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances and tangent
bearings shall be given for each street. All dimensions and angles of the
lines of each lot shall also be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet
and decimals of a foot.
(e) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown thus: "x." They shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications of the Village Engineer.
They shall be placed as required by the Village Engineer and their
location noted and referenced on the plat.
(f) Monuments of a type approved by the Village Engineer shall be set at all
corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be
subdivided; and at all street intersections, angle points in street lines,
points of curve and such intermediate points as shall be required by the
§ 252-6 MASSENA CODE § 252-6
252:14
Village Engineer. Location and description of all such monuments shall
be shown.
(g) All lot corner markers shall be permanently located, satisfactory to the
Village Engineer, at least 3/4 inch (if metal) in diameter and at least 24
inches in length, shown thus: "o," and located in the ground to existing
grade.
(h) Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
(i) Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements.
(j) Number to identify each lot or site.
(k) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
(l) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(m) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
(n) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
(o) Certification by licensed surveyor or professional engineer certifying to
accuracy of survey and plat, including license numbers and seals.
(p) All public open spaces for which deeds of cession are included and those
spaces title to which is reserved by the developer. For any of the latter,
there shall be submitted with the final plat copies of the agreements or
other documents showing the manner in which such areas are to be
maintained and the provisions made therefor.
(q) All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance of
unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the Village
Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
(r) Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, lots, easements and
any other sites for public uses.
(s) Subdivision name or identifying title; name of the village, county and
state; scale, true North arrow and date.
(2) Cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the Village
Engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to Village standard scales and elevations
and shall be based on a datum plane approved by the Village Engineer.
(3) A certificate by the Village Engineer certifying that the subdivider has
complied with one of the following alternatives:
(a) All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of
these regulations and with the action of the Planning Commission giving
conditional approval of the preliminary plat and to his satisfaction in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by him.
§ 252-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 252-6
252:15
§ 252-7. Variances.
(b) A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to the
Village and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required
improvements. Such bond or certified check shall be accompanied by a
certificate of the Village Attorney as to the sufficiency of the bond
offered in lieu thereof.
(4) Protective covenants in form for recording.
(5) Other data: such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the Planning Commission.
A. Hardship. Where the Planning Commission finds that in a specific and unusual
instance extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with these
regulations, it may, with specific approval by the Village Board of Trustees, vary
the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest served,
provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of the Master Plan or these regulations, and provided that a petition is
submitted in writing explaining the need for a variance in each particular instance.
B. Large scale development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may
be modified by the Planning Commission in the case of a plan and program for a
large development or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the Planning
Commission provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated, and which also provide such covenants or other legal provisions as will
assure conformity to the achievement of the plan.
C. Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Commission may
require such conditions as will, in it judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 252-6 MASSENA CODE § 252-7
252:16
Chapter 258
SUNDAY ACTIVITIES
§ 258-1. Sunday sports permitted.
It shall be lawful to conduct, witness, participate or engage in any form of public sports,
exercises, shows or entertainment which are conducted or engaged in primarily for the
entertainment of spectators, not specifically prohibited by any provision of law, on the
first day of the week after 2:00 in the afternoon, to witness which the public is invited or
an admission fee is charged, either directly or indirectly.
§ 252-7 SUNDAY ACTIVITIES § 258-1
258:1

Chapter 266
TAXATION
§ 258-1 TAXATION § 258-1
266:1

ARTICLE I
Tax on Utility Services
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 72, Art. I, of the 1969 Code]
§ 266-1. Tax on furnishing of utility services. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law. of the State of New
York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first day of June 1954
is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the Village of Massena which
is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service and which has
a gross income, for the 12 months ending May 31 of each year hereafter, in excess of
$500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Transportation
Law § 240 et seq. and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of June 1954 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in
the Village of Massena which has a gross operating income, for the 12 months ending
May 31 of each year hereafter, in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application only
within the territorial limits of the Village of Massena, and shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law for the same period. Such
taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the
territorial limits of the Village of Massena, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 266-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional
or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided
that profits from the sale be included in gross income), made or service rendered
ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser in the Village of Massena, including cash
credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such
service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost
of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale
of securities; also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property
(other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of
the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also
receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village
of Massena other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose
voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and also profits
from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the Village of Massena
whatsoever; provided, however, that the words "gross income" shall include, in the
case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipt from
local exchange service wholly consummated within the Village of Massena, and in the
case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only receipts from
transactions wholly consummated within the Village of Massena.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipt received in or by reason of any
§ 266-1 TAXATION § 266-2
266:3
sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of
gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason
of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service in the Village of Massena, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost
of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest
or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, association, joint-stock association,
copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting in fiduciary capacity, or any
other entity, and persons, their assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any
court whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities, political and
civil subdivisions of the state or municipality, and public district.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either division of the
State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of operating
or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street
surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person
(whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity,
steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or
wires, or of furnished gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph
service, by means of mains, pipes or wires regardless of whether such activities are the
main business of such person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of
the public streets.
§ 266-3. Utilities to keep records.
Every utility subject to tax under the chapter shall keep such records of its business and
in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and such records shall be preserved
for a period of three years, except that the Village Treasurer may consent to their
destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 266-4. Utilities to file returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the 25th day
of March, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding such return date, including
any period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective;
provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required by the foregoing provisions,
any utility may file quarterly, on or before September 25, December 25, March 25 and
June 25, a return for the three calendar months preceding each return date, including any
period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective. Every
return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered
thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by
him for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he
may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer in order to insure payment
of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental return, which
shall contain any data that may be specified by him, and he may require any utility
doing business in the Village of Massena to file an annual return, which shall contain
any data specified by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this
article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of
§ 266-2 MASSENA CODE § 266-4
266:4
the corporation, if such business be conducted by a corporation to the effect that the
statements contained therein are true.
§ 266-5. Tax payable with return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the
Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period covered by such return.
Such tax shall be due and payable at the time for filing the return or, if a return is not
filed when due, on the last day on which the return is required to be filed.
§ 266-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
§ 266-7. Giving of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given by
mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope, addressed
to such person at the address given by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be
presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to whom addressed. Any
period of time which is determined according to the provisions of this article by giving
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory
to the Village Treasurer and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20
days after the same is required by notice from him, or if no return is made for any
period, the Village Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such
information as he is able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the
basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such determination to
the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix
such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after
the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a
hearing or unless the Village Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same.
After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the
person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York if application therefor
is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to
review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with
the Village Treasurer, and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with
such sureties as justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such
proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and
charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest,
penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be
required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the
granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax,
no assessment of additional tax shall be made after expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that where no return
had been filed as required by this article the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 266-4 TAXATION § 266-7
266:5
of notice, shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 266-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or any portion
thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of
the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof,
excepting the first month, after such return was required to be filed or such tax become
due; but the Village Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return
for a period not exceeding 60 days, and if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may
remit all or any portion of the penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 266-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall determine
that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected,
the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and within
the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer,
however, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer, after a
hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or
penalty or it shall have established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Act of the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All
refunds shall be made out of money collected under this article. An application for a
refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer may receive additional
evidence with respect thereto. After making this determination, the Village Treasurer
shall give notice thereof the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to
review such determination under said Article 78 subject to the provisions therein before
contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 266-10. Tax to be part of operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and
shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others
but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility.
§ 266-11. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the
Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer, bring an action to
enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action
shall be paid to the Village Treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the
property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent
that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 266-12. Village Treasurer to make rules.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power to make such
reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the
§ 266-7 MASSENA CODE § 266-12
266:6
exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties, and to prescribe the form of
blanks, report and other records relating to administration and enforcement of the tax, to
the testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of this
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 266-13. Secrecy provisions.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it
shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer, or any agent, clerk or employee of the
Village of Massena to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross
income or gross operating income, or particulars set forth or disclosed in any return
under this article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any
action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of Massena in an
action of proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the State
Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of
the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under
the provisions of this article when the return or facts shown thereby are directly
involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may
require the production thereof, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns
or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no
more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his
duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit
the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular
returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists showing the
names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner
provided for by this article together with any relevant information which in the
opinion of the Village Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent
taxes; or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal representatives of the
Village of Massena of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside
or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both, and if
the offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Massena he
shall be dismissed from office, and shall be incapable of holding any office or
employment in the Village of Massena for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer may exchange
with the Chief Fiscal Officer of any city or any other village in the State of New
York information contained in returns filed under this article, provided such city or
other village grants similar privileges to the Village of Massena, and provided such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall,
upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any information contained in
such returns.
§ 266-12 TAXATION § 266-14
266:7
§ 266-14. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article shall be
credited and deposited by him in the general fund of the Village.
§ 266-14 MASSENA CODE § 266-14
266:8
ARTICLE II
Business Exemption
[Adopted 10-17-1978 by L.L. No. 9-1978]
§ 266-15. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to grant incentive for the expansion of existing businesses
in the Village of Massena by granting tax exemptions to said businesses for periods as
specified herein.
§ 266-16. Special tax credits and assessments.
A. The Assessor shall have the power to carry out and shall be charged with the duty
of carrying out the purpose and intent of Article 4-A of the Commerce Law, § 485
of the Real Property Tax Law and the other applicable laws of the state to grant to
business facility owners or operators exemption from taxes and special ad valorem
levies to the extent provided in the aforementioned New York State laws. Said
Assessor shall determine the assessed value of the exemption pursuant to such state
laws and shall grant as an exemption 100% thereof for the first five years;
thereafter, said exemption shall be reduced to 50% of the original exemption each
year for the next five years.
B. Any assessment so granted shall commence with the assessment roll prepared on
the next following taxable status date of the Village of Massena.
§ 266-15 TAXATION § 266-16
266:9

ARTICLE III
Physically Disabled Exemption
[Adopted 12-18-1984 by L.L. No. 14-1984]
§ 266-17. Exemption allowed.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes as a one-, twoor
three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase
in value attributable to such improvement if such improvement is used for the purpose
of facilitating and accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by
a resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled or a member of the
resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real
property.
§ 266-18. Application procedures.
The procedure for applying for or the granting of said exemption shall be in accord
within the provisions of § 459 of the Real Property Tax Law and shall apply to an
improvement constructed and added to the tax rolls after January 1, 1981.
§ 266-17 TAXATION § 266-18
266:11

ARTICLE IV
Eligible Funds Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-3-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
§ 266-19. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to maintain the ratio of the amount of the eligible funds
veterans exemption to the assessed valuation of property on which the exemption was
granted. The ratio may change as a result of a revaluation or an update of assessments.
§ 266-20. Tax computation procedure.
A. If the total assessed value of real property for which an exemption has been granted
pursuant to § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law has been increased or decreased as
a result of a revaluation or update of assessments in the Village of Massena, and a
material change in level of assessment has been certified by the State Board of Real
Property Services for the assessment roll on which such property is assessed, then
there will be a revised exemption.
B. The exemption amount will be computed by multiplying the current exemption by
the change in the level of assessments Village-wide as certified by the State Board
of Real Property Tax Services. This is in accordance with the provisions of Real
Property Tax Law § 458, Chapter 410 of 1994 Laws.
§ 266-19 TAXATION § 266-20
266:13

ARTICLE V
Termination of Status as Assessing Unit
[Adopted 11-10-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
§ 266-21. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena is to implement § 1402(3)
of the Real Property Tax Law, providing for the voluntary termination of the Village's
status as an assessing unit, as provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax
Law. It is also the intent of this article to abolish the position of Assessor and Board of
Assessors and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review
of the assessments of real property located within the Village of Massena.
§ 266-22. Cessation of Village as assessing unit.
On or after the effective date of this article, the Village of Massena shall cease to be an
assessing unit.
§ 266-23. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Massena is hereby abolished.
§ 266-24. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Massena is hereby abolished.
§ 266-25. Tax levy.
On or after the effective date of this article, taxes in the Village of Massena shall be
levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the Town of Massena,
Town of Louisville, and Town of Norfolk, with the taxable status date of such towns
controlling for Village purposes.
§ 266-26. Filing of provisions.
Within five days of the effective date of this article, the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Massena shall file a copy of such article with the Clerk and Assessor of the Towns
of Massena, Louisville, and Norfolk and with the State Board of Real Property Tax
Services.
§ 266-27. When effective; referendum.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State;
provided, however, that such article is subject to a permissive referendum, and the
Village Clerk shall forthwith proceed to notice such fact and conduct such referendum if
required by petition.16
16. Editor's Note: No valid petition requesting a referendum was filed.
§ 266-21 TAXATION § 266-27
266:15

ARTICLE VI
Tax Levy Limit Override
[Adopted 2-7-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 266-28. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to allow the Village of Massena to adopt a budget for the
coming fiscal year commencing June 1 that requires a real property tax levy in excess of
the "tax levy limit" as defined by General Municipal Law § 3-c.
§ 266-29. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Subdivision 5 of General Municipal Law § 3-c, which
expressly authorizes a local government's governing body to override the property tax
cap for the coming fiscal year by the adoption of a local law approved by a vote of 60%
of said governing body.
§ 266-30. Tax levy limit override.
§ 266-31. Severability.
If a court determines that any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision or part of this
article or the application thereof to any person, firm or corporation, or circumstance
is invalid or unconstitutional, the court's order or judgment shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, subdivision, or part of this article or in its application to the person,
individual, or firm or corporation or circumstance directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment or order shall be rendered.
§ 266-32. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena, County of St. Lawrence, is hereby
authorized to adopt a budget for the fiscal year commencing June 1, 2012, that
requires a real property tax levy in excess of the amount otherwise prescribed in
General Municipal Law § 3-c.
B. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena, County of St. Lawrence, is hereby
authorized to adopt a budget for the fiscal year commencing June 1, 2013, that
requires a real property tax levy in excess of the amount otherwise prescribed in
General Municipal Law § 3-c. [Added 2-15-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena, County of St. Lawrence, is hereby
authorized to adopt a budget for the fiscal year commencing June 1, 2014, that
requires a real property tax levy in excess of the amount otherwise prescribed in
General Municipal Law § 3-c. [Added 2-4-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 266-28 TAXATION § 266-32
266:17

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Residential-Commercial Development
[Adopted 7-19-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 266-33. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to afford and provide an exemption from general municipal
taxes for developers and building owners to convert nonresidential real property to
residential housing units and commercial mixed uses in accordance with New York State
Real Property Tax Law § 485-a.
§ 266-34. Authority and definitions.
This article is adopted pursuant to New York State Real Property Tax Law § 485-a(2),
which expressly authorizes the Village of Massena to enact a local law providing for
such exemption. The definition of terms in New York Real Property Tax Law § 485-a
shall apply to the provisions of this article.
§ 266-35. Exemption granted.
Beginning with assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring
on or after March 1, 2017, pursuant to New York State Real Property Tax Law § 485-a,
nonresidential real property, upon conversion to mixed-use property, shall be exempt
from taxation and special ad valorem levies levied. For a period of 12 years from the
approval of an application, the increase in assessed value of such property attributable to
such conversion shall be exempt as provided below. Such exemption shall be computed
with respect to the exemption base. The exemption base shall be determined for each
year in which there is an increase in assessed value so attributable from that of the
previous year's assessed value. Such exemption shall be computed in accordance with
the following table:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 through 8 100% of exemption base
9 80% of exemption base
10 60% of exemption base
11 40% of exemption base
12 20% of exemption base
§ 266-36. Exclusions from exemption.
A. No such exemption shall be granted unless such conversion was commenced
subsequent to the date on which this article takes effect; and the cost of such
conversion exceeds the sum of $10,000.
B. For purposes of this section, the term "conversion" shall not include ordinary
maintenance and repairs.
C. No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to any other real
property tax exemption granted to the same improvements to real property, except
§ 266-33 TAXATION § 266-36
266:19
§ 266-37. Time to file application for exemption.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon application by the
owner of such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property
Services and the Village of Massena. Such application shall be filed with the Assessor
of the Village of Massena on or before the taxable status date of March 1.
§ 266-38. Record of exemption.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant
to this article, he or she shall approve the application and such real property shall
thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies as provided in the
article commencing with the assessment roll prepared after the taxable status date of
March 1. The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be
entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll of the taxable property, with the amount
of the exemption shown in a separate column.
where, during the period of such previous exemptions, payments in lieu of taxes
or other payments were made in an amount that would have been equal to or
greater than the amount of real property taxes that would have been paid on such
improvements had such property been granted an exemption pursuant to this article.
In such case, an exemption shall be granted for a number of years equal to the
twelve-year exemption granted pursuant to this article, less the number of years the
property would have been previously exempt from real property taxes.
§ 266-36 MASSENA CODE § 266-38
266:20
ARTICLE VIII
Cold War Veterans' Exemption
[Adopted 3-20-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
§ 266-39. Purpose.
This article shall implement the provisions of New York Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-b, to provide a Cold War veteran real property tax exemption for qualified owners
of qualified residential property in the Village of Massena.
§ 266-40. Definitions.
The terms "cold war veteran," "qualified owner," and "qualified residential real
property" shall have the definitions set forth at New York Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-b. All other definitions set forth at New York Real Property Tax Law § 458-b
shall be applicable to the interpretation and implementation of the Cold War veteran real
property tax exemption in the Village of Massena.
§ 266-41. Exemption.
§ 266-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from real property taxation in
the Village of Massena to the extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property;
provided however, that such exemption shall not exceed $12,000, or the product of
$12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of Massena,
whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section, where a Cold
War veteran has received a compensation rating from the United States Veterans
Affairs or from the United States Department of Defense because of a serviceconnected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from real
property taxation in the Village of Massena to the extent of the product of the
assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold War veteran
disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $40,000,
or the product of $40,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the
Village of Massena, whichever is less.
C. The Cold War veteran exemption from real property taxation in the Village of
Massena shall be granted to qualifying owners of qualifying property permanently
as long as they remain qualifying owners.
D. If a qualified owner of qualified residential real property receives an exemption
from real property taxation in the Village of Massena pursuant to Real Property Tax
Law § 458 or § 458-a, said owner shall not be eligible to receive the Cold War
veteran exemption.
§ 266-39 TAXATION § 266-42
266:21

Chapter 270
TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 270-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words
shall have the meanings given to them by this section:
APPLICANT — Includes any person or entity who files an application for a vehicle for
hire license as an owner, driver, or both.
MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in
the business of carrying persons for hire, or otherwise operated for hire, except vehicles
subject to the provisions of the Transportation Corporation Law.
OPERATOR—Includes any person owning or having control of the use of one or more
vehicles for hire used for hire upon the streets of the Village of Massena or engaged in
the business of operating a vehicle for hire.
PASSENGER — A member of the public who engages the use of a vehicle for hire.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural person, corporations,
partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies and all other entities of any
kind capable of being sued.
STREET — Includes any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public place in the
Village of Massena.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire, or otherwise operated for hire, except vehicles subject to the provisions of the
Transportation Corporation Law, or used by undertakers in carrying on their business.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person be the
owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB OR MEDICAL TRANSPORT VEHICLE OWNER — Either:
VEHICLE FOR HIRE — Includes any motor vehicle used in the transporting of a
passenger or passengers, for hire or for compensation of any kind, upon the public
streets, roads and highways within the Village of Massena.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER'S LICENSE — Includes permission granted by the
Village of Massena to any person to drive upon the streets of such Village any licensed
vehicle for hire.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE REGISTRATION LICENSE — Includes permission granted by
the Village of Massena to any person to operate or keep for hire any vehicle for hire in
such Village.
A person in whose name a taxicab or medical transport vehicle is lawfully
registered under New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law; or
A.
A person who, by contract, lease, or other lawful agreement, has possession and
control of a taxicab or vehicle for hire lawfully registered under New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law to another person.
B.
§ 266-42 TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 270-2
270:1
§ 270-2. General requirements.
The operation or running of taxis, liveries, public cabs, carriages, hacks, automobiles
or other vehicles for the transportation of persons for hire over and upon the streets
of the Village of Massena, New York, or the use of such vehicles for soliciting fares
within or upon the public streets or public places in the Village of Massena, the operation
thereof for or on behalf of any hotel, lodging house or garage, either on private or public
highways within said Village, and regardless of whether such operation extends beyond
the boundaries of the Village of Massena, is hereby prohibited unless carried on pursuant
to Village license as hereinafter provided.
§ 270-3. Vehicle for hire driver's license required.
It shall be unlawful for any operator, driver or owner of any vehicle required to be
licensed hereunder to operate or drive such vehicle or any sort for transportation of
persons for hire within the Village of Massena without obtaining a license therefor.
§ 270-4. Application for vehicle for hire driver's license.
Each applicant for a vehicle for hire driver's license must comply with the following to
the satisfaction of the Chief of Police:
A. Must first have obtained a New York State chauffeur's license.
B. Be of the age of 21 years or over.
C. Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him/her unfit for
the safe operation of a vehicle for hire.
D. Be able to read and write the English language.
E. Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or
drugs.
F. Fill out, upon a blank form to be provided by the Village Clerk, a statement giving
his/her full name, residence, age, height, color of eyes and hair, whether a citizen of
the United States, places of previous employment, whether (s)he has ever been
arrested or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether (s)he has been
previously licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, whether his/her license has
ever been revoked, and for what cause, and the number of the chauffeur's license
issued by the state, which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant
and filed with the Village Clerk as a permanent record. The Chief of Police is
hereby authorized and empowered to require such additional information as he may
deem necessary.
G. Presents to the Chief of Police a statement of any physical conditions or
impairments or any regularly prescribed medication. For any such condition,
impairment or medication, the applicant shall submit a physician's certification that
such conditions, impairments or medication does not impair the applicant's ability
to drive a vehicle for hire.
H. Is not disqualified pursuant to the provisions of § 270-7 of this chapter.
§ 270-2 MASSENA CODE § 270-4
270:2
§ 270-5. Granting of vehicle for hire license.
§ 270-6. Form and terms of vehicle for hire driver's license.
I. Has tendered with his or her application the license fee prescribed pursuant to
§ 270-8 of this chapter.
J. The drug screening test must be performed within five days of vehicle for hire
application submission and preapproval by the Chief of Police. Drug testing is to be
submitted to a laboratory certified to perform toxicology tests and certify the results
thereof by the New York State Department of Health and which performs drug
abuse testing, indicating the applicant does not use amphetamines, barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, benzoylecgonine, ethanol, fentanyl, methadone, opiates,
phencyclidine, propoxyphene, THC-cannabinoids, and tricyclic antidepressants,
unless prescribed by a licensed health care provider who attests, in writing, that
such drug, when consumed by the applicant, in no way impairs the applicant's
ability to operate a motor vehicle. The owner/employer shall be responsible for all
costs associated with the test required for application, renewal or as required by the
Chief of Police. Results must be given to the Chief of Police within five days of
completing the drug screening.
A. Present licenses. All licenses of vehicles for hire pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter which are in operation at the time of the passage of this chapter shall be
renewed annually as a matter of right upon compliance with the other provisions of
this chapter.
B. Licenses of vehicles for hire for which the owner has no vehicle for hire in
operation at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall be deemed abandoned
for nonuse and shall not be renewed.
C. All licenses shall pertain not only to the vehicles for hire which are in operation at
the time of the passage of this chapter, but shall also pertain to any replacement of
such vehicle for hire, provided that such replacement complies with the provisions
of this chapter and the regulation of the Police Department, and further provided
that, prior to the granting of a license for any such replacement, the owner thereof
shall file an application for such replacement on forms to be provided by the Village
Clerk for such purpose.
A. Upon satisfactory compliance with the foregoing requirements, there shall be issued
to the applicant a license stamped with the Seal of the Village of Massena, which
shall be in such form as to contain the signature of the licensee, a copy of his/her
most recent New York State driver's license photograph, and blank spaces upon
which a record may be made of any arrests of or serious complaints against him/
her. Such card shall be conspicuously posted in any vehicle for hire, while the
licensed driver is operating the same so that such card is visible to any passenger in
said vehicle.
B. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall
contain the name and place of residence of the licensee and the dates of issuance
and expiration of the license.
§ 270-4 TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 270-6
270:3
§ 270-7. Renewal of vehicle for hire driver's license.
§ 270-8. Fees for vehicle for hire driver's license.
The following license fee shall be paid for a driver's license or renewal thereof: $20.
§ 270-9. Suspension or revocation of vehicle for hire driver's license or permit.
A vehicle for hire driver's license or permit may at any time be suspended for a period
C. Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his
license shall be punished by the revocation of his license.
D. Vehicle for hire driver's licenses shall be issued as of May 1 in each and every year
and shall be valid to and including the last day of April next succeeding, unless
previously suspended or revoked.
E. No temporary permit shall be issued except when an extraordinary public
emergency arises affecting transportation of the public upon the streets within the
Village. Such temporary permits, when issued, shall be upon such terms and
conditions as the Chief of Police shall provide, but such temporary permits shall in
no event be granted for a longer period than 20 days and may be renewable for a
similar period, from time to time as may be necessary, only upon the written
recommendation of the Chief of Police made to the Board of Trustees and approved
by it. The fee for such temporary permits shall be $1.
F. Such license or permit shall be carried by the licensee at all times when operating
or in charge of any vehicle for hire.
A. The Village Clerk may renew a driver's license from year to year upon review and
approval by the Chief of Police.
B. A driver will be disqualified to operate a vehicle for hire in the Village of Massena
if (This list is not inclusive of all the determining factors to be considered by the
Chief of Police for disqualifying an applicant.):
(1) He or she has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond or
collateral for any felony offense by New York State statute or for any offense
committed in another state which would constitute a felony in the State of New
York.
(2) He or she has accumulated, within the past 24 months, eight or more points on
his or her driver's license (points as determined by the Department of Motor
Vehicles of the State of New York or the state in which the offense was
committed).
(3) He or she, within the past two years, had his or her license to operate a vehicle
for hire in the Village of Massena revoked pursuant to the provisions outlined
in this chapter.
(4) He or she fails to maintain the insurance required by § 270-11A(7) below.
(5) He or she fails the drug screening required by § 270-4J.
§ 270-6 MASSENA CODE § 270-9
270:4
not to exceed three months or revoked for cause after a hearing by the Chief of Police.
Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a statement of the
reasons therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of his license by the official suspending
or revoking such license. When the license or permit is suspended or revoked, a note
of the revocation or suspension shall be forthwith sent to the Village Clerk, the license
to be returned at the expiration of the period for which the license was suspended. A
second suspension for the same reason or, in any case, a third suspension of a driver's
license shall revoke the license. No driver whose license or permit has been revoked
shall be again licensed as a vehicle for hire driver in the Village of Massena unless upon
the presentation of reasons satisfactory to the Board of Trustees. The Police Department
shall notify the Village Clerk whenever such a license or permit is suspended or revoked.
§ 270-10. Record of vehicle for hire driver's licenses and permits.
There shall be kept, in the office of the Village Clerk, a complete record of each license
or permit issued to a driver, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof,
which record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for a license.
§ 270-11. Vehicle for hire registration license; application.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a vehicle for
hire upon the streets of the Village of Massena without first having obtained
therefor a vehicle for hire registration license under the provisions of this chapter
from the Village Clerk. Such license shall be issued as of May 1 and shall expire on
the last day of April next succeeding unless sooner suspended or revoked.
Application for a vehicle for hire registration license shall be made by the owner
upon blank forms furnished by the Village Clerk. Such application shall contain:
(1) The name and age and residence of the person applying for the license and
what, if any, previous experience (s)he has had in such business.
(2) The name, age and residence of the person to be in immediate charge of any
such vehicle for hire.
(3) The type of motor car to be used, the horsepower, the factory number, the state
license number, the number of years the vehicle has been driven, and the
seating capacity according to its trade rating.
(4) Whether previously licensed to operate a vehicle for hire and, if so, where.
(5) Whether license to operate a vehicle for hire has even been revoked and, if so,
for what cause.
(6) Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary.
(7) Acceptable certificate of automobile insurance issued by a carrier and with
such liability limits as are acceptable to the Village of Massena; New York
State statutory workers' compensation, unemployment registration number and
disability insurance for each driver employed by the applicant; and
commercial automobile livery and taxi insurance in the amount mandated by
New York State law. A valid copy of all documents must be forwarded to the
Village Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney.
§ 270-9 TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 270-11
270:5
§ 270-12. Inspection of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, clean, fit, and of good appearance.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner and/or the registrant to immediately report to the
Clerk any cancellation or revocation of insurance, or any change in the availability
of the licensed vehicle to operate as a vehicle for hire, or any change in the company
dispatching said vehicle.
C. A licensed vehicle owner may replace the licensed vehicle for hire with another
vehicle if the vehicle for hire shall become disabled, disqualified for service, or the
like, provided that the license holder makes prior application to the Clerk, and that
said replacement vehicle complies with the requirements of this chapter, and makes
payment of a fee in the amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
A. Mechanical inspection. The Chief of Police or his designee shall refuse a license to
or, if already issued, revoke or suspend a license of any vehicle found to be unfit or
unsuited for public patronage. A vehicle shall not pass inspection unless it is in a
thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers and in good repair.
Inspection of vehicles shall be annually. The inspection shall be performed by a
mechanic at the Village Garage, the cost of which is to be borne by the applicant.
The fee for such inspection shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees. A mechanical inspection shall include, but not be limited to,
a review of the following items:
(1) Brakes.
(2) Tires.
(3) Steering.
(4) Shock absorbers and springs.
(5) Lights.
(6) Windshield.
(7) Mirrors.
(8) Windshield wipers.
(9) Horn.
(10) Fuel inlet restrictor.
(11) Speedometer.
B. Physical inspection. The Chief of Police or his designee shall maintain constant
vigilance over all vehicles for hire to see that they are kept in a condition of
continued fitness for public use, and to this end, (s)he shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all vehicles for hire from time to time, as hereinbefore provided for, or on
§ 270-11 MASSENA CODE § 270-12
270:6
the complaint of any citizen as often as may be necessary. Reports, in writing, of
all inspections shall be promptly filed in the office of the Village Clerk. A vehicle
shall not pass a physical inspection unless it is free from excessive auto body and
paint damage, clean, fit, uniform in color, or good appearance and in a thoroughly
safe condition. A physical inspection shall include but not be limited to a review of
the following items:
(1) Interior upholstery.
(2) Floorboards.
(3) Door handles.
(4) Windows.
(5) Locks.
(6) Lights.
(7) Tires.
(8) Body damage and rust.
(9) Paint.
(10) Spare tire, jack, lugs and lug wrench.
(11) Directional signals.
(12) Safety flares.
C. General condition of vehicles.
(1) Every vehicle shall be well painted and in good appearance, interior and
exterior.
(2) Any vehicle damaged in any way must be reported to the Clerk within 24 hours
of the accident, at which time a form will be provided to the owner of said
vehicle which must remain in the vehicle until such time as repairs are made.
The vehicle must be repaired no later than 30 days from the date of the
accident. When repairs are made, the vehicle must be inspected to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(3) The baggage compartment of every vehicle shall be clean and capable of
holding passengers' baggage.
(4) Maximum age of the vehicle shall be no more than 12 years of the present year
of manufacture.
(5) Vehicles for hire shall be kept clean. Every vehicle for hire operated in the
Village of Massena shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be swept and
dusted at least once a day. The interior dash, glass and floor shall be cleaned
thoroughly with suitable antiseptic solution.
(6) Vehicles shall be kept in repair. Every vehicle for hire shall be kept in such
§ 270-12 TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 270-12
270:7
§ 270-13. Vehicle for hire registration license card.
If, upon inspection, a vehicle for hire is found to be of lawful construction and in proper
condition, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and upon the approval of
the application and the payment of the license fee hereinafter set forth, the same shall be
licensed by delivering to the owner a card of such size and form as may be prescribed
by the Village Clerk. The card shall contain the official license number of the vehicle for
hire, and the name and address of the licensed owner thereof, together with the date of
inspection of the vehicle and a statement to the effect that in case of any complaints, the
Village Clerk shall be notified giving the license number of the vehicle. Such card shall
be signed by the licensing official and shall contain blank spaces upon which an entry
shall be made of the date of every inspection of the vehicle by the Village Mechanic or
his representative. Such license card shall be conspicuously posted in the cab so that the
same is visible to any passengers in said cab.
§ 270-14. License fees for vehicles for hire.
The following license fee shall be charged: $25 for each car licensed. No license fee
shall be prorated for a period of less than six months.
§ 270-15. Suspension or revocation of vehicle for hire registration license.
Vehicle for hire registration licenses may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause
after a hearing by the Chief of Police if the vehicles shall be used for immoral or illegal
business or purpose, for a violation of any ordinance or state law governing the operation
of motor vehicles, for a lapse in the insurance requirements set forth in § 270-11A(7)
above, or for other good cause. When the license is suspended or revoked, the same shall
be retained by the Village Clerk and shall be returned only after the expiration of the
suspension period.
§ 270-16. Register of licensed vehicles for hire.
condition of repair as may be reasonably necessary to provide for the safety of
the public and for continuous and satisfactory operation.
(7) All taxicabs and medical transport vehicles shall have printed lettering on both
the left and right front doors at least three inches high in a color contrasting to
that of the cab, setting forth the name of the company or person owning or
dispatching said taxicab or medical transport vehicle.
(8) All taxicabs shall be equipped with a roof light of a minimum size of 12 inches
in length and three inches in height which shall contain the word "taxi" and/or
the name of the applicable livery company.
A. The Village Clerk shall keep a register or card index of the name of each person
owning or operating a vehicle for hire licensed under this chapter, together with the
license number and the description and make of such vehicle, with the date and
complete record of inspection made of it. Such record shall be open to the
inspection of the public at all reasonable times.
B. The number of taxicabs for which licenses may be issued under this chapter of the
§ 270-12 MASSENA CODE § 270-16
270:8
§ 270-17. Charges for the transportation of passengers in a taxicab.
Charges for taxicab transportation of passengers within the limits of the Village of
Massena shall be at the following rates:
§ 270-18. Articles found in vehicles for hire.
Every driver of a vehicle for hire, immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment, must carefully search such vehicle for any property lost or left therein, and
any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, must be taken to the
police station and deposited with the officer in charge within 24 hours after the finding
thereof.
§ 270-19. Transfer of license and permit.
§ 270-20. General regulations.
Village of Massena shall be limited to 10 in number.
A. A maximum of $5.25 for one to five passengers, and a maximum of $4.50 for
disabled and senior citizens for one to five passengers.
B. Waiting time may be charged after five minutes at the rate of $0.25 per minute.
C. No person shall be allowed to ride in a vehicle for hire with a person or persons
who have previously engaged such vehicle for hire without the consent of such
person or persons.
A. Every person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon discontinuing or abandoning the operation or driving of a vehicle for
hire, return such license or permit to the Village Clerk unless such license or permit
has been lost or for other reasons cannot be restored. Such license and permit shall
not be assigned or transferred to any other person, or be applicable to any other
motor vehicle than the one specified therein except as hereinafter set forth:
assignable if approved by the Village Board of Trustees, provided that all herein
licenses held by the owner are surrendered by the assignee and later meet the
approval of this chapter. Transfer shall cost $1 per cab. Any licensee who
unlawfully permits his license or permit to be used by any other person, and any
person who unlawfully uses such license or permit granted or given to any other
person, shall each be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Whenever a license or
permit shall be lost, stolen or destroyed, without fault on the part of the holder, his
agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be
issued by the Village Clerk upon the filing of a sworn statement containing the facts
of such loss or theft.
B. Vehicle for hire registration licenses may be transferred and assigned to any person
who does not hold any vehicle for hire registration license, provided application
shall be made to the Board of Trustees and said Board consents to such transfer and
assignment, and provided further that the assignor shall surrender to the assignee all
of the vehicle for hire registration licenses issued to him. There shall be charged a
transfer fee of $1 for each license so transferred.
§ 270-16 TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 270-20
270:9
§ 270-21. Cab stands.
§ 270-22. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every holder of a vehicle for hire license shall always keep the inside of the cab
operated by him/her in a clean and sanitary condition and shall at least once a day
thoroughly clean the inside of such vehicle.
B. No vehicle for hire shall be used to convey any person affected with a contagious
disease. Should it be found by the owner or driver that a vehicle for hire has been
so used, (s)he shall immediately report to the health authorities, and such vehicle
shall not again be used until it has been thoroughly cleaned and fumigated under
the direction of the health authorities.
C. Every owner of a vehicle for hire shall provide windows in the tonneau of each
vehicle sufficient in number and of such size and dimensions that always persons
may be readily seen through such window with sufficient distinctness to identify
such person.
D. No owner or driver of a vehicle for hire shall at any time so fasten or lock the doors
on a vehicle that it is impossible for a passenger to open the same from the inside.
Every owner shall provide means for unfastening doors on such vehicle so that such
doors may be readily opened on the inside by a passenger.
A. The Board of Trustees shall designate the location of a cab stand or cab stands at its
discretion in the Village of Massena.
B. Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the supervision
of the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, other than a licensed
taxicab, in any cab stand.
C. A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cab stand while such taxicab is in charge
of its driver on duty awaiting a fare.
A. Any owner or driver of a vehicle for hire not licensed or equipped in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, or of a vehicle for hire license of which has been
suspended or revoked, who engages in the business of a vehicle for hire as defined
herein, or attempts to engage in such business, or solicits passengers for hire, or any
person not having been duly licensed as a vehicle for hire driver, or any person
whose license as such driver has been revoked, or any person whose license has
been suspended, and who, during the term of suspension, drives for hire a vehicle
for hire upon the streets shall, upon conviction, be liable to a penalty of not more
than $250 for each offense or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
B. Suspension and revocation of license. In addition to the fine and imprisonment, or
both, authorized by this chapter, any licensee shall be subject to the suspension or
revocation of his/her license upon conviction for any violation of this chapter. The
Chief of Police may, in his discretion, suspend or revoke a license granted under
any provisions of this chapter, pending or in advance of the criminal prosecution of
the licensee.
§ 270-20 MASSENA CODE § 270-22
270:10
Chapter 273
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Radio antenna agreement — See Ch. A308.
Television antenna system — See Ch. A309.
§ 273-1. Purpose and background.
A. Recent advances in wireless communications technology have resulted in a new
generation of telecommunication services. These new services transmit
electromagnetic waves of such a frequency and power that will likely require
numerous antenna locations. These antennas may be located on buildings, water
towers and other similar structures but will also frequently be located on new or
enlarged towers. This requires that the Village regulate these wireless
communication system facilities in a different manner than conventional television
and radio transmission towers which are able to transmit their signals at much
greater distances.
B. The Federal Communications Commission has recently licensed a number of
providers of wireless communication services and additional providers are expected
to be licensed in the near future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites
within the Village and these efforts are expected to include requests to construct
new communication towers and/or structures as well. The intent of this proposed
regulation is to provide for the establishment and/or expansion of wireless
telecommunication services within the Village while protecting neighborhoods and
minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless
telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting and screening. More
specifically this regulation has been developed in order to:
(1) Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to
accommodate new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of
communication towers needed to serve the Village.
(2) Encourage providers to collocate their facilities on a single tower.
C. The Village of Massena has undertaken a deliberate process to establish policy,
standards and procedures related to the siting of tower structure and antenna arrays
for wireless telecommunications as contained herein. In doing so, the municipality
attempted to:
(1) Preserve property values and development opportunities.
(2) Minimize the visual impact of towers.
(3) Minimize the number of towers and their heights.
§ 270-22 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 273-1
273:1
§ 273-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio
frequency waves. Such waves shall include, but not be limited to, radio, television,
cellular, paging, personal communication services, and microwave, communications.
The frequency of these waves generally range from 10 Hertz to 300 Megahertz but can
be higher as technology advances.
BTS (BASE TRANSCEIVER STATION) — The central cell facility that contains all
the receivers, transmitters and other apparatus needed for cellular/PCS operation.
CAPACITY — The number of mobile users that can realistically be serviced by a BTS.
COLLOCATION — Locating wireless communications facilities from more than one
wireless communications services provider on a single site.
COVERAGE—The general term that describes the ability of a BTS to send and receive
wireless signals of sufficient strength to provide reliable cellular/PCS service.
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GUYED TOWER — A construction technique that uses stabilizing cable to provide
lateral support for a tower.
HEIGHT OF TOWER — The vertical distance measured in feet from the average
existing level of the ground surrounding the tower and within 10 feet thereof to the top
point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. The existing elevation
shall mean the actual or approved elevation of the property at the time of application.
INTERFERENCE — Any electromagnetic radiation or noise that is not the desired
signal.
LATTICE TOWER — Description of the type of tower construction typified by crossbracing
between three posts that constitute a rigid antenna support structure.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A unified self-supporting structure typified by a smooth
tapered steel pole similar to roadway light supports.
NETWORK — The general term used to describe all the BTS facilities and equipment
required to provide cellular/PCS services.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PATH LOSS—The attenuation experienced by the radio waves as they propagate from
the BTS to the mobile phone or from the mobile phone to the BTS. Path loss will be the
same for either direction over short periods of time.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any parabolic dish, antenna or other device or equipment
(4) Promote safety; general welfare and quality of life.
(5) Assure adequate access to wireless communication service for the community.
§ 273-1 MASSENA CODE § 273-2
273:2
of whatever nature or kind, the primary purpose of which is to receive television, radio,
light, microwave, or other electronic signals, waves and/or communications from space
satellites.
SEQR — State environmental quality review as described in 6 NYCRR Part 617.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio, video, data,
and other information by wire, radio, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic
systems.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure intended to support wireless
communications equipment used to receive and/or transmit electron magnetic waves.
Design examples of towers might include but may not be limited to self-supporting
lattice; guyed and monopoles structures; and water towers.
TOWER OPERATOR — The owner, manager and/or management firm of a
telecommunication tower.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Licensed wireless
telecommunications services including, but not necessarily limited to: cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and other types of telecommunications
services that are or may be marketed to the general public.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — A facility operated by a licensed
wireless telecommunication service provider which consists of the equipment and
structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with
wireless telecommunications services.
§ 273-3. Application procedures.
A. No communication installation, transmission tower, telecommunication tower,
communication tower accessory facility or structure, freestanding tower and/or pole
or transmission reception antenna shall henceforth be erected, moved, changed or
altered other than replacement in kind except after the approval in conformance
with the provisions of these regulations.
B. No existing structure shall be modified to serve as a transmission tower,
telecommunication tower, communication tower accessory facility or structure,
freestanding tower, antenna and/or pole unless in conformity with this chapter and
other laws of the Village.
C. The applicant must provide a copy (in the applicant's name) of the certificate of
need or appropriate FCC license issued by the Federal Communications
Commission to provide the telecommunication services that the proposed tower is
designed to support. If the appropriate applicant FCC license has not been issued,
the applicant must show proof that the application has been filed and accepted by
the Federal Communications Commission and is under review for the granting of
the applicant's license. Speculative applications of any type shall not be considered
or acted upon by the Village Planning Board.
D. All applications for installation of a new telecommunications tower shall be
accompanied by a report containing the information hereinafter set forth. The
report, shall be signed by the tower operator and contain the following information:
§ 273-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 273-3
273:3
(1) Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) preparing the report.
(2) Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner, operator and the applicant.
(3) Postal address and Tax Map page, block and lot or parcel number of the
property.
(4) Zoning District in which the property is situated.
(5) Size of the property on which the proposed construction is to occur and the
location of all adjoining lot lines within 500 feet.
(6) Location of nearest residential structure measured in feet.
(7) Location of nearest occupied residential structure measured in feet.
(8) Location of all structures existing and proposed on the property, which is the
subject of this application.
(9) Location, size and height of all proposed and/or existing antennas and all
appurtenant structures.
(10) Type, size and location of all proposed and existing mitigating landscaping.
(11) The number, type, and design of the tower and antenna(s) proposed and the
basis for the calculations of tower and system capacity.
(12) The make, model and manufacturer of the communications tower and
antenna(s) with supporting construction details.
(13) A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all related fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including but not limited to height,
above-grade materials, color and lighting.
(14) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio equipment.
(15) The applicant's proposed tower maintenance and inspection procedures and
records systems.
(16) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site are within threshold levels
adopted by the FCC.
(17) Certification to the Village that the tower and attachments both are designed
and constructed (as-built) to meet all state and federal structural requirements
for loads, wind, ice, etc.
(18) A professionally prepared contour radio propagation map showing anticipated
coverage from the site proposed.
E. The applicant shall submit a complete long EAF, pursuant to SEQR, Type I/II and
a complete visual environmental assessment form (visual EAF addendum). The
Village Planning Board, as lead agency, may require submission of a more detailed
visual analysis based on the results of the Visual EAF. In addition, the applicant
shall address the environmental flight path of area species.
§ 273-3 MASSENA CODE § 273-4
273:4
§ 273-4. Siting preferences.
§ 273-5. Standards applicable to new towers.
A. Shared use of existing towers. At all times, shared use of existing towers or other
suitable facilities shall be preferred to the construction of new towers. An applicant
shall be required to present an adequate report inventorying existing towers within
a reasonable distance of the proposed site and outlining opportunities for shared use
of existing facilities as an alternative to a proposed new tower.
(1) An applicant proposing to share use of an existing tower shall be required to
document intent from an existing tower owner to allow shared use.
(2) The Board shall only consider a new telecommunication tower when the
applicant adequately demonstrates that shared usage of an existing tower or
other structure or facility is impractical. The applicant shall be required to
submit a report demonstrating good-faith efforts to secure shared use from
existing towers as well as documentation of the physical and/or financial
reasons why shared usage is not practical. Written requests and responses for
shared use shall be provided.
B. Shared usage of site with new tower (clustering). Where shared usage of an existing
tower is found to be impractical, the applicant shall investigate shared usage of an
existing tower site for its ability to accommodate a new tower and accessory uses.
Documentation and conditions shall be in accordance with Subsections A(1) and
(2) above.
C. New tower at a new location. The Board shall consider a new telecommunications
tower on a site not previously developed with an existing tower. The applicant shall
adequately demonstrate that shared usage of an existing tower site is impractical
and shall submit a report demonstrating good-faith efforts to secure shared use from
an existing tower, as well as documentation of the physical and/or financial reasons
why shared usage is not practical. (Written requests and responses for shared use
inquiries shall be provided.) Information regarding the required need for the new
telecommunications tower shall be required in the form of empirical data
illustrating said need.
D. Future shared usage of new towers.
(1) The applicant must examine the feasibility of including a telecommunication
tower in his proposed plan that will accommodate future demand for reception
and transmitting facilities.
(2) The Board reserves the right to impose reasonable conditions regarding
reservation of tower space for future antennas including height, orientation and
power and restriction or elimination of restrictive use covenants as part of
tower use contracts and preservation of reasonable fee structures as part of the
contract.
A. Siting considerations.
(1) There will be no approval granted to proposals to construct new
§ 273-4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 273-5
273:5
telecommunications towers and/or accessory structures or facilities within the
following Zoning Districts:
(a) Residential A.
(b) Residential B.
(c) Residential C.
(d) Planned Development Districts.
(e) Greenbelt-Preservation District G-PD.
(2) There will be no approval granted to proposals to construct new
telecommunications towers and/or accessory structures or facilities within
1,500 feet of the following areas of county-wide and intercommunity
significance:
(a) Designated byways or scenic trails (measurement from the road center
line).
(b) New York State wildlife management areas (measurement made from
property line or official designation boundary).
(c) State or county forests (measurement made from property line or official
designation boundary).
(d) Federal/state designated historic districts (measurement made from
property line or official designation boundary).
(e) Shorelines of the St. Lawrence River, Grasse River, Racquette River
(measurement made from the shoreline, as determined on USGS 7.5
quadrangle topographic maps).
B. Lot size and setbacks for new towers; accessory structures.
(1) Lot size and setbacks from new towers.
(a) All proposed telecommunication tower and accessory structures shall be
located on a single parcel and a set back from abutting residential parcels,
public property or street lines a distance sufficient to contain on-site
substantially all ice-fall or debris from tower failure and preserve the
privacy of the adjoining properties.
(b) Lot size of parcels containing a tower shall be determined by the amount
of land required to meet the setback requirements. If the land is to be
leased, the entire lot required shall be leased from a single parcel.
(c) All tower bases shall be located at a minimum setback from any property
line a minimum distance equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the tower.
(2) Accessory structures shall comply with the minimum setback requirements in
the underlying zoning district.
C. Visual impact assessment. The Board shall require the applicant to undertake a
§ 273-5 MASSENA CODE § 273-5
273:6
visual impact assessment of any proposed new towers or any proposed modification
of an existing tower. The visual impact assessment shall include:
(1) A Zone of Visibility Map, provided in order to determine location where the
tower may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representatives of before and after views from key viewpoints both
inside and outside of the town, including but not limited to state highways and
other major roads, state and local parks, and areas of aesthetic interest.
(3) Alternative tower designs and color schemes.
(4) Description of visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and foundations,
accessory buildings and overhead utility lines from abutting properties and
streets/roads.
D. New tower design. Alternative designs shall be considered for new towers,
including lattice and single pole structures. The design of a proposed new tower
shall comply with the following:
(1) Towers and antennas shall be designed to withstand the effects of the wind
according to the standards designated by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry Association.
(2) Unless specifically required by FM or APA regulations, all towers shall have
a finish compatible with the surrounding area that shall minimize the degree
of visual impact.
(3) The maximum height of any tower intended to be used as a
telecommunications tower shall not exceed that which shall permit operation
without artificial lighting of any kind or nature in accordance with municipal,
state and/or federal law and/or regulation.
(4) The Board may request a review of the application by a qualified engineer for
the evaluation of need for the design of any new tower.
(5) Facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures
designed to blend with the ambient surroundings.
(6) No portion of any tower or related structure shall be used for advertising
purposes
E. Screening. Deciduous or evergreen tree plantings may be required to screen
portions of the tower and accessory structures from nearby properties as well as
from public sites known to include important views or vistas. Where a site abuts a
residential property or public property, including streets, screening shall be
required.
F. Access. Adequate emergency and service access shall be provided. Maximum use
of existing roads, public or private, shall be made. Road construction shall, at all
times, minimize grounds disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the toe of fill,
the top of cuts or no more than 10 feet beyond the edge of any pavement. Road
§ 273-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 273-5
273:7
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance
and reduce soil erosion potential.
G. Fencing. Sites of proposed new towers and sites where modifications to existing
towers are proposed shall be adequately secured to prevent unauthorized access by
the general public. Specifically:
(1) All antennas, communication towers, antenna towers, monopoles and other
supporting structures including guy wires, shall be made inaccessible to
children and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be
climbed or run into.
(2) Transmitters and communication control points shall be installed such that
they are accessible only to persons authorized by the licensee to operate or
service them.
H. Signage.
(1) Telecommunication towers/facilities shall be permitted one sign no larger than
two square feet to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate
area of the presence of an antenna that has transmit capabilities. The sign shall
also contain the names of the owners and operators of the antenna(s) as well
as emergency phone numbers.
(2) The sign shall be located to be visible from the primary access point to site.
No other signage shall be permitted on any antenna(s), antenna(s) supporting
structure, monopole, or communication tower structure unless required by
federal or state regulation.
I. Color, shape and camouflage.
(1) In scenic or historic areas, companies are required to camouflage each tower,
for example by putting it inside an artificial tree, a clock tower, a church
steeple, silos or a flagpole.
(2) Wireless towers are required to paint wireless devices or supporting structures
in a neutral color designed to blend in with the background. Large dish
antennas (e.g., over six feet in diameter) are prohibited. Existing trees must be
left as a buffer and additional trees may be required to be planted around the
entire facility in order to provide screening.
J. Health concerns, testing and reporting. Section 704 of the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 allows localities to regulate wireless facilities
based on environmental or health effects. The tower company may be required to
pay for regular inspections (annually) if such structure is located within 1,000 feet
of a residence or occupied structure and provide the local governments with a copy
of the inspection report to assure continued compliance with FCC emissions
standards.
K. Notification. Applicants must notify landowners within a mile of proposed towers
and/or antennas. For areas within 1,500 feet of a designated byway or scenic trail,
the applicant must notify the organization. The Village of Massena must be notified
before any discussions with landowners that own a site considered to be within the
§ 273-5 MASSENA CODE § 273-5
273:8
§ 273-6. Review process and decisions.
LWRP Waterfront Overlay Area.
A. Procedure.
(1) Within 62 days of receipt of a complete preliminary application as defined
above, the Planning Board may approve the preliminary application or
schedule a public hearing. If a public hearing is held, the Planning Board shall,
within 62 days of the completion of the hearing, approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the preliminary application. Under the referral
provisions of § 239 of General Municipal Law, the Planning Board may not
take final action on the application until a copy of the application has been
forwarded to the St. Lawrence County Planning Board and that Board has
taken action on it pursuant to § 239-m of New York State General Municipal
Law.
(2) If a preliminary application is approved, the applicant and the Enforcement
Officer shall be notified in writing by the Planning Board and a building
permit issued within 10 days of receipt thereafter of a request from the
applicant. The applicant shall not have to file a final site plan if the preliminary
site plan is approved without modifications.
(3) If the Planning Board approves the preliminary application with modifications,
the applicant shall submit a final detailed site plan to the Planning Board for
final approval. Within 62 days of receipt of the application for final site plan
approval, the Planning Board shall render a written decision to the applicant
and Code Enforcement Officer, and such decision shall be signed by the
Chairperson of the Planning Board.
B. Public hearings. All public hearings shall be conducted in compliance with the
provisions of the New York State Open Meeting Laws.
C. Time limitations. The time periods within which Planning Board actions are
required to act are the maximum times allowable. The Planning Board shall make
every effort to act as quickly as possible in reviewing applications in order to
minimize delays to the applicant. If the Planning Board does not complete its
review within the times specified in § 273-6A of this chapter, this will constitute
approval of the application, except where the review period has been extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
D. Justification and notice.
(1) The Planning Board shall apply all of the review standards described in this
chapter in reviewing site plans.
(2) Decisions of the Planning Board shall be in writing and may include
reasonable conditions to further the intent of this chapter. Reasons for
disapproval shall be clearly stated.
(3) Decisions of the Planning Board shall be filed within five days in the Code
Enforcement Office and a copy mailed to the applicant by certified mail, with
§ 273-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 273-6
273:9
§ 273-7. Compatibility with applicable state or federal laws.
All towers approved must comply with all other regulations of the state or federal
government, including Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations
applicable to environmental and health effects of both transmitters and receivers.
§ 273-8. Removal of towers.
The applicant will provide a bond equal to the estimated cost of construction for the
removal of such tower(s) due to nonuse for a period of six months or for noncompliance
or discontinuance of use as determined by the municipality.
§ 273-9. Exceptions.
Residential accessory uses (e.g., television antennas, satellite dishes, ham radio, citizens
band radio) under 50 feet in height are specified in § 300-8C. Specifically, exceptions to
these regulations are:
§ 273-10. Penalties for noncompliance.
The burden will be placed upon the applicant to prove the facility clearly meets all the
requirements of this chapter. Monetary penalties of up to $100 per day will be imposed
for noncompliance. In addition, the facility could be subject to closure after due process.
Any modifications to the use or configuration of a tower shall constitute the need to
obtain a new permit (this includes increases in tower height or installation of bulky
antennas or work platforms on a tower). The company must provide evidence of general
liability and property damage insurance.
return receipt requested.
(4) Approval of a site plan by the Planning Board shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date thereof for the purpose of obtaining a building permit.
Failure to secure a building permit during the period shall cause the site plan
approval to become null and void. No building permit shall be issued and no
site work shall commence until all necessary permits and approvals from
Village, county and state agencies are obtained and any required performance
bond is filed with the Village Clerk.
A. New uses that are accessory to residential uses; and
B. Approved uses existing prior to the effective date of these regulations.
§ 273-6 MASSENA CODE § 273-10
273:10
Chapter 275
TOBACCO CONTROL POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 204.
§ 275-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Massena Village Board to ban outdoor tobacco use at any
recreational areas and within a reasonable distance from any entrance or exit at property
owned or leased by the Village of Massena in order to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by eliminating exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke and
tobacco residue. Furthermore, the Massena Village Board acknowledges the need of
nonsmokers, especially children, to breathe smoke-free air, recognizing the danger to
public health which secondhand smoke causes. Additionally, the Massena Village Board
recognizes that the need to breathe air free of the disease-causing toxins in secondhand
smoke should have priority over the desire and convenience of tobacco use on property
owned or leased by the Village of Massena.
§ 275-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure or portion thereof, owned or leased by the Village of
Massena, used for business-related or recreational purposes.
ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM — A personal electronic device
that aerosolizes liquid or gel containing nicotine, flavorings or other constituents and
produces an emission which may be absorbed or exhaled by the user. "Electronic
nicotine delivery system" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo,
an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
"Electronic nicotine delivery device" does not include any product specifically approved
by the state or the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation,
treatment, or prevention of disease when used as intended for its approved purpose.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER—Any person, agent or designee empowered by rule, law,
or order to enforce local law.
ENTRANCES AND EXITS — The passageways by which persons may enter a
building, typically consisting of a door or doorway. For the purposes of this chapter, this
includes the stoop, steps, or ramp leading from the sidewalk or pavement to such a door
or doorway.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation,
personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity except the
Village of Massena.
§ 273-10 TOBACCO CONTROL POLICY § 275-2
275:1
PLAYING FIELD — That portion of an outdoor Recreational Area that is set up and
marked in some way for the playing of one or more specific games or sports (such as
baseball, football, or soccer), and that is open to the general public. For the purposes of
this chapter, a playing field that is fenced or the outside perimeter of which is otherwise
physically demarcated shall be deemed to include all of the area inside such fence or
demarcation, together with any bleachers or other designated viewing area; a playing
field that is not fenced or otherwise demarcated (as to its outside perimeter) shall be
deemed to include all of the area customarily required for playing the game for which it
is being used, together with any bleachers or other designated viewing area.
REASONABLE DISTANCE — A distance that ensures that people located within an
area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by
smokers outside the area. This distance shall be a minimum of 25 feet in any direction.
RECREATIONAL AREA — Any outdoor area that is open to the general public for
recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational
area" includes but is not limited to playing fields, playgrounds, parks, picnic areas,
golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails,
swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, and amusement parks.
The term "recreational area" is not intended to include streets and sidewalks unless they
are located within a demarcated recreational area such as a park.
SMOKING — The inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for
inhalation, in any manner or in any form; or the use of any electronic nicotine delivery
system.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any manufactured product containing tobacco or nicotine,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, bidis, snus, dissolvable tobacco products, and electronic nicotine
delivery system. However, "tobacco product" does not include any product that has been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, pursuant to its authority over drugs
and devices, for sale as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes
and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
§ 275-3. Tobacco use prohibitions.
A. The use or disposal of any tobacco products or related waste are prohibited in, and
within a reasonable distance of the windows, entrances and exits of Village-owned/
leased buildings, including but not limited to, the following:
(1) Massena Arena (Harte Haven Plaza).
(2) Massena Community Center (61 Beach Street).
(3) Department of Public Works (85 Robinson Road).
(4) Fire Station (34 Andrews Street).
(5) Massena Town Beach (Town Line Road).
(6) Town Hall (60 Main Street).
(7) Waste Water Treatment Plant (302 East Orvis Street).
§ 275-2 MASSENA CODE § 275-3
275:2
§ 275-4. Other provisions.
§ 275-5. Penalties and enforcement.
(8) Water Treatment Plant (357 Pontoon Bridge Road).
B. The use or disposal of any tobacco product or related waste are prohibited in and at
Village-owned/leased recreational areas, including but not limited to, the following:
(1) Footbridge Park (Liberty Avenue).
(2) Elm Circle Park (Elm Circle).
(3) Adjoining Fields located near Massena Arena (Harte Haven Plaza).
(4) Veteran's Memorial Park (Andrews Street).
(5) North Main Street Park (North Main Street).
(6) Springs Park (West Hatfield Street).
(7) Bushnell Field Park (Robinson Road).
(8) Brighton Street Park (Brighton Street).
(9) East Orvis Street Park (East Orvis Street).
(10) Creative Wooden Playground (Danforth Street).
(11) Alcoa Field Recreation Park (Woodlawn Avenue).
C. The Mayor or his/her designee shall engage in an ongoing educational program to
explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter. However, lack of
such education shall not be a defense to a violation of this chapter.
A. No ash can, ashtray, or other smoking waste receptacle shall be placed in any area
in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter.
B. No person shall permit smoking or the use of tobacco products in an area under the
person's control in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by
this chapter;
C. The Department of Public Works shall issue requirements about the content and
placement of signage advising the public of the restriction of tobacco products
usage and/or smoking in the designated areas.
D. The presence of smoking waste receptacles in violation of Subsection A above and
the absence of signs required by Subsection C above shall not be a defense to a
violation of any provision of this chapter.
E. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate
against an employee, applicant for employment, customer or other person because
that employee, applicant, customer or person exercises any rights afforded by this
chapter or reports or attempts to report a violation of this chapter.
§ 275-3 TOBACCO CONTROL POLICY § 275-5
275:3
§ 275-6. Statutory construction and severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section of this
chapter is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalidated provision.
§ 275-7. Effective date.
The effective date of this local law shall be effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State.
A. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available at law or in equity.
B. Each instance of smoking or tobacco product use in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation. For violations other than smoking or tobacco
product use, each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. Each violation of this chapter constitutes an infraction. The first violation within a
calendar year will be subject to a fine of $50. Subsequent violations within a
calendar year will each be subject to a $100 fine.
E. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Enforcement Officer.
F. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
G. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation
of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the Village Attorney,
including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement
proceedings, code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.
H. Nothing in this chapter shall create a right of action in any person against the
Village of Massena or its agents to compel public enforcement of this chapter
against private parties.
I. Any person may bring a civil action to enjoin a violation of this chapter by a
business or to enjoin repeat violations of this chapter by an individual.
§ 275-5 MASSENA CODE § 275-7
275:4
Chapter 276
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 210. Solicitation — See Ch. 238.
§ 276-1. Permit required.17 [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Before any person or corporation shall commence a transient retail business in the
Village of Massena, said person or corporation shall obtain a permit from the Mayor,
stating the place where such business is to be conducted and the date of expiration of the
term, which permit may be renewed from time to time, and shall file with the Village
Clerk cash deposit or bond, in an amount of $1,000. Said bond shall be approved by the
Village Attorney as to form and by the Mayor as to its sufficiency.
§ 276-2. Permit fee. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
On each occasion of a transient merchant sale conducted in the Village of Massena, there
is hereby imposed a license fee of $500.
§ 276-3. Location of business. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The Village reserves the right to require the permit holder, or those acting under the
permit, to move the location of the business in the event that it is a hazard to traffic, is
dangerous or in any way interferes with the movement of persons or vehicles.
§ 276-4. Application for permit.
Any person or corporation desiring to conduct a transient retail business in the Village
of Massena shall present to the Mayor a verified petition, stating:
§ 276-5. Inventory and reports submitted to Village Clerk. [Amended 9-4-2001 by
A. The name and permanent address of the person or corporation desiring to conduct
such business.
B. The place where and the time during which said business is to be conducted.
C. The name and local address of the person to be in immediate charge of said
business.
D. The character of the merchandise to be dealt in.
E. The estimated amount of the gross sales which will be made.
17. Editor's Note: Former §§ 276-1, Tax on transient retail business, and 276-2, Computation of tax, which immediately
preceded this section, were deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 275-7 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS § 276-5
276:1
L.L. No. 2-2001]
The person or corporation receiving such permit shall, before the beginning of business,
file with the Village Clerk a verified report of the stock on hand, the aggregate value
thereof, with which it is intended to conduct said business; and shall thereafter, as further
stock is received, within two days after the receipt thereof, file a verified report with
the Village Clerk of such added stock and of the aggregate value thereof, and shall on
Monday of each week file a verified report of the stock sold during the preceding week.
At the completion of said transient business the person or corporation shall file a verified
report setting forth the total amount of stock sold and the total amount for which it was
sold.
§ 276-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — One conducted on any parcel of land or in a
store, hotel, house, enclosure, building or structure for the sale and retail of goods,
wares or merchandise, excepting food products, and which is intended to be conducted
for a temporary period of time and not permanently. If the place in which a business
is conducted is rented or leased for a period of six months or less, such fact shall be
presumptive evidence that the business therein is a transient business.
§ 276-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable to a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village
may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter.
§ 276-5 MASSENA CODE § 276-7
276:2
Chapter 278
TREES
§ 278-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks
having individual names and all areas owned by the Village or to which the public has
free access as a park.
PRIVATE TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation which are
not located within the right-of-way of the Village of Massena or on property owned by
the Village of Massena.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying
between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the right-ofway
of the Village of Massena.
§ 278-2. Arbor Committee created. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
There is hereby created a Village Arbor Committee for the Village of Massena, County
of St. Lawrence, State of New York. Said Committee shall consist of seven members,
citizens and residents of this Village, who shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Village
of Massena.
A. Term of office.
(1) The term of office of the seven persons to be appointed by the Mayor of the
Village of Massena shall be three years, except that the term of two of the
members appointed to the original Committee shall be for only one year, and
the term of two of the members of the original Committee shall be for two
years.
(2) In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
B. Compensation. The members of the Arbor Committee, including ex officio
members, shall receive no compensation for their services pursuant to this chapter,
but they may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties within the appropriations made available therefor.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Arbor Committee shall have the following duties
and responsibilities:
(1) To study the problems and determine the needs of the Village of Massena,
County of St. Lawrence, State of New York, in connection with its tree
management program.
(2) To assist the Department of Public Works with the type and kinds of trees to
be planted upon such municipal streets or parts of municipal streets, parks, and
rights-of-way, or as designated.
§ 276-7 TREES § 278-2
278:1
§ 278-3. Spacing.
§ 278-4. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distances trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in
accordance with the three species size classes listed in the Specifications, and no trees
may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet;
medium trees, three feet; large trees, four feet.
§ 278-5. Distance from street corners and fire hydrants.
No street trees shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from
the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted
closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant.
§ 278-6. Utilities.
No street tree other than those species listed in Specifications as small trees may be
planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within
three lateral feet (small or medium), five lateral feet (large), or any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. DIG SAFELY. NEW YORK (800/
962-7962) shall be contacted in order to locate utilities prior to any planting at proposed
sites.
§ 278-7. Public tree care. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and
shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds
as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
(3) To assist the Village of Massena Department of Public Works, County of St.
Lawrence, State of New York, and its residents of the Village in the
dissemination of news and information regarding selection, planting, and
maintenance of trees within the Village limits.
(4) To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar
as it relates to the Village may be discussed by members of the Committee,
officers, and personnel of the Village and all others interested in the tree
management program.
D. Operation. The Arbor Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations (subject to Board approval), and keep a journal of its proceedings.
A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
A. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the species size classes listed
in the Specifications and no trees may be planted closer together than the following:
small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet, except in special
plantings designed by an arborist.
B. No nuisance trees shall be planted in the Village of Massena. Such trees must have
the approval of an arborist to be planted and can be removed from Village property
if considered a hazard or nuisance.
§ 278-2 MASSENA CODE § 278-7
278:2
beauty of such public grounds. The Department of Public Works may remove or cause
or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition; or which
by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public improvements; or is affected with an injurious fungus, insect, or other
pest or poses a hazard to the public. This section does not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of said trees
is in accordance with §§ 278-3 and 278-4 and the Specifications to this chapter.
§ 278-8. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a moral practice for any person, firm, or Village department to
top any street tree, park tree, or other trees on public property. Topping is defined as the
severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storm or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this
section at the determination of an arborist.
§ 278-9. Pruning, corner clearance (private trees). [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L.
No. 2-2007]
Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street right-of-way within
the Village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light
from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear space of 15 feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners
shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The Village shall have the right to prune
or cause the removal of any tree or shrub, in whole or in part, on private property when
it: interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, interferes
with visibility of any traffic-control device, sign or street intersection or constitutes a
menace to the safety of the public.
§ 278-10. Dead or diseased tree removal on public domain as well as private
property. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The Village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased street trees
or trees on private property within the Village when such trees constitute a hazard to
life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitutes potential threat to other
trees within the Village. The Village shall notify in writing the owners of such trees.
Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 10 days after the date
of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
Village shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on
the property tax notice.
§ 278-11. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of
the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
§ 278-7 TREES § 278-12
278:3
§ 278-12. Healthy street and park trees.
In order to protect the Village's investment in time and resources in the street program, it
shall be unlawful to remove any healthy street tree without prior approval of the arborist.
§ 278-13. Interference with authority of tree program.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with agents of the
Village tree program while they are engaged in and about planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing any street trees, as authorized in this chapter.
§ 278-14. Protection of trees during construction.
Contractors occupying Village streets for building purposes shall place such proper
guards about all trees liable to injury as shall effectually protect them.
§ 278-12 MASSENA CODE § 278-14
278:4
Chapter 280
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 71.
Bicycles — See Ch. 100.
Railroads — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 246.
Unlicensed motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 286.
§ 278-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 278-14
280:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 280-1. Definitions of words and phrases.
§ 280-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Massena, New York, shall install
and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter and may install and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or
guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to the
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article I of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article I of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE —The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the absence of a
curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.18
FIRE LANES — A vehicular access roadway or driveway designated officially
by the Fire Department as a required means of Fire Department emergency
access.[Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD—Whenever certain hours are named herein or on
traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard which is in current use in
this state.
PARKING FIELDS—Any part of land determined by the owner or owners of said
land to be used by the public for the purpose of parking vehicles.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this
chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking
time established by this Village and, when operated, shall at all times indicate the
balance of legal parking time and, at the expiration of such period, shall indicate
illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone adjacent to
a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by
lines painted or otherwise durably marked upon the curb or the surface of the street
adjacent to or adjoining a parking meter.
PARKING METER ZONE — A street and/or any designated location set aside
under provisions of this chapter for the installation of parking meters and upon
which parking meters have been installed and are in operation.
SCHOOL DAYS — When school is officially open for regular sessions.
18. Editor's Note: The former definition of holidays, which immediately followed this definition, was deleted 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 280-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-2
280:3
provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 280-3. Obedience required.
§ 280-4. Schedules; regulations.
A. Every person shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device
applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in the
manner prescribed by and subject to the exceptions specified in the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. Every person shall obey any property provision of this chapter applicable thereto in
the manner prescribed by this chapter when such obedience is not required by the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations adopted under
the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby established a system of schedules,
appearing as Article IX of this chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations
after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they
refer. All regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule as
indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance with
provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law or by an officer or
agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt regulations pursuant to § 1603
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 280-2 MASSENA CODE § 280-4
280:4
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 280-5. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated at the intersections and
locations described in Schedule I (§ 280-32).
§ 280-6. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 280-33) are hereby designated
as one-way streets, and vehicles shall proceed along those streets or parts of streets only
in the direction indicated.
§ 280-7. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the locations
described in Schedule III (§ 280-34) during the hours indicated of any day.
§ 280-8. U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction, otherwise known as
a "U-turn," is hereby prohibited on any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IV (§ 280-35).
§ 280-9. Prohibited turns on red signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 1111, Subdivision (d)2, of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law, no person shall make a right turn on a steady red signal at the locations designated
in Schedule V (§ 280-36).
§ 280-10. Through highways.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 280-37) are hereby designated
as through streets, and traffic control signals, flashing red signals, stop signs or yield
signs shall be erected as indicated at entrances thereto.
§ 280-11. Stop and yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VII (§ 280-38) are hereby designated as stop or
yield intersections, and stop or yield signs shall be erected as indicated.
§ 280-12. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any Village streets or
highways within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour, except that the
speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule VIII (§ 280-39) shall be as indicated in said schedule.
§ 280-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-12
280:5

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 280-13. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic control device.
§ 280-14. All-night parking.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all streets within the Village between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 280-15. No parking at any time.
The parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times in those streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IX (§ 280-40).
§ 280-15.1. No parking during snow removal/emergency. [Added 12-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 11-1999]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all streets within the Village when snow
removal is necessary.
§ 280-15.2. No parking at crosswalks. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited within 20 feet of a crosswalk, unless
a different distance is indicated by an official sign or markings
§ 280-15.3. No parking at driveway. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited in front of a public or private
driveway.
A. Snow removal. If snow has been predicted and/or accumulated to a minimum of
three inches, then parking of vehicles is prohibited on all streets within the Village.
Parking shall be banned until entire street has been plowed, sanded/salted and
maintained and precipitation has ended for said storm.
B. Snow removal emergency. The Department of Public Works Superintendent is
authorized to declare a snow removal emergency when in his/her judgment, snow
is likely to accumulate, or has accumulated, at such depths as will make snow
removal difficult if vehicles are left parked on Village streets. Notice of such
emergency shall be conveyed to the public via media announcement(s) and will
remain in effect until such time as the snow emergency is declared ended via media
announcement(s).
C. Penalty. When found to be in violation of this section, vehicles will be removed in
accordance with Chapter 280, Vehicles and Traffic, Article VI, Removal and
Storage of Vehicles.
§ 280-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-15.4
280:7
§ 280-15.4. No parking at sidewalk. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited upon a sidewalk, including
obstructing a curb area, which has been cut down, lowered or constructed so as to
provide accessibility to the sidewalk.
§ 280-15.5. No parking at fire lanes. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited upon any designated fire lane at the
locations designated as fire lanes in § 280-52.
§ 280-15.6. No parking at fire hydrant. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
§ 280-15.7. No double parking. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is prohibited on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped,
standing or parked at the edge or curb of the street.
§ 280-15.8. No parking at intersection. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited within 30 feet upon the approach
to any flashing signal, stop or yield sign located at the side of the roadway, unless a
different distance is indicated by official sign or markings.
§ 280-15.9. No parking in handicapped space. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited in the handicapped parking spaces
designated in § 280-29 and in those handicapped parking spaces as prescribed in § 1203
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless that vehicle bears a permit issued
under § 1203-a or a registration issued under § 404-a of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law and such vehicle is being used for the transportation of a severely disabled
or handicapped person.
§ 280-15.10. No parking on wrong side of road. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked
partially or wholly shall be so stopped, standing, or parked parallel to the curb or edge
of the roadway. On a one-way roadway, such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of
authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway, such vehicle shall be facing in the
direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway on which the
vehicle rests.
§ 280-15.11. Failing to display handicapped permit. [Added 3-20-2012 by L.L. No.
3-2012]
Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited in the handicapped parking spaces
designated in § 280-29 and in those handicapped parking spaces as prescribed in § 1203
§ 280-15.4 MASSENA CODE § 280-15.11
280:8
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless that vehicle properly displays a
permit issued under § 1203-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 280-16. Parking prohibited certain hours.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in Schedule X
(§ 280-41) during the times indicated on the days indicated.
§ 280-17. Limited-time parking.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in Schedule XI
(§ 280-42) for a longer period of time than that designated during the hours indicated on
the days indicated.
§ 280-18. Standing prohibited.
The standing of vehicles at any time is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule XII (§ 280-43).
§ 280-19. Stopping prohibited.
The stopping of vehicles at any time is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule XIII (§ 280-44).
§ 280-20. Angle parking.
Angle parking is hereby authorized upon the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XIV (§ 280-45).
§ 280-21. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XV (§ 280-46) are hereby designated as loading
zones, and the standing of vehicles is hereby prohibited in such locations except for the
express purpose of loading and unloading of merchandise, goods and materials, and then
only for a period not to exceed 10 minutes.
§ 280-22. Bus stops.
Standing is hereby prohibited, excluding buses, at the locations designated as bus stops
in Schedule XVI (§ 280-47).
§ 280-23. Taxi stands.
Standing is hereby prohibited, excluding taxis, at the locations described in Schedule
XVII (§ 280-48).
§ 280-15.11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-23
280:9

ARTICLE IV
Restrictions on Trucks
[Amended 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 280-24. Truck route system.
§ 280-24.1. Dimensions and weights of vehicles.
Except as expressly permitted by the United States or the New York State Department
of Transportation, and except where the requirement for local delivery will permit no
alternate legal route, no person shall operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to
be operated or moved on any public street in the Village of Massena any vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations provided for in this
section.
A. A truck route system upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations
having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are permitted to travel and operate
shall be as set forth in Schedule XVIII (§ 280-49).
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight in
excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all highways within the Village except
those highways listed, except that this exclusion shall not be construed to prevent
the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along the highway from
which such vehicles and combinations are excluded.
A. Width.
(1) The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall not be more than 96 inches plus
safety devices, on any Village highway in the Village of Massena.
(2) The provisions of Subsection A(1) shall not apply to vehicles and implements
or combinations thereof, not over 13 feet in width, used solely for farm
purposes, during the period from sunrise to sunset, provided at least two red
flags not smaller than 24 inches square be displayed on the left front and rear
of each vehicle or implement or combination thereof in such a manner as to be
clearly visible from the front and rear at a distance of at least 500 feet.
However, no such vehicles, implements or combinations thereof shall be
operated on any highway after 10:00 a.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, expect for a trip of two miles or less.
(3) The provisions of Subsection A(1) shall not apply to omnibuses or buses used
solely for the transportation of children to and from school, but the width of
such omnibuses shall not exceed 98 inches.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1), racks for carrying hay,
straw or unthreshed grain may have a width of 10 feet at top of the rack. In no
case shall the width at the base of the rack exceed 102 inches, nor shall the
width of a rack exceed 102 inches at any portion thereof while on any Village
highway.
B. The height of a vehicle from the underside of tire to top of vehicle, inclusive of
load, shall be not more than 13 1/2 feet. Any damage to highways, bridges, or
§ 280-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-24.1
280:11
highway structures resulting from the use of a vehicle exceeding 13 feet in height,
where such excess height is the proximate cause of the accident, shall be
compensated for by the owner and operator of such vehicle.
C. Length.
(1) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall not be more
than 40 feet unless otherwise provided in this subsection.
(2) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 48 feet, except as
provided in this subsection; provided, however, that the length of any trailer or
semitrailer being operated in combination with another trailer or semitrailer
shall not exceed 28 1/2 feet.
(3) The length of buses having a carrying capacity of more than seven passengers
shall not exceed 45 feet, except that the length of articulated buses shall not
exceed 62 feet.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fire vehicles.
(5) Any semitrailer with a length in excess of 48 feet but not exceeding 53 feet
may be operated on any qualifying highway or specifically designated access
highway, if the distance between the kingpin of the semitrailer and the center
line of the rear axle or rear axle group does not exceed 41 feet and if the
semitrailer is equipped with a rear-end protective device of substantial
construction consisting of a continuous lateral beam extending to within four
inches of the lateral extremities of the semitrailer and located not more than 22
inches from the surface as measured with the vehicle empty and on a level
surface.
D. Total length.
(1) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and bumpers,
shall not be more than 65 feet unless otherwise provided in this subsection.
(2) The provisions of Subsection D(1) shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of a corporation which is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Interstate Commerce Commission, the Public Service Commission or
other regulatory body and which are used in construction, reconstruction,
repair or maintenance of its property or facilities, provided that any such
vehicle complies with the safety requirements of the laws and regulations
of the United States and of New York State pertaining to over-length
vehicles;
(b) Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar objects of
excess length, provided that any such vehicle complies with the safety
requirements of the laws and regulations of the United States and of New
York State pertaining to such over-length vehicles.
(c) Fire vehicles; and
(d) Any vehicles or combination of vehicles which is disabled and unable to
§ 280-24.1 MASSENA CODE § 280-24.1
280:12
proceed under its own power and is being towed for a distance not
in excess of 10 miles for the purpose of repairs or removal from the
highway.
(e) Stinger-steered automobile transporters, while operating on qualifying or
access highways. Such vehicles shall not, however, exceed 75 feet
exclusive of an overhang of not more than three feet on the front and four
feet on the rear of the vehicle.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection D(1), a bumper overhang of not
more than three feet on the front and four feet on the rear of the combination
of the vehicle used to transport other motor vehicles shall be permitted.
E. In determining the number of wheels and axles on any vehicle or combination of
vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two wheels shall be counted for
each axle, and axles which are less than 46 inches apart, from center to center, shall
be counted as one axle. However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels,
the sums of the widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheel shall be
taken in determining tire width.
F. Subject to the provisions of this § 280-34B governing maximum vehicle gross
weights:
(1) The weight per inch width of tire on any one wheel of a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be
not more than 800 pounds.
(2) The weight on any wheel of a single vehicle or combination of vehicles,
equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 11,200
pounds.
(3) The weight of any one axle of a single vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, shall be not more than 22,400 pounds.
(4) The weight on any two consecutive axles of a single vehicle or a combination
of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when such axles
are spaced less than eight feet from center to center, shall be not more than
36,000 pounds, except where axles are spaced eight feet or greater, but less
than 10 feet, the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that permitted by
Subsection G(2) and, in addition, shall not exceed 40,000 pounds; axles to be
counted as provided in Subsection E of this section.
(5) A single vehicle, or a combination of vehicles having three axles or more and
equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, may have a total weight on all
axles not to exceed 34,000 pounds for each foot and major fractions of a foot
of the distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the
rearmost axle.
G. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of this section. In no case,
however, shall the total weight exceed 80,000 pounds. For any vehicles or
combination of vehicles having a total gross weight less than 71,000 pounds, the
higher of the following shall apply:
§ 280-24.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-24.1
280:13
(1) The total weight on all axles shall not exceed 34,000 pounds, plus 1,000
pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from the
center of the foremost axle to the center of the rearmost axle; or
(2) The overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles shall not
exceed the weight following the weight produced by application of the
following formula:
W = 500 [(LXN)/(N-1)+(12XN)+36]
where "W" equals overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, "L" equals distance in feet from
the center of the foremost axle to the center of the rearmost axle of any group
of two or more consecutive axles, and "N" equals the number of axles in the
group under consideration, except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles
may carry a gross load not to exceed 34,000 pounds, provided that the overall
distance between the first and last axle of such consecutive set of tandem
axles is 36 feet or more. For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having
a total gross weight of 71,000 pounds or greater, this subsection shall apply
to determine maximum gross weight which is permitted hereunder, subject to
the provisions of this § 280-24.1 governing maximum vehicle gross weights.
H. No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Village of Massena other
than on pneumatic tires.
I. For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be ascertained by
measuring the greatest width of the tire casing when the tire is inflated.
J. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of vehicles over, on or
through any bridge or structure on any highway if the weight of such vehicle, or
combination of vehicles, and load, is greater than the posted capacity of the
structure, or exceeds the height of the post clearance as shown by an official sign.
K. If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, an
appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the registrant of the vehicle, or, if a
combination of vehicles, to the registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the
operator. In the event the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant,
any appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant shall be served upon the
operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the registrant only for the purpose of
receiving such appearance ticket or summons. In addition, a notice containing all
pertinent information relating to the charge which is contained on the summons or
appearance ticket shall be mailed by or on behalf of the person who issued the
appearance ticket or summons to the registrant at the address given on the
registration certificate for the vehicle, or if no registration certificate is produced at
the time the appearance ticket or summons is issued to the address of the registrant
on file with the department within five days after the date of issuance of the
appearance ticket or summons, but at least five days before the return date specified
on the appearance ticket or summons. Proof of mailing to the registrant under this
section shall be filed with the court in which the appearance ticket or summons is
returnable on or before the return date. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to owner-operators of any motor vehicles or to any motor vehicle or trailer
which is registered in the name of a person whose principal business is the lease or
§ 280-24.1 MASSENA CODE § 280-24.1
280:14
rental of motor vehicle or trailers unless the motor vehicle or trailer is being
operated by an employee of the registrant or for a community interest other than the
lease or rental agreement between the parties of the lease or rental agreement.
L. In any case wherein the charge laid before the court alleges a violation of this
section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of such charge must
include at least a plea of guilty to a violation of one of the subsections of this
section. No other disposition by plea of guilty to any other charge in satisfaction of
such shall be authorized; provided, however, if the prosecuting attorney, upon
reviewing the available evidence, determines that the charge of a violation of this
section is not warranted, he may consent, and the court may allow, a disposition by
plea of guilty to that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge; provided,
however, the court must impose at least the minimum fine as authorized in the
section for the offense.
M. Penalties for offenses.
(1) The violation of the provisions of §§ 280-24 and 280-24.1 of this chapter shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500, or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for the first offense; by a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment for the second or subsequent offense, in both cases plus
the fine provided in Subdivisions B of this section.
(2) A violation of the provisions of Subsection F(4) and F(5) of § 280-24.1 of this
chapter by any vehicle or combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds that
weight limitation as set forth in either of such sections, or the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the U.S. or New York State
Department of Transportation, shall be punishable by fines levied on the
registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles, whether at the time of the violation
the vehicle was in the charge of the registered owner or his agent or lessee in
accordance with the following schedule (in addition to the fines as prescribed
in Subsection A of this section):
EXCESS TOTAL WEIGHT
(POUNDS)
Greater than
Less than
or Equal to Amount of Fine
0 2,000 $50
2,000 3,000 $75
3,000 4,000 $100
4,000 5,000 $200
5,000 6,000 $300
6,000 7,000 $400
7,000 8,000 $500
§ 280-24.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-24.1
280:15
EXCESS TOTAL WEIGHT
(POUNDS)
Greater than
Less than
or Equal to Amount of Fine
8,000 9,000 $600
9,000 10,000 $700
10,000 15,000 $1,200
15,000 20,000 $1,700
20,000 25,000 $2,200
25,000 30,000 $2,700
30,000 $0.06 for each pound in excess of 30,000
NOTE: Where the excess total weight is greater than the limits specified by a
U.S. or New York State Department of Transportation excess weight permit,
the permit shall, for the purpose of computing the fine, be deemed void and
the amount of the fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such vehicle if
the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been issued.
(3) A violation of the provisions of the Subsection F(2) and F(3) of § 280-24.1 of
this chapter by any vehicle or combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds
the weight limitations specified by a permit issued by the U.S. or New York
State Department of Transportation shall be punishable by fines levied on the
registered owner, or his agent, or lessee, in accordance with the following
schedule in addition to the fines as prescribed in the Subsection A of this
section:
PERCENTAGE OF EXCESS WEIGHT
(PERCENTAGE)
Greater Than
Less than
or Equal To Amount of Fines
0 5.0 $100
5.0 10.0 $200
10.0 15.0 $350
15.0 20.0 $600
20.0 25.0 $1,000
25.0 30.0 $1,600
30.0 — $2,450
§ 280-24.1 MASSENA CODE § 280-24.1
280:16
NOTE: Where the excess axle or axles weight is greater than the limits
specified by a permit issued by the U.S. or New York State Department of
Transportation, the permit shall, for the purposes of computing the fine, be
deemed void and the amount of the fine shall be determined in accordance
with the maximum weight which would have been in effect for the operation
of such vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of vehicles, if
it is found that there is a violation of Subsection F(5) and also of Subsection
F(3) and F(4), or both Subsection F(3) and F(4) of this section, there shall be
a single fine imposed, and the maximum amount of such fine shall not exceed
the highest fine that could be imposed under Subsection A of this subsection
or this paragraph.
(4) The court may impose any sentence authorized by this chapter; provided,
however, any such sentence must include a fine as provided in this section.
§ 280-24.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-24.1
280:17

ARTICLE V
Pedestrian Crossings
§ 280-25. Pedestrian crossings prohibited in certain locations.
The crossing of streets by pedestrians at the locations described in Schedule XIX
(§ 280-50) is hereby prohibited.
§ 280-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-25
280:19

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 280-26. Authority to remove vehicles.
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any street within the Village during a
snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects that portion of the
highway on which said vehicle is parked or abandoned or when any vehicle is found
unattended on any highway within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic or when any vehicle is parked or standing unattended on any
highway within this Village where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said
vehicle may be removed by the Police Department of the Village.
§ 280-27. Storage and charges. [Amended 3-4-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
The Police Department shall arrange for the removal and storage of such vehicle in
a suitable place at the expense of said owner. Such owner or person in charge of the
vehicle may redeem the vehicle upon payment to the towing agency for the amount
incurred in effecting such removal and storage fees.
§ 280-28. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain, to the extent possible, the
owner of the vehicle or person having the same in charge and to notify him of the
removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to
redeem same.
§ 280-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-28
280:21

ARTICLE VII
Handicapped Parking Spaces
[Added 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
§ 280-29. Establishment of spaces. [Amended 12-15-1987 by L.L. No. 8-1987;
2-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
Handicapped parking spaces shall be established within the following specified areas
and only as indicated by designated signs/markings:
A. Andrews Street public parking lot.
B. Andrews Street Fire Station lot.
C. Main Street, west side, front of the United States Post Office.
D. Main Street, west and east sides, between the intersections of East Orvis Street and
West Orvis Street and Andrews Street.
E. Parking lot off Main Street and Andrews Street.
F. Andrews Street, north side, first parking space west of the fire hydrant at the
intersection of Main Street.
G. Church Street, east side, in front of 3 Church Street between the driveways of the
Flanders Inn and Seacom Credit Union. [Added 12-19-1989 by L.L. No. 14-1989]
H. Danforth Place, west side, adjacent to playground site. [Added 1-21-1992 by L.L.
No. 1-1992]
I. Cornell Avenue. Beginning 51 feet west of the intersection of the southbound lane
of Sycamore Street and the eastbound lane of Cornell Avenue, continuing west on
the south side of Cornell Avenue 153 feet, there shall be six handicapped parking
spaces. [Added 8-19-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997]
J. Phillips Street, north side, 141 feet east of the northbound lane right-of-way of Main
Street. [Added 7-16-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
K. Main Street, northbound lane, 210 feet to 230 feet north of the center line of East
Orvis Street. [Added 1-19-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
L. Park Avenue, north side, beginning 190 feet west of the center line of Liberty
Avenue and ending at 210 feet. [Added 7-19-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 280-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-29
280:23

ARTICLE VIII
General Penalty
§ 280-30. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-7-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987; 12-3-1996
by L.L. No. 7-1996; 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 3-20-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012;
3-20-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for the following violations will be
punished by the fine prescribed:
Section Violated Violation Fine
§ 280-14 All night 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
$15
§ 280-15 No parking anytime $25
§ 280-15.1 Snow emergency $25
§ 280-15.2 Crosswalk $25
§ 280-15.3 Driveway $25
§ 280-15.4 Sidewalk $25
§ 280-15.5 Fire lane $25
§ 280-15.6 Fire hydrant $25
§ 280-15.7 Double parking $25
§ 280-15.8 Intersection $25
§ 280-15.9 Handicapped space $50
§ 280-15.10 Wrong side $15
§ 280-15.11 Fail to display permit $15
§ 280-16 Certain hours prohibited $25
§ 280-17 Limited-time parking $25
§ 280-18 Standing prohibited $25
§ 280-19 Stopping prohibited $25
§ 280-20 Angle parking $25
§ 280-21 Loading zones $25
§ 280-22 Bus stops $25
§ 280-23 Taxi stands $25
B. Fines doubled. The schedule of fines set forth above shall be doubled for all fines
not paid within 60 days of the date of citation, provided a late payment notice has
been sent at least 30 days after citation.
C. Late payment fees. A vehicle owner shall have 15 days from the date of a citation
within which to remit payment in full to the Village of Massena Traffic Bureau,
exclusive of the date of the citation. If such payment is not received by the Traffic
Bureau within 15 days, a late payment fee of $10 shall be surcharged, in addition to
the amount of the fine. Such surcharge shall not be doubled pursuant to Subsection
§ 280-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-30
280:25
§ 280-31. When effective.
B above.
D. Except as otherwise provided, every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a
violation of any provision of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months
after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
E. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate § 280-42 (Schedule XI:
Limited-Time Parking) shall be subject to a penalty of $25 for the first offense and
a penalty of $50 for the second offense occurring within 12 months.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and § 46 of the Highway Law of
the State of New York, this chapter and any regulations adopted hereunder shall
take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any regulations adopted hereunder which are
subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and § 46 of the
Highway Law of the State of New York shall take effect from and after the day on
which approval in writing is received from both the New York State Department of
Transportation and the New York State Department of Public Works.
§ 280-30 MASSENA CODE § 280-31
280:26
ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 280-32. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-5, traffic control signals shall be installed,
maintained and operated at the following intersections and locations:
Intersection/Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
§ 280-33. Schedule II: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-6, the following described streets or parts of
streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Center Street [Repealed 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Center Street, north lane West From Paddock Street to Park Avenue
Park Avenue [Added 6-20-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989; repealed 8-15-1989 by L.L.
No. 6-1989]
Park Avenue West From Willow Street to Woodlawn
Avenue
Public Parking Ground
(Andrews Street North)
West driveway
(entrance)
Entire length
Public parking ground
(Andrews Street South)
East driveway
(exit)
Entire length
Public parking ground
(Glenn Street)
North driveway
(exit)
Entire length
Public parking ground
(Glenn Street)
South driveway
(entrance)
Entire length
Water Street [Added 10-16-1979 by L.L. No. 8-1979; repealed 9-2-1980 by L.L. No.
9-1980]
§ 280-34. Schedule III: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-7, no person shall make a turn of the kind
designated below at any of the following locations during the hours indicated of any day:
Name of Street
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Water Street Left All times Main Street
§ 280-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-35
280:27
§ 280-35. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-8, no person shall make a U-turn on any of
the streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 280-36. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-9, no person shall make a right turn at a
steady red signal at the following locations:
Signal Facing Traffic on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Main Street North Phillips Street
Main Street South Andrews Street
Maple Street East Main Street
§ 280-37. Schedule VI: Through Highways.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-10, the following highways are designated as
through highways, and traffic control devices shall be erected on the following entrances
thereto:
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Alvern Avenue Rockaway Street Both Stop sign
Kent Street Both Stop sign
Douglas Road Both Stop sign
Parker Avenue Both Stop sign
Brighton Street Both Stop sign
Amherst Road Columbia Street West Stop sign
Andrews Street Church Street South Stop sign
West Orvis Street South Stop sign
Clark Street South Stop sign
Allen Street Both Stop sign
Hillcrest Avenue North Stop sign
Riverside Parkway North Stop sign
Ransom Avenue South Stop sign
Prospect Avenue
(westerly side)
South Stop sign
Nightengale Avenue South Stop sign
§ 280-35 MASSENA CODE § 280-37
280:28
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Clarkson Avenue South Stop sign
Sherwood Drive South Stop sign
Windsor Road South Stop sign
Churchill Avenue South Stop sign
Dover Street South Stop sign
Westwood Drive South Stop sign
North Clarkson
Avenue [Added
12-15-1987 by L.L.
No. 8-1987]
North Stop sign
Rosebriar Parkway
[Added 12-15-1987 by
L.L. No. 8-1987]
North Stop sign
Bayley Road Reed Drive West Stop sign
Chamberlain Road West Stop sign
Victory Road West Stop sign
Merritt Avenue West Stop sign
Beach Street Spruce Street East Stop sign
Dodge Street West Stop sign
James Street West Stop sign
Pleasant Street East Stop sign
Ober Street East Stop sign
Chase Street East Stop sign
Ames Street Both Stop sign
Belmont Street East Stop sign
Stoughton Avenue Both Stop sign
Roosevelt Street East Stop sign
Washington Street East Stop sign
Garfield Avenue East Stop sign
Lincoln Drive West Stop sign
Monroe Parkway East Stop sign
McKinley Court West Stop sign
Bishop Avenue Poplar Street Both Stop sign
Sycamore Street Both Stop sign
Bridges Avenue Clark Street North Stop sign
Allen Street North Stop sign
§ 280-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-37
280:29
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Elm Circle (East) North Stop sign
Elm Circle (West) North Stop sign
Burney Avenue Morrill Avenue West Stop sign
Center Street Grinnell Avenue East Stop sign
Paddock Park East Stop sign
Boynton Street East Stop sign
Cornell Avenue North Stop sign
Bishop Avenue North Stop sign
Somerset Avenue North Stop sign
Syakos Place South Stop sign
Woodlawn Avenue North Stop sign
Chase Street Franklin Street South Stop sign
Cook Street Wells Street South Stop sign
Cornell Avenue Forrest Place West Stop sign
Grinnell Avenue West Stop sign
Maiden Lane South Stop sign
Cummings Street Williams Street South Stop sign
Curtis Avenue King Street East Stop sign
Alden Street East Stop sign
Tracy Street East Stop sign
Stearns Street East Stop sign
Dover Street Westwood Drive Both Stop sign
Ann Street West Stop sign
Sharon Drive West Stop sign
East Hatfield
Street
Grove Street North Yield sign
Urban Drive North Stop sign
Bayley Road North Stop sign
East Orvis Street Glenn Street North Stop sign
Grove Street South Stop sign
Walnut Avenue South Stop sign
Douglas Road South Stop sign
Water Street North Stop sign
Brighton Street South Stop sign
Howard Street South Stop sign
§ 280-37 MASSENA CODE § 280-37
280:30
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
View Street North Stop sign
Talcott Street South Stop sign
River Street North Stop sign
Grant Street South Stop sign
Plum Street North Stop sign
Burney Avenue South Stop sign
Railroad Avenue South Stop sign
Tamarack Street North Stop sign
Robinson Street South Stop sign
Cummings Street South Stop sign
Grove Street Laurel Avenue Both Stop sign
Grassmere Avenue East Stop sign
Ridgewood Avenue East Stop sign
Alvern Avenue East Stop sign
Cecil Avenue East Stop sign
Bowers Street West Stop sign
Highland
Avenue
Ransom Avenue Both Stop sign
Prospect Avenue Both Stop sign
Nightengale Avenue Both Stop sign
Clarkson Avenue North Stop sign
Sherwood Drive North Stop sign
Windsor Road North Stop sign
Churchill Avenue North Stop sign
Dover Street North Stop sign
Coventry Drive North Stop sign
Serra Lane [Added
12-15-1987 by L.L.
No. 8-1987]
North Stop sign
Highland Park [Repealed 10-3-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006]
Howard Street Alvern Avenue West Stop sign
Jefferson Avenue Monroe Parkway
(East)
South Stop sign
Monroe Parkway South Stop sign
Kennedy Court Both Stop sign
Washington Street West Stop sign
§ 280-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-37
280:31
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Roosevelt Street West Stop sign
Spruce Street West Stop sign
Liberty Avenue Poplar Street West Stop sign
Cedar Street West Stop sign
Sycamore Street West Stop sign
Spruce Street Both Stop sign
Ober Street West Stop sign
Chase Street West Stop sign
Ames Street West Stop sign
Belmont Street West Stop sign
Center Street West Yield sign
Stoughton Avenue Both Stop sign
Roosevelt Street Both Stop sign
Main Street Bowers Street East Stop sign
Garvin Avenue West Stop sign
Water Street East Stop sign
Malby Avenue King Street Both Stop sign
Alden Street West Stop sign
Merritt Avenue East Stop sign
Tracy Street West Stop sign
Stearns Street Both Stop sign
South Street West Stop sign
Maple Street Francis Street South Stop sign
Haskell Street North Stop sign
George Street South Stop sign
Pine Street North Stop sign
Clary Street North Stop sign
East Avenue South Stop sign
West Avenue South Stop sign
Erwin Avenue North Stop sign
Hospital Drive North Stop sign
Baldwin Street North Stop sign
§ 280-37 MASSENA CODE § 280-37
280:32
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
North Clarkson
Avenue [Added
12-15-1987 by
L.L. No. 8-1987;
amended
7-3-1990 by
L.L. No. 9-1990]
Rosebriar Avenue East Stop sign
North Main
Street [Amended
10-16-1984 by
L.L. No.
10-1984]
Haskell Street West Stop sign
Ames Street East Stop sign
Martin Street West Stop sign
Stoughton Avenue East Stop sign
Orchard Road West Stop sign
Kathleen Street West Stop sign
Northview Drive West Stop sign
Lincoln Drive East Stop sign
Owl Avenue West Stop sign
Park Avenue Lincoln Place East Stop sign
Warren Avenue Both Stop sign
Cornell Avenue East Stop sign
Bishop Avenue Both Stop sign
Sycamore Street North Stop sign
Cedar Street North Yield sign
Poplar Street Both Stop sign
Somerset Avenue East Yield sign
Woodlawn Avenue Both Stop sign
Prospect Avenue McCluskey Avenue East Stop sign
Ransom Avenue Highland Avenue Both Stop sign
Elm Street East Yield sign
Bridges Avenue East Yield sign
Chestnut Avenue East Stop sign
Cherry Street East Stop sign
Ridgewood
Avenue
Rockaway Street South Stop sign
Walnut Avenue North Stop sign
§ 280-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-37
280:33
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Kent Street South Stop sign
Robinson Road Perkins Road Both Stop sign
Victory Road East Stop sign
Russell Road East Stop sign
St. Regis
Boulevard
Robinson Road East Stop sign
Stearns Street West Stop sign
Serra Lane
[Added
12-15-1987 by
L.L. No. 8-1987]
Ashbury Place West Stop sign
Somerset
Avenue
Poplar Street Both Stop sign
South Main
Street
Romeo Avenue East Stop sign
McCluskey Avenue West Stop sign
Leach Street East Stop sign
Wilson Avenue West Stop sign
Depot Street Both Stop sign
Cook Street West Stop sign
South Racket Road East Stop sign
Spruce Street Woodlawn Avenue Both Stop sign
Franklin Street North Stop sign
Bishop Avenue Both Stop sign
Cornell Avenue South Stop sign
Warren Avenue South Stop sign
Stearns Street
[Added
8-5-1986 by
L.L. No. 5-1986]
Malby Avenue Both Stop sign
Sycamore Street Woodlawn Avenue Both Stop sign
Bishop Avenue Both Stop sign
Cornell Avenue South Stop sign
Victory Road Perkins Road North Stop sign
Barnhart Road South Stop sign
Russell Road South Stop sign
§ 280-37 MASSENA CODE § 280-37
280:34
Name of
Through Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
West Hatfield
Street
Spring Street South Stop sign
Prospect Avenue North Stop sign
Amherst Road North Stop sign
Middlebury Avenue North Stop sign
Colgate Drive North Stop sign
West Orvis
Street
Danforth Place South Stop sign
Church Street North Stop sign
Westwood Drive
[Amended
10-5-1982 by
L.L. No. 9-1982;
10-16-1984 by
L.L. No.
10-1984]
Prospect Avenue Both Stop sign
Nightengale Avenue Both Stop sign
Clarkson Avenue Both Stop sign
Sherwood Drive Both Stop sign
Windsor Road Both Stop sign
Churchill Avenue Both Stop sign
Sharon Drive East Stop sign
Ann Street East Stop sign
Coventry Drive South Stop sign
Dover Street Both Stop sign
Serra Lane South Stop sign
Woodlawn
Avenue
Cedar Street Both Stop sign
Cedar Street [Added
6-15-2021 by L.L. No.
4-2021]
North and south Stop sign
Poplar Street Both Stop sign
Poplar Street [Added
6-15-2021 by L.L. No.
5-2021]
North and south Stop sign
Sycamore Street Both Stop sign
Spruce Street Both Stop sign
§ 280-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-38
280:35
§ 280-38. Schedule VII: Stop and Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-11, the following described intersections are
designated as stop or yield intersections:
Sign on At Intersection of
Directions from
Which Entering
Type of Traffic
Control Device
Alvern Avenue [Added
6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
Kent Street Both Stop sign
Alvern Avenue Parker Avenue Both Stop sign
Ash Street Linden Street West Yield sign
Baldwin Street Townline Road East Stop sign
Carney Place Haskell Street West Stop sign
Cecil Avenue Douglas Road West Stop sign
Cecil Avenue [Added
6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
Kent Street Both Stop sign
Center Street [Repealed 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
Chamberlain Road Barnhart Road East Stop sign
Cherry Street Allen Street West Stop sign
Chestnut Street Allen Street West Stop sign
Claremont Avenue Baldwin Avenue West Yield sign
Colgate Drive Columbia Street South Stop sign
Cooper Street Ames Street South Stop sign
Cooper Street Stoughton Avenue North Stop sign
Cummings Street Randall Drive North Stop sign
Dana Street Hospital Drive East Stop sign
Dana Street Pine Street West Stop sign
Elgin Avenue Baldwin Avenue West Yield sign
Elm Circle [Added
10-3-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
Elm Street and
Highland Park
North Stop sign
Elm Street [Added
10-3-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
Elm Circle and
Highland Park
West Stop sign
Erwin Avenue Dana Street North Yield sign
Forrest Place Grinnell Avenue East Stop sign
Franklin Street Ober Street Both Stop sign
§ 280-38 MASSENA CODE § 280-38
280:36
Sign on At Intersection of
Directions from
Which Entering
Type of Traffic
Control Device
Glenn Street [Added
5-7-1991 by L.L. No.
1-1991]
Phillips Street Both Stop sign
Grassmere Avenue Douglas Road Both Stop sign
Grassmere Avenue Walnut Avenue Both Stop sign
Grove Street Laurel Avenue Both Stop sign
Grove Street [Added
11-18-1997 by L.L. No.
9-1997]
Ridgewood Avenue Both Stop sign
Highland Park [Added
10-3-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
Highland Avenue West Stop sign
Highland Park [Added
10-3-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
Elm Circle and Elm
Street
South Stop sign
Highland Avenue
[Added 10-3-2006 by
L.L. No. 3-2006]
Highland Park Both Stop sign
Hubbard Road Barnhart Road West Stop sign
Isabel Street McCluskey Avenue North Stop sign
Judith Street Lawrence Street East Stop sign
Judith Street Marie Street West Stop sign
Kent Street [Added
6-17-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
Alvern Avenue Both Stop sign
Kent Street Cecil Avenue Both Stop sign
Laurel Avenue Walnut Avenue West Stop sign
Lawrence Street Marie Street South Stop sign
Lawrence Street
[Amended 11-17-1981
by L.L. No. 10-1981]
Lincoln Place Grinnell Avenue North Stop sign
Linden Street McCluskey Avenue North Stop sign
Madison Avenue Monroe Parkway North Stop sign
Madison Avenue Washington Street South Stop sign
Marie Street Kathleen Street North Stop sign
Middlebury Avenue Columbia Street South Stop sign
§ 280-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-38
280:37
Sign on At Intersection of
Directions from
Which Entering
Type of Traffic
Control Device
Morrill Street [Amended
7-6-1982 by L.L. No.
5-1982]
Grant Street Both Stop sign
Morrill Street Howard Street Both Yield sign
Morrill Street [Amended
8-3-1982 by L.L. No.
6-1982]
Talcott Street Both Stop sign
Northview Drive Marie Street East Stop sign
Ober Street Franklin Street Both Stop sign
Park Avenue [Added
6-5-1984 by L.L. No.
3-1984]
Sycamore Street North Stop sign
Park Avenue [Added
8-28-1984 by L.L. No.
7-1984]
Woodlawn Avenue Northwest Stop sign
Phillips Street Glenn Street Both Stop sign
Pine Street Martin Street Both Stop sign
Pine Street Orchard Road North Stop sign
Pratt Place Water Street East Stop sign
Prospect Avenue Prospect Circle
(Andrews Street
end)
South Yield sign
Prospect Avenue School Street Both Stop sign
Prospect Circle
(Boulevard end)
Prospect Avenue South Yield sign
Prospect Circle Ransom Avenue West Yield sign
Ripley Street Boynton Street West Stop sign
Ripley Street Paddock Park East Stop sign
Rockaway Street Cecil Avenue Both Stop sign
Stephenville Street
[Added 6-15-1993 by
L.L. No.1-1993]
Street extension off
St. Regis Boulevard
East Stop sign
Urban Avenue [Added
10-7-1986 by L.L. No.
7-1986]
Stephenville Street South Stop sign
Westwood Drive
[Added 10-19-2004 by
L.L. No. 5-2004]
Churchill Avenue Both Stop sign
§ 280-38 MASSENA CODE § 280-38
280:38
Sign on At Intersection of
Directions from
Which Entering
Type of Traffic
Control Device
Westwood Drive
[Added 10-3-1989 by
L.L. No. 10-1989]
Clarkson Avenue Both Stop sign
Westwood Drive Nightengale Avenue Both Stop sign
Westwood Drive Sherwood Drive Both Stop sign
Westwood Drive
[Added 5-19-1998 by
L.L. No. 2-1998]
Windsor Road Both Stop sign
Winter Street Garvin Avenue North Stop sign
Woodlawn Avenue Ober Street South Yield sign
§ 280-39. Schedule VIII: Speed Limits.
Speed limits other than 30 miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bayley Road [Added 2-5-2008
by L.L. No. 2-2008]
20 From NYS Route 37 to a point 785
feet southeast (School zone:
Jefferson School)
Danforth Place [Added
6-2-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992]
15 From Bridges Avenue northerly a
distance of 562 feet
Highland Park [Added
2-5-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
20 From Garvin Avenue to Elm Street a
distance of 915 feet (School zone:
Trinity School)
North Main Street [Added
2-5-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
20 From Lincoln Drive to a point 1,480
feet north (School zone: Madison
School)
Owl Avenue [Added 2-5-2008
by L.L. No. 2-2008]
20 From North Main Street to dead end
a distance of 1,570 feet (School
zone: Madison School)
Pine Street (northbound lane)
[Added 10-6-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998]
20 Beginning a distance of 483 feet
from the intersection of the
westbound lane of Maple Street and
the northbound lane of Pine Street,
and continuing northbound on Pine
Street a distance of 315 feet
§ 280-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-39
280:39
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Pine Street (southbound lane)
[Added 10-6-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998]
20 Beginning a distance of 534 feet
from the intersection of the
eastbound lane on Martin Street and
the southbound lane of Pine Street,
and continuing southbound a
distance of 302 feet
§ 280-40. Schedule IX: No Parking at Any Time.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-15, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon the following streets or parts of streets:
§ 280-39 MASSENA CODE § 280-40
280:40
Name of Street Side Location
Alden Street [Added
6-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3-1983]
South From Curtis Avenue to Malby Avenue
Ames Discount Store
[Added 4-21-1981 by
L.L. No. 4-1981]
— Beginning at a point in the center line of
Stephenville Street, which point is formed by
intersection of the center line of Stephenville
Street running southwest, with the center line of
the Stephenville Street entrance to Ames
Discount Store running southeast; thence south
59° 37' west along the extension of Stephenville
Street a distance of 24 linear feet to a point;
thence south 30° 23' east a distance of 14 linear
feet to a point, which point is the intersection of
the south curbline of Stephenville Street with the
east curbline of Ames Discount Store parking lot
and which point is the beginning of this
description; thence south 28° 53' east along the
east curbline of Ames Discount Store a distance
of 167 linear feet to a point; thence angle right
90° and south 61° 07' west along the front edge
of the storefront concrete apron a distance of 474
linear feet to a point; thence angle right 90° and
north 28° 53' west a distance of 230 linear feet to
a point; thence angle right 90° and north 61° 07'
east a distance of 35 linear feet to a point; thence
angle right 90° and south 28° 53' east a distance
of 200 linear feet to a point located 30 feet from
the edge of the concrete apron; thence angle left
90° and north 61° 07' east on a line parallel to
the front of the stores, a distance of 403 linear
feet to a point located 36 linear feet west from
the east curbline of the parking lot; thence angle
left 90° and north 28° 53' west and parallel to the
east curbline of the parking lot a distance of 137
linear feet to a point; thence angle right north
59° 37' east a distance of 36 linear feet to the
point of beginning.
Ames Street North From North Main Street east to Beach Street
Andrews Street North From intersection of West Orvis Street to
corporation line
Andrews Street South From Church Street to corporate Village line
Andrews Street [Added
10-5-1982 by L.L. No.
7- 1982]
South From Main Street to corporate limits
Bayley Road North From Curtis Avenue to Williams Street
§ 280-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-40
280:41
Name of Street Side Location
Bayley Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
North Beginning at the corner of the entrance to
Jefferson School 30 feet west
Bayley Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
South Between Victory Road and Chamberlain Road
Bayley Road South From Victory Road to St. Regis Boulevard
Beach Street North From Monroe Parkway through McKinley
Avenue to intersection of Monroe Parkway
Beach Street West From Park Avenue to Dodge Street
Bridges Avenue North From Main Street to Clark Street
Bridges Avenue South From east side of Danforth Place, as extended, to
east boundary line of Clark Street, as extended
Bridges Avenue South From west side of Main Street to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Burney Avenue East Entire length
Butler Street Both From Railroad Street to East Orvis Street
Center Street South From Park Avenue to Willow Street
Churchill Avenue
[Added 3-4-1980 by
L.L. No. 2-1980]
Both From the southerly intersection of Highland
Avenue a distance of 140 feet southerly
Cook Street South From South Main Street west to Wells Street
Coventry Drive [Added
6-20-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
West Beginning at the intersection of the northerly
bounds of Highland Avenue and the westerly
bounds of Coventry Drive and proceeding north
along the western side of Coventry Drive for a
distance of 200 feet
Danforth Place [Added
5-19-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
East Beginning from a point 333 feet south of the
intersection of the northbound lane of Danforth
Place and the eastbound lane of West Orvis
Street, continuing from that point to a point 231
feet south along the northbound lane of Danforth
Place
Danforth Place [Added
5-19-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
West Beginning from a point 347 feet south of the
intersection of the southbound lane of Danforth
Place and the eastbound lane of West Orvis
Street, continuing from that point to a point 341
feet south along the southbound lane of Danforth
Place
Danforth Place West From West Orvis Street to a point 100 feet south
thereof
§ 280-40 MASSENA CODE § 280-40
280:42
Name of Street Side Location
Dover Street [Added
6-20-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
West Beginning at the intersection of the northerly
bounds of Highland Avenue and the westerly
bounds of Dover Street and proceeding north
along the western side of Dover Street for a
distance of 200 feet
East Hatfield Street North From its intersection with Main Street to a point
100 feet east thereof
East Orvis Street Both From its intersection with Parker Avenue to a
point 146 feet west thereof
East Orvis Street
[Added 9-3-1991 by
L.L. No. 7-1991]
Both Beginning at the westerly intersection of Walnut
Avenue (north and south sides of East Orvis
Street) and extending easterly to the easterly
intersections of Douglas Road and Water Street
East Orvis Street North Between River Street and Plum Street
East Orvis Street South Beginning at the easterly intersection of Parker
Avenue and extending easterly to a point which
allows 2 parking spaces before the intersection
of Brighton Street
East Orvis Street South Between Brighton Street and Grant Street
East Orvis Street South Between Burney Avenue and Railroad Street
East Orvis Street
[Added 10-5-2010 by
L.L. No. 7-2010]
South Beginning at centerline of Burney Avenue and
ending 45 feet west
East Orvis Street
[Added 10-5-2010 by
L.L. No. 7-2010]
South Beginning at centerline of Grant Street and
ending 138 feet east
East Orvis Street
[Added 6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3- 1983]
South From Main Street easterly a distance of 223 feet
Garvin Avenue South From westerly bounds of Main Street to easterly
bounds of Highland Park
George Street [Repealed 10-5-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982]
George Street [Added
12-2-1997 by L.L. No.
11-1997]
West From a point at the intersection of the eastbound
lane of Maple Street and the southbound lane of
George Street proceeding south on George Street
a distance of 52 feet
Glenn Street Both From Phillips Street north to Water Street
§ 280-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-40
280:43
Name of Street Side Location
Harte Haven Shopping
Center [Added
4-21-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
— Beginning at a point in the north bounds of East
Hatfield Street, which point is formed by the
intersection of the north bounds of East Hatfield
with the west bounds of Harte Haven Shopping
Center property; thence north 3° 57' west along
the west bounds of Harte Haven property a
distance of ±383.6 feet to a point; thence angle
right 61° 42' a distance of 31.5 linear feet, more
or less, to the corner of the concrete apron at
Harte Haven Shopping Center and the point of
beginning of this description; thence along the
edge of the concrete apron north 57° 45' east a
distance of 213 linear feet to an angle point;
thence angle left north 21° 45' east and still
along the concrete apron and beyond a distance
of 595.5' linear feet to a point; thence angle left
90° north 68° 15' west a distance of 33 linear
feet to a point; thence angle left 90° south 21°
45' west a distance of 584.8 linear feet and
parallel to the shopping center apron to an angle
point; thence angle right south 57° 45' west, and
still parallel to the shopping center apron, a
distance of 203.3 linear feet to a point; thence
angle left 90° south 32° 15' east a distance of 33
linear feet to the point of beginning. (The
purpose of the description is to describe a strip
of land parallel to the front of the shopping
center approximately 33 feet wide for a fire
access lane and no parking.)
Haskell Street
[Amended 5-30-2000
by L.L. No. 3-2000]
Both From North Main Street to a point 393 feet west
thereof
Highland Avenue
[Added 6-20-2000 by
L.L. No. 4-2000]
North Beginning at the intersection of the northerly
bounds of Highland Avenue and the westerly
bounds of Churchill Avenue and proceeding
west along the northern side of Highland Avenue
to the westerly most bounds of Highland Avenue
Highland Park [Added
11-1-1983 by L.L. No.
8- 1983]
East Beginning at the north bounds of Garvin Avenue
intersection and extending northerly a distance
of 300 feet
Hillcrest Avenue Both From Andrews Street to a point 100 feet west
thereof
King Street [Added
6-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3- 1983]
South From Curtis Avenue to Malby Avenue
§ 280-40 MASSENA CODE § 280-40
280:44
Name of Street Side Location
King Street [Added
11-1-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
West From south bounds of Malby Avenue to north
bounds of Merritt Avenue
Laurel Avenue Both From Main Street to a point 100 feet east thereof
Liberty Avenue North From Poplar Street to a point 320 feet west
thereof
Liberty Avenue [Amended 10-5-1982 by L.L. No. 10-1982; repealed 1-20-2009 by
L.L. No. 1-2009]
Liberty Avenue
[Amended 4-15-1986
by L.L. No. 3-1986]
South From Park Avenue to a point 300 feet north
thereof
Main Street East Between northerly and southerly driveways of
First United Methodist Church
Main Street East From East Orvis Street to a point 175 feet south
thereof
Main Street [Added
4-15-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008]
East Beginning at a point 367 feet south from the
center line of East Orvis Street and continuing in
front of the U.S. Postal Service mailbox(es) for a
distance of 32 feet
Main Street West Between northerly and southerly driveways of
Sacred Heart Church
Main Street West Directly in front of Town Hall Building
Main Street West From a point where Water Street extended
intersects the southerly boundary of the bridge
crossing the Grasse River
Main Street [Added
11-15-1983 by L.L. No.
9-1983]
West From intersection of Main Street and West Orvis
Street northerly a distance of 178 feet
Main Street [Added
4-15-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008]
West Beginning at a point 245 feet south from the
center line of West Orvis Street and continuing
in front of the U.S. Postal Service mailbox(es)
for a distance of 25 feet
Main Street West From northerly boundary line of St. Regis
Boulevard to a point 100 feet north thereof
Main Street West From northerly bounds of McCluskey Avenue
south to southerly bounds of West Hatfield
Street
Main Street [Added
5-7-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
West 2 parking spaces directly in front of Stan's Men's
and Ladies' Shop
Malby Avenue East From Bayley Road to Alden Street
Malby Avenue East From Bayley Road to Robinson Street
§ 280-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-40
280:45
Name of Street Side Location
Maple Street [Repealed 7-19-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
Maple Street [Added
7-19-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
North Beginning on the west side of Hospital Drive
and ending on the east side of the corporation
line (approximately 1,920 feet)
Maple Street [Added
7-19-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
North Beginning at the west side of Main Street and
ending on the east side of Erwin Avenue
(approximately 3,100 feet)
Maple Street [Added
7-19-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
South Beginning at the west side of Main Street and
ending on the east side of the corporation line
(approximately 5,290 feet)
Maple Street Extension Both From Main Street to Center Street
Massena Arena [Added
7-1-1980 by L.L. No.
7-1980]
Fire lane approximately 22 feet in width,
beginning at the northwesterly corner of the
Arena parking lot and proceeding westerly and
parallel to the Massena Arena building a
distance of 20 feet therefrom and extending
approximately 368 feet to a point at the westerly
end of the Arena building; thence proceeding
southerly and adjacent to the westerly end of the
Arena building a distance of approximately 220
feet to the southwesterly corner of the Arena
building; thence proceeding easterly and
adjacent to the south side of the Arena building a
distance of approximately 218 feet. A restricted
parking area for authorized personnel is
established a width of 20 feet and running
parallel the entire length of the Arena building.
McKinley Avenue South From a point 125 feet north of northerly bounds
of Monroe Parkway and east bounds of Beach
Street to a point 180 feet northeast thereof
McKinley Avenue South From east bounds of Monroe Parkway to a point
145 feet east thereof
North Main Street
[Added 6-19-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
East Starting 426 feet from the northerly bounds of
Stoughton Avenue thence proceeding 22 feet
North Main Street West From Grasse River Bridge north to a point 30
feet north of safety zone and crosswalk at Center
Street
Orchard Road [Added
1-20-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
North 380 feet from the intersection of North Main
Street and Orchard Road
Park Avenue North From Cedar Street to Woodlawn Avenue
Park Avenue Northwest From northerly bounds of Lincoln Place to
southerly bounds of Liberty Avenue
§ 280-40 MASSENA CODE § 280-40
280:46
Name of Street Side Location
Parker Avenue East From East Orvis Street to a point 103 feet south
thereof
Perkins Road [Added
11-15-1983 by L.L. No.
9- 1983]
West From Robinson Road to Barnhart Road
Phillips Street Both From easterly bounds of Glenn Street east to
westerly bounds of Water Street
Poplar Street Both From Bishop Avenue to Somerset Avenue
Railroad Avenue
[Added 6-2-1992 by
L.L. No. 4- 1992]
East From East Orvis Street southerly a distance of
150 feet
Riverdale Apartments
90 East Hatfield Street
[Added 3-6-1984 by
L.L. No. 2-1984]
A fire lane beginning at a point in the center of
East Hatfield Street where it is intersected by the
center line of the Riverdale Apartment entrance,
then at Hatfield Street and along the center line
of Riverdale Apartment entrance a distance of 95
feet to the interior traffic circle, thence
proceeding around the traffic circle in a
clockwise direction a distance of approximately
130 feet. The area to be defined is an area
measured 8 feet perpendicular from the concrete
curb of the interior circle.
Romeo Avenue [Added
6-12-1979 by L.L. No.
4- 1979]
North From Main Street east to Harte Haven Parking
Lot
St. Regis Boulevard Both Entire length
Serra Lane [Added
6-20-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
West Beginning at the intersection of the northerly
bounds of Highland Avenue and the westerly
bounds of Serra Lane and proceeding north
along the western side of Serra Lane for a
distance of 200 feet
Somerset Avenue East From Poplar Street to Park Avenue
South Main Street
[Amended 10-16-1984
by L.L. No. 10-1984]
Both From major railroad crossing southerly to
Village corporate limits
South Racquette Street
[Added 1-19-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
South From South Main Street (center of roadway)
easterly a distance of 345 feet
South Street [Added
6-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3- 1983]
South From Curtis Avenue to Malby Avenue
§ 280-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-40
280:47
Name of Street Side Location
Stearns Street [Added
6-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3- 1983]
South From Curtis Avenue to Malby Avenue
Sycamore Street
[Added 10-19-2010 by
L.L. No. 8-2010]
East From Bishop Avenue to Park Avenue
Sycamore Street [Added 3-6-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984; repealed 10-19-2010 by L.L.
No. 8-2010]
Tracy Street [Added
6-21-1983 by L.L. No.
3- 1983]
South From Curtis Avenue to Malby Avenue
Victory Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
East Between Barnhart Road and Bayley Road
Victory Road East From a point 50 feet north of Russell Road to a
point 50 feet south thereof
Victory Road [Added
11-15-1983 by L.L. No.
9- 1983]
West From Robinson Road to Bayley Road
Warren Avenue West From Park Avenue to Spruce Street
Water Street [Repealed 4-2-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
Water Street [Repealed 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
Water Street [Added
4-2-1990 by L.L. No.
2- 1990]
North Beginning at the easterly intersection of Main
Street easterly a distance of 140 feet
Water Street [Added
4-2-1990 by L.L. No.
2- 1990]
North Beginning at a point 280 feet from the
intersection of Main Street easterly to the
northerly bounds of Phillips Street
Water Street [Added
4-2-1990 by L.L. No.
2- 1990]
South Beginning at a point 54 feet from the easterly
intersection of Glenn Street easterly a distance of
117 feet
Water Street [Added
4-2-1990 by L.L. No.
2- 1990]
South Beginning at a point 150 feet from the easterly
intersection of Main Street easterly 68 feet
Water Street West From East Orvis Street north a distance of 100
feet
West Hatfield Street
[Added 2-4-1986 by
L.L. No. 2-1986]
Both From Colgate Drive to the corporate Village
limits
West Hatfield Street Both From its intersection with Main Street to a point
100 feet west thereof
§ 280-40 MASSENA CODE § 280-40
280:48
Name of Street Side Location
West Orvis Street South From Andrews Street to a point 148 feet east
thereof
West Orvis Street North From Church Street to Andrews Street
West Orvis Street
[Added 6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3- 1983]
South From Main Street east a distance of 68 feet
Willow Street [Added
9-5-1989 by L.L. No.
8- 1989; amended
3-16-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999]
North From the easterly intersection of Woodlawn
Avenue a distance of 20 feet easterly
Woodlawn Avenue Both From Willow Street to Park Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue North From Park Avenue to Cedar Street
Woodlawn Avenue
[Added 6-3-1980 by
L.L. No. 6- 1980]
South From Cedar Street to Sycamore Street
§ 280-41. Schedule X: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-16, the parking of vehicles is prohibited in
the locations described below during the hours indicated on the days indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours/Dates Location
Beach Street [Added
6-5-1984 by L.L. No.
4- 1984]
West 4:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m., May
1 through
August 31
Stoughton Avenue to
Washington Street
Cedar Street [Added
10-6-1981 by L.L. No.
8-1981]
South 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Park Avenue to Liberty
Avenue
Haskell Street West 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Maple Street to a point
810 feet north thereof
Highland Park [Added
2-5-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
From Highland Avenue to
Elm Street
Hospital Drive [Added
8-17-1993 by L.L. No.
2-1993]
East 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
From Dana Street north to the
end of Hospital Drive
§ 280-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-41
280:49
Name of Street Side Hours/Dates Location
Liberty Avenue
[Added 8-7-1979 by
L.L. No. 6-1979]
North 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Willow Street east to
Center Street
Liberty Avenue
[Added 10-5-1982 by
L.L. No. 10-1982]
South 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Beginning at the easterly
intersection of Willow Street
and extending a distance of
105 feet easterly
Nightengale Avenue
[Added 6-17-2008 by
L.L. No. 5-2008]
East August 15
through
September 30
From Highland Avenue to
School Street (350 feet)
Nightengale Avenue
[Added 6-17-2008 by
L.L. No. 5-2008]
East August 15
through
September 30
From School Street to school
entrance (606 feet)
North Main Street [Added 6-5-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984; repealed 6-19-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
School Street [Added
6-17-2008 by L.L. No.
5-2008]
South August 15
through
September 30
From Nightengale Avenue to
Prospect Avenue (286 feet)
Woodlawn Avenue
[Added 10-16-1979 by
L.L. No. 7-1979]
North 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Willow Street east to
Center Street
Woodlawn Avenue
[Added 11-7-1979 by
L.L. No. 9-1979]
South 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Willow Street east to
Center Street
§ 280-42. Schedule XI: Limited-Time Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-17, the parking of vehicles is prohibited in
the locations described below for a longer period of time than that designated during the
hours indicated on the days indicated:
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Between Hours of Location
Andrews Street [Added 11-17-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981; repealed 6-21-1983 by L.L.
No. 3-1983]
Andrews Street
[Added 7-7-1987
by L.L. No. 5-
1987]
North 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
From intersection of
Main Street to
easterly intersection
of Church Street
Andrews Street [Added 6-5-1990 by L.L. No. 5-1990; repealed 7-3-1990 by L.L.
No. 7-1990]
§ 280-41 MASSENA CODE § 280-42
280:50
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Between Hours of Location
Andrews Street
[Added 7-3-1990
by L.L. No.
7-1990]
South 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
Monday through
Saturday
West side of parking
lot between p.m.,
intersection of Main
Street and Church
Street
Churchill Avenue
[Added
4-18-1995 by
L.L. No. 1-1995]
Both 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Westwood
Drive to Highland
Avenue
Danforth Place
[Repealed
6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3-1983]
East Orvis Street
[Added
1-20-1981 by
L.L. No. 1-1981;
repealed
4-18-1995 by
L.L. No. 2-1995]
Glenn Street
[Added 7-7-1987
by L.L. No.
5-1987]
Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
From intersection of
East Orvis Street to
southerly
intersection of
Phillips Street
Highland Avenue
[Added
4-18-1995 by
L.L. No. 1-1995;
amended
6-20-2000 by
L.L. No. 4-2000]
South 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Dover Street
to Windsor Road
Hospital Drive
[Added
2-17-1987 by
L.L. No. 1-1987]
East 2 hrs. All times Beginning at the
northerly
intersection of
Maple Street and
extending to the
southerly
intersection of Dana
Street
§ 280-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-42
280:51
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Between Hours of Location
Liberty Avenue
[Added
4-15-1986 by
L.L. No. 3-1986]
North (East) 30 mins. All times Beginning at a point
210 feet from north
bounds of Willow
Street and extending
northeasterly a
distance of 100 feet
Main Street
[Repealed
2-6-1979 by L.L.
No. 1-1979]
Main Street
[Repealed
6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3-1983]
Main Street
[Added 7-7-1987
by L.L. No.
5-1987]
Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
From intersection of
East Orvis Street
and West Orvis
Street to southerly
intersection of
Water Street
Main Street West 15 mins. All times Front of United
States Post Office
between northerly
and southerly
driveways
Park Avenue
[Repealed
6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3-1983]
Phillips Street
[Added 7-7-1987
by L.L. No.
5-1987]
North 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
Beginning at a point
75 feet from easterly
intersection of Main
Street and extending
to Glenn Street
Phillips Street
[Added 7-7-1987
by L.L. No.
5-1987]
South 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday
From intersection of
Main Street to the
easterly intersection
of Glenn Street
Willow Street
[Added 9-1-1981
by L.L. No.
7-1981; repealed
6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3-1983]
§ 280-42 MASSENA CODE § 280-42
280:52
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Between Hours of Location
Willow Street
[Repealed
6-21-1983 by
L.L. No. 3-1983]
§ 280-43. Schedule XII: Standing Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-18, the standing of vehicles is prohibited in
the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Bayley Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
North Beginning at the corner of the entrance to
Jefferson School 30 feet west
Bayley Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
South Between St. Regis Boulevard and
Chamberlain Road
South Main Street Both From New York Railroad crossing to a point
100 feet north thereof
South Main Street Both From the north end of Racquette River
Bridge to a point 50 feet north thereof
South Main Street Both From the south end of Racquette River
Bridge to a point 50 feet south thereof
Victory Road [Added
4-7-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
Both Between Barnhart Road and Bayley Road
§ 280-44. Schedule XIII: Stopping Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-19, the stopping of vehicles is prohibited in
the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 280-45. Schedule XIV: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-20, angle parking of vehicles is hereby
allowed on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Park Avenue North From Woodlawn Avenue to Liberty
Avenue
§ 280-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-46
280:53
§ 280-46. Schedule XV: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-21, the following locations are designated as
loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Amended
6-15-1982 by L.L. No.
3-1982; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
West First parking space north of United
States Post Office driveway entrance
Water Street [Added 4-2-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990]
North Beginning at a point 140 feet from the
easterly intersection of Main Street a
distance of 140 feet easterly
§ 280-47. Schedule XVI: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-22, standing is prohibited, excluding buses,
at the following locations hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Added 2-6-1979
by L.L. No. 1-1979]
West A distance of 60 feet in front of the
Municipal Parking Lot adjacent to the
Town Hall Building
West Orvis Street [Added
2-15-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000; amended 5-30-2000
by L.L. No. 2-2000]
North Beginning at a point 140 feet from the
northwest corner of the intersection of
Main Street and West Orvis Street, and
continuing an additional 60 feet
westerly
§ 280-48. Schedule XVII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-23, standing is hereby prohibited, except
taxis, at the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 280-49. Schedule XVIII: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-24, a truck route system upon which trucks,
tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of five tons may travel is hereby
established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Andrews Street (designated State
Highway No. 56)
Entire length
Bridge Road Entire length
§ 280-46 MASSENA CODE § 280-49
280:54
Name of Street Location
Butler Street Entire length
Center Street From Main Street to Willow Street
Church Street Entire length
East Hatfield Street From Main Street to Grove Street
East Orvis Street Entire length
Main Street (designated State Highway
No. 420)
Entire length
Maple Street (designated State Highway
No. 37B)
Entire length
North Main Street [Repealed 5-18-2021
by L.L. No. 3-2021]
Parker Avenue
[Amended 10-7-1986 by L.L. No.
6-1986]
From East Orvis Street to Center Street
Phillips Street Entire length
Railroad Avenue Entire length
St. Regis Boulevard (designated State
Highway No. 37)
Entire length
South Main Street (designated State
Highway No. 420)
Entire length
South Racquette Street Entire length
Water Street Entire length
West Hatfield Street Entire length
West Orvis Street Entire length
Willow Street [Repealed 11-15-2005 by
L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 280-50. Schedule XIX: Pedestrian Crossings.
In accordance with the provisions of § 280-25, pedestrians are hereby prohibited from
crossing the street at the following locations except within the marked crosswalks
thereat:
Name of Street Location
Main Street From Maple Street to a point 50 feet south of Bridges
Avenue
§ 280-49 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-51
280:55
§ 280-51. Schedule XX: Tractor-Trailer Restricted Parking. [Added 10-5-1993 by
L.L. No. 4-1993]
Tractor-trailers shall be restricted from parking upon the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location
Massena Arena
[Added 11-18-1997
by L.L. No. 8-1997]
All times The portion of the Harte Haven
Shopping Center parking lot which
is leased by the Village designated
for Massena Arena parking
Willow Street Both All times From the Village corporation limit
at the railroad underpass southerly
to the intersection of Somerset
Avenue
Willow Street West 1 hour From the intersection of Somerset
Avenue southerly to the intersection
of Center Street
§ 280-52. Schedule XXI: Fire Lanes. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times in areas designated as fire lanes:
Structure Street Time Limit Location
Grassmere Terrace Grassmere Avenue All times
Harte Haven
Shopping Center
SH #37 All times
Home Depot SH #37 All times
Jefferson
Elementary
Bayley Road All times
Laurel Terrace Laurel Avenue All times
Massena Arena Harte Haven All times
Madison Elementary
School
Owl Avenue All times
Massena Central
High School
Nightengale Avenue All times
Massena Junior
High School
School Street All times
Massena Memorial
Hospital
Hospital Drive All times
Massena Memorial
Hospital Medical
Office Buildings
Hospital Drive All times
§ 280-51 MASSENA CODE § 280-52
280:56
Structure Street Time Limit Location
New Testament
Church
Andrews Street All times
Nightengale
Elementary
Nightengale Avenue All times
St. Lawrence
Internists
Andrews Street All times
St. Lawrence
Seaway
Development
Corporation
Andrews Street All times
Trinity Catholic
School
Main Street All times
Triple A Lumber Malby Avenue All times
Wal-Mart SH #37 All times
§ 280-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 280-52
280:57

Chapter 286
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic generally — See Ch. 280.
§ 286-1. Legislative purpose.
The Board of Trustees recognizes the potential adverse impact on the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Massena and to property within
the Village by the use of unlicensed motor-driven vehicles and, therefore, deems it
appropriate to control the use of said vehicles.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, easements or any other areas dedicated
or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE — Any type of unlicensed motor-driven
vehicle or conveyance, including but not necessarily limited to snowmobiles, twowheeled
motor vehicles known as "trail bikes" and "motor scooters" and four-wheeled or
three-wheeled motor vehicles commonly known as "go-carts" or "all-terrain vehicles,"
but not including mopeds or any vehicle used for agricultural, landscaping or lawn
maintenance purposes.
VILLAGE-OWNED LAND — All parks, recreation areas, ballparks, lake and river
areas, storage facilities, garage areas, parking areas and any and all other Village-owned
land and premises.
§ 286-3. Operation on public property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle upon
any public property or Village-owned land in the Village of Massena.
§ 286-4. Operation on private property restricted.
A. The operation of an unlicensed motor-driven vehicle is prohibited upon private
property unless the operator of said unlicensed motor-driven vehicle has the express
permission of the owner of said private property to operate said vehicle on said
property.
B. Any driver or operator of an unlicensed motor-driven vehicle who enters or remains
upon private property which is either fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner
designed to exclude intruders, or where notice against trespassers is given by
posting in a conspicuous manner or where notice against trespassing has been
§ 280-52 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 286-4
286:1
§ 286-5. Careless or negligent operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle in a careless, reckless
or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any
person.
§ 286-6. Exceptions.
§ 286-7. Impoundment of vehicles in violation.
The police shall immediately impound any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle operated in
violation of this chapter. The unlicensed motor-driven vehicle shall be returned upon
payment of the fine or upon direction of the court.
§ 286-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 286-9. Conflicts with state law.
Should any section or portion of this chapter be in conflict with the laws of the State of
personally communicated to such person by the owner of such land or other
authorized person, shall be presumed to be operating without the permission of the
owner of said property.
A. It shall not be unlawful for any employee of the Village of Massena to operate
unlicensed motor-driven vehicles for the purpose of maintaining, repairing or doing
any public work within the scope of his employment.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use or operation of unlicensed motor-driven
vehicles on premises duly approved for such use by the appropriate officials or
municipal regulatory bodies of the Village of Massena.19
A. A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter by any operator or
parent shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than seven days for each violation,
except that:
(1) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $250
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each
violation; and
(2) When the person was found to have committed two or more such violations
within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than $500 nor more
$1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. The
Village may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
chapter.
19. Editor's Note: Former §§ 286-7, Responsibilities of parents or guardians, and 286-8, Notice of violation to parents or
guardians, which immediately followed this section, were deleted 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
§ 286-4 MASSENA CODE § 286-9
286:2
New York applicable to the operation, registration, ownership or control of unlicensed
motor vehicles, then, in that instance, said laws of the State of New York shall prevail.
§ 286-9 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 286-9
286:3

Chapter 290
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 216. Sewers — See Ch. 230.
§ 286-9 WATER § 286-9
290:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 290-1. Regulations to be part of contract; compliance required; approved meter
required.
§ 290-2. Permanent and temporary connections.
A. The following rules and regulations established by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Massena, or as hereinafter amended or modified, are made a part of any
and all agreements or contracts with each consumer/owner, taker or user of water
furnished, directly or indirectly, from the mains of said Village.
B. Each and every consumer/owner, user or taker of water from the Village water
system shall be in all respects bound by, and shall be considered to have agreed to,
the rules, regulations, requirements, conditions and schedules of water rates and
other charges as hereinafter set forth or amended or modified by the Board of
Trustees as a condition precedent to the rights of service from said water system.
C. All premises using the Village water supply must use a meter approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works and owned by the Village.
A. Permanent connections.
(1) Parties desirous of connecting to the mains of the water system of the Village
shall make application for permission. It shall be in the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works to fix and determine the charges for this
service, in accord with current labor and material costs. Those costs are
defined annually in the fee schedule of Village employee labor and contracted
costs for materials. [Amended 10-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003; 9-7-2010 by
L.L. No. 6-2010; 10-21-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
(2) No person or persons shall make connection to the mains of the water system
of the Village, except the duly authorized representatives of the Village of
Massena. Any person violating any of the provisions contained in § 290-2
shall be liable to a fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(3) The installation, maintenance and condition of a service pipe/lateral from the
main to the meter shall be to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public
Works or his representative. The curb stop shall be closed and remain closed
and shall not be opened by anyone other than the Superintendent of Public
Works or his agent. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(4) All materials, the method, manner and location of same and the general
arrangement and progress of the work shall conform to the specifications
hereinafter set forth in these regulations.
(5) No work shall be performed until the owner or applicant has obtained the
necessary street opening permit from the proper authority.
§ 290-1 WATER § 290-2
290:3
(6) A separate tap and service shall be installed for each premises located on a
street in which there is a Village water main, and no connection will be
allowed to supply water to another person or premises except with the written
permission of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena. When the word
"premises" is used herein, it shall be taken to designate:
(a) A building under one roof, owned or leased by one person or occupied as
a residence or for business, industrial or commercial purposes.
(b) Each premises having its own frontage upon a street having a water main
shall have its own individual service; except, however, that, in all cases
where two or more buildings on the same lot have frontage on the street
upon which there is a water main, the buildings which do not have a water
service may connect onto the water line of the building having such a
service, provided that when such connection is made, due notice is given
by the party so connecting to the Superintendent of Public Works before
any connection is made so that the Superintendent may place a separate
meter for each building using water under such conditions. [Amended
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(7) The minimum size and material service pipe to be installed shall have a
diameter of 3/4 inch and be of copper material. The applicant shall state the
size of the service desired. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(8) No connection of any kind shall be made to the service pipe between the main
and the meter.
(9) Where an application is made for a connection for which an existing service
pipe is provided to the curb box only, all work shall be performed in
accordance with these rules, regulations and specifications, as far as they are
applicable. The connections shall be made at the curb stop instead of at the
main. It shall be the duty of the applicant or his agent to determine that the
portion of the connection previously installed is in satisfactory condition and
to make any repairs thereto which may be required by the Superintendent of
Public Works or his representative, all of which shall be at the expense of the
applicant. Detailed methods of connection to the existing service pipe shall be
in accordance with the instructions of the Superintendent of Public Works or
his representative. The applicant must pay the charge which is applicable to
the service connection previously installed based on the following schedule:
For properties located within the Village, the charges determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works will be an amount equal to 50% of the actual
cost of installation. For properties located in the Town outside of the Village,
the charges determined by the Superintendent of Public Works will be an
amount equal to 100% of the actual installation costs. All materials for
connections larger than 3/4-inch copper and any special equipment necessary
to complete installation will be charged to the applicant, whether located
inside or outside of the Village, at 100% of the actual cost. [Amended
9-7-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010; 10-21-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
(10) Where an application is made to increase the size of the service pipe or for any
other change to be made in said pipe which serves any consumer/owner, the
§ 290-2 MASSENA CODE § 290-2
290:4
§ 290-3. General regulations.
corporation stop controlling such service must be closed at the main prior to
any withdrawal of water through the reconstructed service pipe.
B. Temporary connections. Those desiring the use of water for temporary purposes
other than from temporary connections to the main shall make application therefor
to the Village of Massena, setting forth in detail the reason therefor and the exact
use which is to be made of the water, and the Village of Massena may issue the
necessary permit under such terms and conditions as it may determine.
C. Cross-connection control. It shall be unlawful for the owner of property or the user
of Village water, or both, to introduce or permit the introduction into the Village
water supply system of pollution or contamination of any kind. Whenever crossconnection
to other water supply into the Village system is found or whenever any
other condition is found which presents the possibility of contamination or
pollution, the water supply to such premises and/or other premises from which
cross-connection is made shall be discontinued immediately until the crossconnection
is eliminated or the condition remedied. The operator of the waterworks
may permit or require a backflow preventer of pattern and design which the New
York State Department of Health approves as reasonably adequate to prevent
contamination if the operator determines that a complete physical separation from
the Village water system is not practicable or necessary or that adequate inspection
for cross-connection cannot readily be made or that such backflow preventer is
necessary because of existing or possible backflow resulting from special condition,
use or equipment. Any corrective measure, disconnection or change on private
property shall be at the sole expense of the person in control of such property. Any
changes required in the Village system outside the property or between the meter
and the supply line or distribution system and any charges for cutoff or
disconnection shall be added to the charges for water against the premises
necessitating such expenditure. All physical connections which may constitute
potential cross-connection are prohibited unless constructed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the provisions of the New York State Sanitary Code,
Chapter 1, Subpart 5-1, Section 5-1.31. [Added 6-19-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990;
amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. Except in cases of fire, no person or persons shall take water from the fire hydrants
of said Village for any purpose whatsoever without having obtained a special
permit from the Village of Massena, which permit shall be conditioned in
accordance with the circumstances involved at the discretion of the Village of
Massena, and, in case of fire, said fire hydrants shall be opened and water taken
therefrom only by Village employees or active members of the Fire Department.
Any person violating any of the provisions contained in § 290-3 shall be liable to a
fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for
not more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
B. No work shall be performed upon the Village mains or upon services connected
thereto between the main and the curb stop, except by employees or agents of the
Village of Massena.
§ 290-2 WATER § 290-3
290:5
C. The consumer/owner is required to notify the Superintendent of Public Works of
any leak occurring in or damage to the service line. In such case, the water will be
turned off at the curb stop and shall remain turned off until the leak or the damage
is repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works. All repairs to
the service line between the curb stop and the water meter shall be made by the
consumer/owner at his own cost and expense. The repairs to the service line
between the main and the curb stop shall also be made at the expense of the
consumer/owner. If the service pipe is all galvanized iron, at the option of the
Superintendent of Public Works, a service of galvanized iron or other may be
required to be replaced with a copper service pipe between the main and the meter
at the expense of the consumer/owner. In all cases, repairs shall be made in
conformity with the specifications for new services insofar as they may be
applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed as violating any agreement
heretofore entered into between consumer/owners served through improved and
accepted services and the Village of Massena, nor is it to be construed as affecting
any future agreements similar to the ones heretofore executed. [Amended 9-4-2001
by L.L. No. 2-2001; 9-7-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010; 10-21-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
D. If it is desired to abandon a service, the Village of Massena shall be notified in
writing, and the service will be disconnected at the meter. The work shall be
performed at the expense of the owner. A new service pipe will not be provided for
an applicant while a disconnected service is disconnected in accordance with this
provision. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
E. The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Massena shall have control
of the installation, maintenance, repair and adjustment of taps, mains, curb boxes,
service pipes and meters. The Village of Massena shall not be responsible for
breaks, obstructions or interruption in service arising from any cause whatsoever,
except that it may take such steps as are reasonable upon proper notification to
make such repairs as may be necessary to restore service from the main to the curb
stop. Charges for such repairs are to be made in accordance with Subsection C of
this section.
F. Service shall be controlled at the curb stop, and water will be charged for as long as
the curb stop is open. The water shall be turned off and on only by employees of
the Village of Massena or its duly authorized representatives and only upon filing
proper notice with said Village of Massena. Violations of this rule shall be
sufficient cause for discontinuing the service. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
G. The Village of Massena shall not be liable for any damage which may result in
consumer/owners' pipes, appliances or other fixture from the shutting off of water
mains or service pipes for any purpose whatsoever, whether previous notice has
been given or not. No deduction from the service charge will be made for periods
when the service is shut off. In cases where coils or other devices are installed in
heating furnaces or separate heating devices for the purpose of providing domestic
hot water, an approved check and relief valve must be installed at the expense of
the owner in the supply of the feed pipe between the meter and the source of heat.
This is not only to be installed at the expense of the owner but also at his peril. The
Village of Massena assumes no responsibility for the proper operations and
§ 290-3 MASSENA CODE § 290-3
290:6
§ 290-4. Furnishing of meters and meter reading units such as radio frequency
automatic meter reading (RF AMR) or other. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001; 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meters and transmitter units to be used within
the limits of the Village of Massena will be furnished by the Village at Village expense.
All others shall be furnished by the Village at the property owner's expense and shall
remain the property of the Village. Five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meters and
transmitter units to be used for individual residential service outside the limits of the
Village of Massena will be furnished by the Village at Village expense. All others shall
be furnished by the Village at the property owner's expense, including capital projects
and large-scale developments as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works,
where the service has been extended by the Village of Massena.
§ 290-5. Size of meters.
function of said valves.
H. In cases where boilers or other special equipment is supplied with water, a suitable
valve or other device must be installed at the expense and peril of the consumer/
owner to prevent collapse or explosion in case the water is shut off in the street
mains.
I. The Village of Massena shall not be held liable for any damage sustained by reason
of failure to supply water to any owner at any time or for any cause, and it reserves
the right to control the amount of water supplied in the event that the supply
becomes short for any reason, in particular, the right, at any time it is considered
necessary, to prohibit the use of water for sprinkling of lawns or gardens or for any
other purpose.
J. The Village of Massena does not guarantee service from the street main to the meter
or through the house or through any piping valves or connections therein.
K. The Village of Massena shall be the sole judge as to the meaning of these rules and
regulations. Its interpretation shall be final and binding upon all applicants for water
service and upon all takers and users of water.
L. In all cases where the Village has performed and provided a service, an
administrative charge (8.0%) of the aggregate bill amount shall be added to the
total. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
A. Meters shall be the size determined by the requirements of each particular
installation and shall be adequate for delivering and measuring accurately the peak
loads which they may be required to handle.
B. In case of installations having three-fourths-inch service pipes, the requirements of
Subsection A of this section will usually be deemed to have been met where the
meter is of five-eighths-inch size with three-fourths-inch connections.
C. In case of installations having service pipes larger than 3/4 inch, the requirements
of Subsection A of this section will usually be deemed to have been met where the
meter is of the same size as the service pipe.
§ 290-3 WATER § 290-5
290:7
§ 290-6. Location of meter and meter reading units (transmitters). [Amended
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 290-7. Right to enter.
Employees or agents of the Village of Massena may enter the premises of the consumer/
owner at any reasonable time to examine its connections and to determine the quantity
of water used and the method and manner of its use. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. shall be considered reasonable hours for this purpose.
§ 290-8. Damage to meters and meter reading units (transmitters). [Amended
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Damaged meters and transmitters shall be repaired or replaced by the Village of Massena
at the expense of the consumer/owner, except where the damage is caused by ordinary
wear and tear.
§ 290-9. Interference with meters.
D. Where the service pipe is larger than 3/4 inch, a meter of smaller size than the
service pipe may be used.
E. In all other cases which are not specifically covered by this section, the judgment
and discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Massena is
final and binding.
A. The service connection and the plumbing in the building to be served shall be so
arranged that the meter can be placed in a horizontal position not more than three
feet from the point at which the service enters the building. There shall be installed
by the owner a suitable stop and waste valve between the point where the service
enters the building and the meter, which must at all times be within clear view, and
the location thereof must be easily accessible for reading, inspection and repair.
B. The Village of Massena may, in its discretion, install a transmitter, remote or
outside reader on or in any building served by the Village Water Department. This
transmitter, remote or outside reader shall be installed at no cost to the property
owner. The transmitter, remote or outside reader shall be installed at a location
which is easily accessible for reading. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
designate such location.
A. All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter from any
service. Any person violating any of the provisions contained in § 290-9 shall be
liable to a fine and penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each violation. Each day on which such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L.
No. 2-2001]
B. No seal placed by the Village of Massena for the protection of any meter, valve,
fitting or other water connection shall be tampered with or defaced. It shall not be
broken except on written authorization from the Superintendent of Public Works.
Where the seal is broken, the Village of Massena reserves the right to order the
§ 290-5 MASSENA CODE § 290-9
290:8
§ 290-10. Rates and charges. [Last amended 5-19-2009 by L.L. No. 4-200920,21]
meter removed for test at the expense of the consumer/owner.
C. Whenever a seal on a water meter shall be found to be broken, it shall be
presumptive evidence that it was broken by the owner or occupant of the premises
in which it is located. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. General rates and minimum allowed usage. Water shall be charged to all
consumers/owners, users or takers of water on an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)
basis and actual usage in accordance with the following rates:
(1) Water rate schedule: inside Village.
(a) Water Plant capital recovery fee: $3.50 per month per EDU; $7 every two
months per EDU; or $10.50 quarterly per EDU, as determined by the
Village.
(b) Maple and Orvis Streets (Route 37B Project) capital recovery fee: $1.50
per month per EDU; $3 every two months per EDU; or $4.50 quarterly
per EDU, as determined by the Village.
(c) Rate Schedule. [Amended 5-8-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010; 10-20-2015 by
L.L. No. 5-2015;2212-17-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Water Used in Any Calendar
Month
(gallons) Rate per 1,000 Gallons
First 3,000 $4.70
Next 17,000 $3.99
Excess of 20,000 $3.09
NOTE: The minimum allowed usage is 3,000 gallons per month or
$14.10 per month, or $28.20 bimonthly (every two months).
(2) Water rate schedule: outside Village within a water district. [Amended
5-8-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010; 10-20-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015;233-20-2018
by L.L. No. 4-2018]
(a) Water Plant capital recovery fee: $3.50 per month per EDU; $7 every two
months per EDU; or $10.50 quarterly per EDU, as determined by the
Village.
(b) Rate Schedule. [Amended 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
20. Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 6-1-2009.
21. Editor's Note: Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
22. Editor's Note: This local law also provided an effective date of 12-1-2015.
23. Editor's Note: This local law also provided an effective date of 12-1-2015.
§ 290-9 WATER § 290-10
290:9
Use Rate
Residential $4.94 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$14.82 per month for 3,000 gallons, or minimum
$29.64 bimonthly (every two months) for 6,000
gallons
Commercial $8.99 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$67.43 per month for 7,500 gallons, or minimum
$134.85 bimonthly (every two months) for 15,000
gallons
Industrial $8.99 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum per
contract agreement
Institutional $4.94 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$98.80 per month for 20,000 gallons, or minimum
$197.60 bimonthly (every two months) for 40,000
gallons
(3) Water rate schedule: outside Village not within a water district. [Added
3-20-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
(a) Water Plant capital recovery fee: $3.50 per month per EDU; $7 every two
months per EDU; or $10.50 quarterly per EDU, as determined by the
Village.
(b) Nondistrict fee: $14 per month per EDU; $28 every two months per EDU;
or $42 quarter per EDU, as determined by the Village.
(c) Rate Schedule. [Amended 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Use Rate
Residential $6.18 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$18.54 per month for 3,000 gallons, or minimum
$37.08 bimonthly (every two months) for 6,000
gallons
Commercial $11.23 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$84.23 per month for 7,500 gallons, or minimum
$168.45 bimonthly (every two months) for 15,000
gallons
Industrial $8.99 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum per
contract agreement
Institutional $6.18 per 1,000 gallons per month; minimum
$123.60 per month for 20,000 gallons, or
minimum $247.20 bimonthly (every two months)
for 40,000 gallons
B. Water Plant recovery fee. A user fee based on an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)
will be collected by the Village of Massena for each consumer/owner, user or taker
of water and any parcel within the Village boundaries that has water service
§ 290-10 MASSENA CODE § 290-10
290:10
available. An EDU is based on one average annual residential consumption. The
amount of the fee is calculated based on the capital improvements and debt needs
of the Village Water Treatment Plant only. The Water Plant capital recovery fee
will be collected regardless of water usage, even if the water has been shut off or
disconnected. Town of Massena Water District Users will not be charged if water
service has been physically disconnected. Equivalent dwelling units are assigned as
follows:
Property or Parcel Type Number of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Residential 1 per occupancy (refer to Subsections C, D, E,
F below)
Commercial 1 per occupancy (annual usage less than
100,000 gallons)
Large users, including but not
limited to dry cleaners, laundries,
car washes, restaurants
Calculated based on average annual usage, one
per 100,000 gallons
Professional offices, retail
establishments
1 per occupancy (see Subsections C, D, E, F
below)
Industrial Calculated based on average annual usage, 1
per 100,000 gallons
Institutional: schools, hospitals
and medical offices, nursing
homes
Calculated based on average annual usage, 1
per 100,000 gallons
Vacant parcels, parking lots, etc. 1/2 per parcel (parcels that do not have access
to connect to water mains are exempt, such as
landlocked)
Cemetery Exempt
C. Multiple-unit or apartment building minimums. Any structure or unit receiving
water service shall be charged, billed and collected a minimum water charge per
month equivalent to the number of electric meters serving or utilized at said
structure or building. Any structure wherein there are fewer electric meters than the
number of separate units shall be charged the number of minimums equal to the
number of separate units. Any usage, as registered by the water meter, above the
multiple or the number of minimums by the minimum monthly gallonage of 3,000
gallons will be charged and collected in addition to such minimum. In addition,
each building shall be charged for water usage on the excess gallonage over the
number of minimums, multiplied by the gallons permitted under a single minimum.
D. Minimum rates for public multiple dwellings. Minimum rates for public housing
(one- or two-room apartments) with one electric meter and/or one water meter shall
be based on a ratio of 1:1 (apartments vs. billing units) (100 apartments equal 100
units to be billed).
E. In the event that a structure has multiple electric meters but there is a permanent
discontinuance of separate units, then, upon application of the Superintendent and
upon his certification that the separate uses have been permanently discontinued,
the Village may waive the requirement as to charges for separate minimums.
§ 290-10 WATER § 290-10
290:11
§ 290-11. Shutting off and turning on of water. [Added 11-7-1984 by L.L. No.
12-1984; 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Should it be desired by the consumer/owner to discontinue the use of water, the Village
of Massena shall be notified in writing as to the desired time and place at which the
service is to be discontinued. The Board shall require the Superintendent of Public
Works or his representative to shut off the service at the curb box. When it is desired to
resume service, similar notification shall be given to the Village of Massena and, upon
payment of all indebtedness, the Superintendent of Public Works or his representative
will turn on or off the water at the curb box. The charge made for turning on or off the
water shall be $25.
§ 290-12. Testing of meters.
§ 290-13. Repair of meters.
F. Unit. A "single unit" shall be defined as the use of a structure for a separate
function, whether or not owned or utilized by the same person or persons, which
has individual water/sewer service. In the circumstances where there are separate
units utilizing common water/sewer facilities, each separate common water/sewer
facility shall constitute one unit.
A. It is the policy of the Village of Massena to make periodic tests at approximately
eight-year intervals of all meters sized one inch and smaller, without specific charge
to the consumer/owner. There shall be, however, no obligation upon the
Department to make these tests, nor shall the failure to do so give rise to the
assumption that the meters are in any way out of order or incorrectly registering.
B. The meters will be tested at the request of the property owner upon the payment, in
escrow, to the Village Treasurer of the sum of $35. If the tested meter is found to
be within the error limits established by the Superintendent, said deposit will be
forfeited to the Village of Massena. If the tested meter exceeds the error limits
established by the Superintendent, the above deposit will be returned to the
consumer/owner or owner. Such testing will be at such times as is convenient for
the Village Water Department. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
C. If there should be a disarrangement of the meter or a faulty registration of the
quantity of water consumed for the current quarter, the correct amount shall be
taken to be that of the registration plus the deficiency or less the excess that the
subsequent readings of the meters shall indicate, and if it is found that the meter is
stopped or fails to register, the quantity of water consumed shall be taken to be the
same as that of the average of the previous four quarters and the bill rendered
accordingly.
A. Where repairs to meters are necessitated by the normal deterioration of the meters
through use, the cost of repairing such meters shall be borne by the Village of
Massena.
B. Where repairs to meters are necessitated by neglect on the part of the consumer/
owner, such as damage done by freezing or by hot water backing through the meter
or actual breakage, the consumer/owner shall be charged for the cost of the repair
§ 290-10 MASSENA CODE § 290-13
290:12
§ 290-14. Reading of meters.
When bills are desired by the consumer/owner at other than regularly specified times, a
bill will be given after the receipt of a written request.
§ 290-15. Responsibility for frozen services.
The Village of Massena does not assume responsibility for frozen services,
notwithstanding the fact that installation of any service which may subsequently become
frozen had been installed by the Village or its representatives.
§ 290-16. Billing procedure.
§ 290-17. Penalties for delinquent bills. [Amended 11-21-1989 by L.L. No.
12-1989; 5-21-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; 6-17-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
work. Such cost, however, shall not exceed the cost of purchasing a new meter of
the same size.
A. Each consumer/owner will, unless it is otherwise provided, receive a bill for water
monthly, bimonthly (every two months), or quarterly, the same to be due and
payable upon presentation. [Amended 4-29-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987; 10-21-2003
by L.L. No. 5-2003]
B. In any case where the amount of water used is of such quantity that the
Superintendent of Public Works shall deem it advisable to issue a bill monthly, it
shall be done notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing subsection. The
decision of the Superintendent of Public Works shall be binding, and the bills shall
become due and payable upon presentation.
C. The responsibility for payment of all bills rests upon the owner of the premises, and
he shall be liable for all charges when due and payable, and such charges shall be a
lien upon the premises until fully paid.
D. Failure to receive a bill, either monthly, bimonthly (every two months), or
quarterly, does not entitle any consumer/owner to avoid the penalty as hereinafter
prescribed. The Village of Massena does not guarantee billing or delivery of bills
to any consumer/owner. [Amended 10-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
A. In the event that any previous water bill, whether the same is rendered monthly,
bimonthly (every two months) or quarterly, has not been paid in full, a penalty of
10% or the amount of the unpaid bill will be assessed and added to the waterconsumption
bill. Said penalty of 10% shall go into effect the 11th day of the month
following the date of the bill. However, if payment is made by mail, payment shall
be presumed timely if the envelope containing said payment is postmarked before
the closing of the 10th day of the month following the date of the bill. [Amended
10-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
B. If payment is made by use of the Village night deposit box, payment shall be
presumed timely if the payment is removed by 8:00 a.m. the morning after the due
date of the bill. It is then backdated one business day and posted with such date.
[Amended 1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 290-13 WATER § 290-18
290:13
§ 290-18. Nonpayment of bills.
§ 290-19. Private fire-protection regulations and rates. [Amended 10-2-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 290-20. Service to areas outside Village.
A. Unpaid bills for water-service charges or other charges incurred by the consumer/
owner are a lien upon the property. The Village may enforce the collection of
unpaid bills by cutting off the supply of water after penalties start to accrue on the
unpaid bill or may enforce collection of such bill or by any other means as provided
by law.
B. On or before the first day of May in each year, the Village Treasurer shall submit to
the Board of Trustees a statement showing the names of the owners of property who
have not paid the water rent as provided or prescribed herein and the amount of
such delinquency. Such amounts shall be levied as taxes upon the several properties
owned by the persons named in such statement and shall be shown in a separate
column in the tax roll under the name of "Water Rents." Such water rents may also
be collected in the manner prescribed in Subdivision 4 of § 452 of the General
Municipal Law.
A. In cases where it is desired to install connections to private fire-protection systems,
written application shall be made to the Village, setting forth the details thereof.
The application shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the plan of
the system to be installed. This plan must be approved by the Village previous to
any work being done.
B. The Village of Massena reserves the right to impose specific regulations in
connection with the supply to private fire-protection systems.
C. All installations necessary to serve private fire-protection systems shall be
constructed and maintained at the sole expense of the owner or applicant.
Connections for private fire-protection purposes shall be properly valved at the
expense of the consumer/owner in order to prevent the use of water for any other
purpose than those which are contemplated by this article.
A. The Board of Trustees may consent to the extension of Village water mains beyond
the Village limits upon such terms and conditions as the Trustees may agree;
provided, however, that ownership of all mains and equipment, except laterals from
the street or right-of-way to the building and any elevated tank structure, shall be
owned by the Village and maintained or caused to maintained by the municipality
and/or district(s) said water mains and equipment serve; the laterals by the property
owner, and elevated structure by the water district(s) and/or the municipality the
structure serves. [Amended 6-20-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001; 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
B. As a precondition to the receipt of Village water service from and after the effective
date of this chapter, any such water main or equipment lying in any public street or
right-of-way shall be transferred to the Village of Massena. [Amended 10-2-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 290-18 MASSENA CODE § 290-20
290:14
§ 290-21. Discontinuance of water service to multiple dwellings.
C. Any contract between the Village of Massena and any water district outside of the
Village of Massena must embody, and does so by reference, the terms and
conditions of the Water Use Law for the Village of Massena, as it may be amended
from time to time.
A. The Water Department shall not discontinue water service to an entire multiple
dwelling (as defined in the Multiple Dwelling Law or the Multiple Residence Law)
located in this Village for nonpayment of bills rendered for service unless such
Department shall have given 15 days' notice of its intention so to discontinue as
follows:
(1) Such notice shall be served personally on the owner of the premises affected
or, in lieu thereof, to the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the last
preceding bill has been rendered and from whom or which the utility has
received payment therefor and to the superintendent or other person in charge
of the building or premises affected, if it can be readily ascertained that there
is such superintendent or other person in charge.
(2) In lieu of personal delivery of the person or persons, firm or corporation
specified in Subsection A(1) above, such notice may be mailed in a postpaid
wrapper to the address of such person or persons, firm or corporation.
(3) Additional notice.
(a) In addition to the notice prescribed by Subsection A(1) and (2) above, 15
days' written notice shall be:
[1] Posted in the public areas of such multiple dwelling;
[2] Mailed to the occupant of each unit in that multiple dwelling;
[3] Mailed to the local health officer and the director of the social
services district for the political subdivision in which the multiple
dwelling is located;
[4] If the multiple dwelling is located in a city or Village, mailed to the
Mayor thereof or, if there is none, to the Manager or, if the multiple
dwelling is located in a town, then mailed to the Town Supervisor;
and
[5] Mailed to the County Executive of the county in which the multiple
dwelling is located or, if there is none, then the Chairman of such
county's legislative body.
(b) Notice required by Subsection A(3)(a)[4] and [5] may be mailed to the
persons specified therein or to their respective designees. The notice
required by this subsection shall state the intended date of discontinuance
of service, the amount due for such service and the procedure by which
any tenant or public agency may make such payment and thereby avoid
discontinuance of service.
§ 290-20 WATER § 290-21
290:15
§ 290-22. Penalties for offenses.
(4) The written notice required by Subsection A(3)(a)[3], [4] and [5] above shall
be repeated not more than four days nor less than two days prior to such
discontinuance.
B. Whenever a notice of intention to discontinue utility service has been made
pursuant to the provisions of this section and obligations owed the Department have
been satisfied, the Department shall notify, in the same manner as it gave such
notice of intention, the occupant of each unit that the intention to discontinue
service no longer exists.
A. Upon any violation of the rules hereinbefore and hereinafter set forth, the Village
of Massena, by its duly constituted agency, may, upon following the process
outlined in § 290-21, discontinue the supply of water, and such supply shall not be
made available until all of the rules and regulations are complied with and until all
unpaid charges and rents shall be paid. The foregoing shall also include the charge
for turning off the water. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
B. Service of any notice authorized or directed by or on behalf of the Village of
Massena may be made upon the owner or consumer/owner, personally or by leaving
the same at the premises where the water is supplied or by sending the same by mail
to such party at the last address furnished to the Village.
§ 290-21 MASSENA CODE § 290-22
290:16
ARTICLE II
Emergencies Due to Freezing of Pipes
§ 290-23. Declaration of emergency.
Whenever the public health, welfare or order of the Village of Massena is endangered
due to the freezing of water service or supply pipes of the water consumer/owners of
the Village of Massena, the Board of Trustees of said Village is hereby empowered to
declare that a public emergency exists.
§ 290-24. Consumer/Owner agreement.
Upon the declaration by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Massena that a public
emergency exists due to the freezing of water service or supply pipes, the Village of
Massena, by its agents, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into a written
agreement to provide for the continuous flow of water at a minimum charge with any and
all property owners whose water service or supply pipes from the main to the building
are freezing or are in danger of freezing as determined by the Superintendent of Public
Works during the emergency declared to exist, upon written application by said property
owner and upon the following terms and conditions:
§ 290-25. Termination of emergency.
An emergency declared to exist hereunder shall cease and terminate on the first day of
May following its declaration, and the meters of water consumer/owners making the
agreement herein contemplated shall be read on that day and the water consumption
determined.
§ 290-26. Frozen private laterals. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
In the event a water supply lateral freezes and obstructs or minimizes the flow of water
to any residence, business or other structure, the Village of Massena is prohibited from
thawing or assisting in the repair of said frozen line.
A. The property owner agrees to pay and does pay to the Village of Massena for each
month for the duration of the emergency period a sum equal in amount to the
average monthly charge for water based on the last four quarterly meter readings,
and said Village of Massena, upon making such agreement, allows to such water
consumer/owner the amount of water that such average monthly charge will
purchase at the current water rate.
B. Upon the execution of such an agreement by the water consumer/owner and the
duly authorized agency of the Village of Massena, it shall be mutually agreed that
such consumer/owner will pay to said Village of Massena the scheduled rate per
1,000 gallons for all water used in excess of the allowance hereinbefore provided.
[Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 290-23 WATER § 290-26
290:17

Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 7.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 59.
Building construction — See Ch. 114.
Excavations — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 168.
Handbills, notices and billboards — See Ch. 180.
Housing Code — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 252.
§ 290-26 ZONING § 290-26
300:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Authority; title; purpose.
§ 300-2. Districts established; map.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 7, § 7-700, of
the Village Law of the State of New York and by Article 2, § 10, of the Municipal
Home Rule Law.
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the Village of
Massena" and is Chapter 300 of the Code of the Village of Massena.
C. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and to provide for: the location and
use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other
purposes; the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures; the percentage of lots that may be occupied; the size of yards and
other open spaces; and the density of population; the protection of solar access
for both residential and commercial use.
(2) For such purposes, this chapter shall divide the Village into districts and
provide penalties for the violation of the provisions thereof, for the
enforcement thereof and for a Board of Appeals with the power to determine
and vary the application thereof in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the chapter.
A. Districts. For the purpose of this chapter the Village of Massena is hereby divided
into eight classes of districts:
Residential A District (single-family residences) R-A
Residential B District (one and two-family residences) R-B
Residential C District (one-, two- and multifamily residences) R-C
Central Business District CBD
Commercial Transition District CTD
Commercial Auto-Related District CAR
Planned Development District PDD
Greenbelt-Preservation District G-PD
B. Map.
(1) The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled "Zoning Map of the Village of Massena, County of St. Lawrence,
State of New York," and signed by the Mayor and Clerk of the Board of
Trustees. A certified copy of said map shall be filed in the office of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other
information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter.
§ 300-1 ZONING § 300-2
300:3
§ 300-3. Existing structures and uses.
(2) The district boundary lines are intended in the main to follow lot lines as they
existed at the time of the enactment of this chapter; but where such a boundary
line obviously does not coincide with lot lines, or where it is not the center line
of a railroad right-of-way or street or of a watercourse, or the shoreline of a
body of water, or where it is not located by dimensions shown on the map, its
position shall be as shown on a set of detailed tax maps showing property
boundaries at the time of adoption. This set of maps shall be certified by the
Village Clerk and shall be kept at that office.
(3) In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the map, the location of
boundaries shown on the map shall be as interpreted by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(4) In all cases where a district boundary divides a lot and more than 50% of the
area of such lot lies in the less restricted district, the regulations prescribed by
this chapter for the less restricted district shall apply to such portion of the
more restricted portion of said lot which lies within 30 feet of such district
boundary. For the purposes of this section, the more restricted district shall be
deemed that district subject to regulations which prohibit the use intended to
be made of said lot or which require higher standards with respect to coverage,
yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements.
A. Zoning affects every structure and use. No building, structure, including billboards
and fences, or premises shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall
be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located. No existing yard shall be diminished below the requirements of this
chapter. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use shall
be considered as providing a required open space for any other building on the same
or any other lot.
B. Continuing existing uses. Any building, structure or use legally existing at the time
of enactment of this chapter may be continued even though such building, structure
or use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it
is located.
C. Extending existing uses or structures. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
complying with local laws in force prior to the effective date of this chapter if the
following is found to exist:
(1) A building permit shall have been duly issued prior to the date of the first
publication of notice of the public hearing on this chapter.
(2) The entire building shall have been completed in accordance with such plans
as have been filed with the Village within one year from the effective date of
this chapter.
D. Nonconforming uses changed. Any nonconforming use, if once changed to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be changed back to a
§ 300-2 MASSENA CODE § 300-3
300:4
§ 300-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate structure on the same lot as the principal
building, occupied or devoted to a use incidental to the principal use of the lot.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use of land or
of a building. In buildings restricted to residence use, the office of a professional and
customary home occupations shall be deemed accessory uses.
ALLEY — A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of access to
abutting properties and not intended for general traffic.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in
the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an enlargement, whether by extending on a
side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
AREA, NET SITE—The total area within the property lines, excluding external streets.
AUTO DEMOLITION — The removal of any parts from any type of motor vehicle for
the purpose of storage or resale.[Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
BABYSITTING AS A HOME OCCUPATION — Day care in a family home for not
more than two nonresident children. A local permit is required. Babysitting as a home
occupation is distinguished from babysitting on an intermittent and casual basis such as
is commonly done by a nonresident younger person in the home of a child.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its height above
the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for
the purposes of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the
average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for business or
dwelling purposes.
nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is not continued for a period of one
year, it shall not he reestablished as a nonconforming use.
E. Replacing damaged buildings. Any nonconforming building or structure damaged
more than 75% of the fair market value at the time of damage by fire, flood,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot or act of God cannot be so reconstructed and used
as before such calamity, but if less than 75% is so damaged, it may be so
reconstructed or used, provided that this is done within 12 months of such calamity.
Fair market value shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Assessor.
F. Restoring unsafe buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Any use not permitted by this chapter shall he deemed to be prohibited. Any list of
prohibited uses contained in any section of this chapter shall be deemed to be not
an exhaustive list but to have been included for the purposes of clarity and emphasis
and to illustrate, by example, some of the uses frequently proposed that are deemed
undesirable and incompatible.
§ 300-3 ZONING § 300-4
300:5
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — See "tourist home."
BOARD OF APPEALS — That Board established by the Village Board of Trustees
pursuant to Village Law § 7-712.
BUFFER ZONE/STRIP — Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or
to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open
space requirements of the zoning regulations are met. See area requirements for each
district.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered
porches, terraces and steps. All dimensions shall be measured between the exterior faces
of walls.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest the front
line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors, solar energy systems and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL—A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which the building is situated.
CAMPGROUND — A tract of land which is used or held out for the commercial
purpose of supplying to the public sites for two or more tents or recreational vehicles.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear height
below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be considered in
determining the permissible number of stories.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to members and their
guests, including premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes which are
not conducted primarily for gain, provided that there are not conducted any vending
stands, merchandising or commercial activities except as required generally for the
membership and purpose of such club.
CONDOMINIUM — An ownership arrangement in which the interior of a housing unit
is individually owned, while the exterior, including land facilities in the development, is
owned by all of the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. The owner has title to the
individual dwelling and a shared interest in the common elements.[Added 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
CONTRACTOR—A person or business that contracts with land owner or agents of any
building or lot in the Village to perform any work for compensation.[Added 9-4-2001
by L.L. No. 2-2001]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail business selling nondurable consumer products,
including but not limited to groceries, prepared and packaged foods and
gasoline.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building or by
§ 300-4 MASSENA CODE § 300-4
300:6
exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
COURT, OUTER—A court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior walls and
lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway,
alley or yard.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the combined
building area of all buildings.
DAY-CARE CENTER—Day care for three or more children away from their homes in
a day-care center, excluding day care in a family home. Care includes services provided
with or without compensation. Day-care centers are as otherwise defined and regulated
in NYCRR, Part 418. Both local and state permits are required.
DAY CARE IN A FAMILY HOME — Day care in a family home for three to six
nonresident children. Care includes services provided with or without compensation.
Both local and state permits are required. Day care in a family home shall be as defined
and regulated in NYCRR, Part 417.
DUMP — A lot or part thereof used primarily for the disposal, by abandonment,
dumping, land filling, burial, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose, of
garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof or
waste, scrap or discarded material of any kind.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE—A detached building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units, including a building used or designed as a residence for three or
more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein,
including apartment houses, apartment hotels and group houses.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof designed for complete
housekeeping facilities for one family, with a minimum area of 450 square feet.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit and maintain
a common household, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption, and also
including domestic servants and gratuitous guests. In the event that no two persons are
related by marriage or blood, the maximum number of persons shall not exceed seven.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the
center line of walls separating two buildings.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage which is accessory to a residential building and
is used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles owned or operated by the
residents of dwelling units located in such building, and not as a separate commercial
enterprise available to the public at large, and which has a capacity of not more than
three vehicles for each dwelling unit located in such building.[Amended 9-4-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage, other than a private garage, available to the public,
operated for gain and which is used for storage, repair, greasing, washing, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used
§ 300-4 ZONING § 300-4
300:7
for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating
substances, including any incidental sale of motor vehicle accessories, and which may or
may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning or otherwise servicing motor
vehicles, but not including body work or painting thereof by any means.
GRADE, FINISHED — The complete surfaces of lawns, walks and roads brought to
grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GREENHOUSE — A structure which is specifically designed, constructed and used for
the culture and propagation of horticultural commodities.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Unless otherwise specified, includes sanatorium,
hospital, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, group home, community
residence and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment and/or other care of ailments,
and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of
human ailments and conditions such as addiction, developmental disability or old age.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest
point of the structure.
HOME OCCUPATION —
An occupation or a profession which:
Is carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building or other
structure accessory thereto.
(1)
(2) Is operated by the family residing in the dwelling unit.
(3) Is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use as a dwelling unit.
Conforms to the following additional conditions:
Not more than one nonresident shall be employed in the home
occupation.
(a)
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign (except as permitted
under § 300-21), no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior
indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential
character of the premises.
(b)
(c) There shall be no sale of merchandise not produced on the premises.
No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be
produced.
(d)
Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
Artist studio, beauty parlors, real estate offices, insurance offices
and dressmaking.
[1]
The professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer,
architect or accountant.
[2]
(e)
(4)
A.
§ 300-4 MASSENA CODE § 300-4
300:8
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL — An establishment for the medical and/or surgical care of sick
or injured animals.
HOTEL — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of furnishing lodging
with or without meals for more than 15 transient guests for compensation.
JUNKYARD — The commercial use of more than 200 square feet of the open area of
any lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or scrap materials or for the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery
or parts thereof. (NOTE: Residential properties are subject to § 1242.10 of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and Chapter 186 of the Code of the
Village of Massena.
KENNEL — A structure used for the harboring of more than three dogs that are more
than six months old.
LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with individual washing machines
and dryers for use by retail customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an
accessory use in an apartment house or an apartment hotel.
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings or
by a dwelling unit and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of this chapter, having not less than the minimum area
and width required by this chapter for a lot in the district in which such land is situated
and having its principal frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may be
determined in accordance with the provisions of the law to be adequate as a condition of
the issuance of a building permit for a building on such land.
LOT, CORNER—A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection
of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a "corner lot"
if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING (MODULAR HOME or PANELIZED
CONSTRUCTION) — A dwelling unit which is constructed in accordance with the
regulations as specified in § 1210.1(a) of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code. For the purpose of these regulations, manufactured housing shall be
deemed the equal of site-built units.
[3] Teacher or musical instruction limited to a single pupil at a time.
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following:
automotive repair (including body work), restaurants or any use where merchandise
is kept for resale.
B.
§ 300-4 ZONING § 300-4
300:9
METAL SHIPPING CONTAINER — A standardized reusable steel box used for the
storage and movement of materials and products within a freight transport
system.[Added 12-15-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit intended for transport on a permanent chassis,
in one or more sections, designed for relocation with only minor preparation such as
reattachment of wheels, lights and towing apparatus and manufactured in accordance
with the regulations as specified in § 1221.1 of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
MOBILE HOME PARK—A site with required improvements and utilities for the longterm
parking and occupancy of mobile homes, which may include services and facilities
for the residents.
MOTEL — A multiple dwelling intended primarily for motorists and not over two
stories in height, in which the exit from each dwelling unit or sleeping room is directly
to the exterior. (Includes but is not limited to the terms "motor court," "motor hotel,"
"tourist court.")
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building or portion of a building arranged,
intended or designed to be used for making repairs to motor vehicles, including body
work and painting.
NONCONFORMING USE—A building, structure or use of land legally existing at the
time of enactment of this chapter and which does not conform to the regulations of the
district or zone in which it is situated.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care and instruction for
two or more children and operated on a regular basis. Both local and state permits are
required. A nursery school shall be as defined and regulated in NYCRR, Part 8, § 125.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME—Any licensed facility where, by reason of
advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, persons are housed or lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care for hire; a long-term care facility.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the
building.
PARKING SPACE — The area required for parking one automobile, which in this
chapter is held to be an area 20 feet long and nine feet wide.
PLANNING COMMISSION—That board established by the Village Board of Trustees
pursuant to Village Law § 7-718.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or place of business where professional
services are offered and does not mainly involve the sale of goods or the keeping of a
stock-in-trade. "Professional offices" include, but are not limited to: doctors, dentists,
surgeons, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners, accountants, real estate brokers,
insurance brokers, psychologists, veterinarians and chiropractors, or other duly licensed
or certified professional.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
ROOMING HOUSE—Any dwelling in which three or more persons either individually
or as families are housed or lodged for hire. Rooms rented in such houses shall not be
equipped with kitchen facilities.
SIGN — Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing
§ 300-4 MASSENA CODE § 300-4
300:10
the subject thereof to the attention of the public. The word "sign" includes the word
"billboard," but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city
or other political unit or of any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic,
professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar
energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used) and components for the
distribution of transformed energy. Passive solar energy systems are included in this
definition, but not to the extent that they fulfill other functions such as structural and
recreational.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE — A solar energy system that requires external
mechanical power to move the collected heat.[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between
any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET LINE—The dividing line between the street and the lot; also the front lot line.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including
swimming pools, patios or paved areas.
TOURIST HOME — An owner-occupied private dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for not more than 15 transient guests for
compensation, including bed and breakfast.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit sharing a minimum of one and a maximum of two
walls with an adjoining dwelling unit and having direct exterior access from the ground
floor.[Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes and standing on
its own wheels that is commonly pulled by a passenger car or a light truck.
USE—The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended
or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use."
WAREHOUSING—Terminal facilities available for a fee for the storage of goods, with
or without maintenance facilities.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line
of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be
measured along the shortest distance between the front line of the building and the street
line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of
the main building and shall not project into a required front yard.
YARD, REAR—An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, between
the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the
lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, situated
between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the
§ 300-4 ZONING § 300-4
300:11
rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
§ 300-4 MASSENA CODE § 300-4
300:12
ARTICLE II
Uses in Residential Districts
§ 300-5. Residential A District R-A.
The purpose of this district is to maintain and to protect the integrity of single-family
residential areas and compatible public uses by requiring lot and building standards and
prohibiting the intermixture of single-family dwellings with incompatible uses.
A. Principal uses permitted (limited to not more than one of the following specified
purposes):
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Municipally owned parks and/or recreational areas.
B. Accessory structures permitted:
(1) Covered storage for firewood.
(2) Doghouse.
(3) Gazebo or screened enclosure.
(4) Greenhouse.
(5) Heat pump, ground, water and/or air-to-air.
(6) Metal shipping container (see § 300-8). [Added 12-15-2020 by L.L. No.
3-202024]
(7) Playhouses.
(8) Residential garages.
(9) Tool/storage building.
(10) Wading/swimming pools.
C. Accessory structures permitted after site plan approval:
(1) Satellite dishes.
(2) Active solar energy system.
D. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Separate living quarters within the main residence for servants or family
members not to exceed more than two adults.
E. Accessory uses permitted to the occupant after site plan approval (limited to not
more than one of the following uses):
24. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection B(6) through (9) as Subsection B(7) through (10),
respectively.
§ 300-5 ZONING § 300-5
300:13
§ 300-6. Residential B District R-B.
The purpose of this district is to maintain and protect the integrity of residential areas
designed to accommodate a mixture of single- and two-family structures and compatible
public uses by requiring lot and building standards and prohibiting the intermixture of
single- and two-family dwellings with incompatible uses.
(1) Home occupation.
(2) Roomers (limit of three people).
F. Within any Residential A District as indicated on the Village of Massena Zoning
Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for any industry, trade, manufacturing or commercial
purpose except as listed above.
A. Principal uses permitted (limited to not more than one of the following specified
purposes):
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Municipally owned parks and/or recreational areas.
B. Special uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Community center.
(2) Day-care center (for not more than eight children).
(3) Place of worship.
C. Accessory structures permitted:
(1) Covered storage for firewood.
(2) Doghouse.
(3) Gazebo or screened enclosure.
(4) Greenhouse.
(5) Heat pump, ground, water and/or air-to-air.
(6) Metal shipping container (see § 300-8). [Added 12-15-2020 by L.L. No.
3-202025]
(7) Playhouses.
(8) Residential garages.
(9) Tool/storage building.
25. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection C(6) through (9) as Subsection C(7) through (10),
respectively.
§ 300-5 MASSENA CODE § 300-6
300:14
§ 300-7. Residential C District R-C.
The purpose of this district is to maintain and protect the integrity of multiple residential
areas by requiring lot and building standards and prohibiting the intermixture of single-,
two-family and multiple residences with incompatible uses.
(10) Wading/swimming pools.
D. Accessory structures permitted after site plan review:
(1) Satellite dishes.
(2) Active solar energy system.
E. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Separate living quarters within main residence for servants or family members
not to exceed more than two adults.
F. Accessory uses permitted to the occupant after site plan review (limited to not more
than one of the following uses):
(1) Home occupation.
(2) Roomers (limit of three people).
G. Within any Residential B District as indicated on the Village of Massena Zoning
Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for any industry, trade, manufacturing or commercial
purpose except as listed above.
A. Principal uses permitted (limited to not more than one of the following specified
purposes):
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Municipally owned parks and/or recreational areas.
B. Special uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Multiple dwelling.
(2) Community center.
(3) Day-care center (for not more than 12 children).
(4) Place of worship.
(5) Health care facility.
(6) Mobile home park.
(7) Rooming house.
§ 300-6 ZONING § 300-7
300:15
§ 300-8. Additional standards for all residential districts.
C. Accessory structures permitted:
(1) Covered storage of firewood.
(2) Doghouse.
(3) Gazebo or screened enclosure.
(4) Greenhouse.
(5) Heat pump, ground, water and/or air-to-air.
(6) Metal shipping container (see § 300-8). [Added 12-15-2020 by L.L. No.
3-202026]
(7) Playhouses.
(8) Residential garages.
(9) Tool/storage building.
(10) Wading/swimming pools.
D. Accessory structures permitted after site plan review:
(1) Satellite dishes.
(2) Active solar energy system.
E. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Separate living quarters within main residence for servants or family members
not to exceed more than two adults.
F. Accessory uses permitted to the occupant after site plan review (limited to not more
than one of the following uses):
(1) Home occupation.
(2) Roomers (limit of three people).
(3) Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home.
G. Within any Residential C District as indicated on the Village of Massena Zoning
Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for any industry, trade, manufacturing or commercial
purpose except as listed above.
A. Residential garages. Garage space or current parking space may be provided for
three motor vehicles on any such lot. Garage or parking space for one additional
motor vehicle may be provided for each 2,000 square feet by which the area of the
26. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection C(6) through (9) as Subsection C(7) through (10),
respectively.
§ 300-7 MASSENA CODE § 300-8
300:16
lot exceeds 7,000 square feet. A garage for more than five vehicles shall be
at least 50 feet from every lot line. One vehicle per dwelling unit may be a
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it does not exceed one ton capacity. Space
for one motor vehicle, which must be noncommercial, may be rented to persons not
resident on the same lot.
B. Outside storage of recreational equipment. Outside storage of recreational vehicles
(including but not limited to snowmobiles, watercrafts, trailers and campers, etc.)
shall not be allowed in any front yard nor within 10 feet of any side or rear lot line.
[Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 8-19-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
C. Antennas.
(1) Receiving-only antennas. No person shall install any satellite antenna, radio
tower or parabolic dish without a permit. No such installation shall be
permitted in front of the principal building on the lot nor within 10 feet of any
other lot line. No such installation shall be higher than 10 feet above the
existing roofline or 35 feet above the grade, whichever is less. This section
shall apply only to those devices measuring over two feet in diameter.
(2) Sending antennas. No person shall install any satellite antenna, radio tower,
parabolic dish or other sending antenna or device without a permit. No such
installation shall be permitted in front of the principal building on the lot nor
within 10 feet of any other lot line. No such installation shall be higher than 50
feet above grade.
D. Babysitting and day-care uses.
(1) Babysitting as a home occupation. Area standards for the district must be met,
including all setbacks, lot minimums and off-street parking.
(2) Day care in a family home as a home occupation.
(a) Minimum area standards for the district must be met.
(b) Employees must be resident family members.
(c) Off-street parking must be provided for two additional passenger vehicles
to provide for loading space.
(d) Fencing and screening shall be as determined by the Planning
Commission during site plan review.
(e) Signs shall conform to standards for home occupations.
(f) A copy of a completed application to the NYS Department of Social
Services under NYCRR Part 417 must accompany the application for site
plan approval.
(3) Day-care center.
(a) In residential districts, minimum area standards for two-family residences
must be met.
§ 300-8 ZONING § 300-8
300:17
(b) Off-street parking must be provided for each employee, and one space
must be provided for loading for every five children for which the center
is licensed.
(c) Fencing of the play yard is required to a height of no less than four feet
and of a type approved by the Planning Board.
(d) Signs must meet the requirements of § 300-21.
(e) A copy of a completed, current application to the New York State
Department of Social Services under NYCRR Part 418 must accompany
the application for site plan approval.
E. Additional standards for multiple dwellings and/or mobile home parks.
(1) Open space and/or recreation area. In all Residential C Districts, there shall be
set aside a common open space and/or recreation area, the area of which shall
at least be equal to 5% of the total site area.
(2) Area lighting. Area lighting shall be required and shown on the site plan as
certified by the Superintendent of Public Works as being the equivalent of
Village streetlighting.
(3) Sidewalks. Sidewalks at least five feet wide shall be provided on at least one
side of all interior roadways.
F. Additional standards for bed-and-breakfast/tourist home.
(1) The residence shall continue to appear as a private dwelling.
(2) Guest parking shall be provided at the rate of one space per guest room and
shall not be located in front of the principal building on the lot nor in any
required side or rear yards.
(3) Signs shall be regulated as in § 300-21.
(4) Area lighting shall not adversely affect any abutting properties.
G. Metal shipping containers shall not be permitted on any residential lot for more than
90 days in one calendar year. Metal shipping containers are not permitted in any
Village right-of-way. [Added 12-15-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
§ 300-8 MASSENA CODE § 300-8
300:18
ARTICLE III
Uses in Commercial Districts
§ 300-9. Central Business District CBD.
The Central Business District CBD forms the central business district of the Village.
The intent is to provide for areas suitable for a concentration of retail, commercial
and business uses and related compatible uses typical of downtown Central Business
Districts. The CBD caters to the needs of the pedestrian consumer. Site plan review
is necessary in order to assure a measure of consistency and compatibility of use and
designs.
A. Principal uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Amusements.
(2) Banks.
(3) Business offices.
(4) Convenience services.
(5) Drinking establishments.
(6) Hotels.
(7) Professional offices.
(8) Retail services.
(9) Retail stores.
(10) Restaurant.
(11) Day-care centers. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
(12) Banks. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
(13) Micro breweries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(14) Brewpubs. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(15) Taprooms. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(16) Micro wineries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(17) Micro distilleries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
B. Accessory uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Apartments (above first floor of commercial building).
C. Within any Central Business District CBD as indicated on the Village of Massena
Zoning Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged or
designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any industrial or manufacturing purpose
except as listed above.
§ 300-9 ZONING § 300-9
300:19
§ 300-10. Commercial Transition District CTD.
Commercial Transition Districts CTD recognize and provide for transition districts
commonly located between a commercial core and its outlying vehicular-oriented
satellite commercial districts. Land uses are typically a mixture of business, commercial
and high-density residential activities. Site plan review is necessary in order to assure
a measure of consistency and compatibility of use and design and to minimize adverse
effects on traffic flow on the major thoroughfares leading to the Central CBD District.
D. Off-street parking and loading. All uses shall be subject to all applicable off-street
parking and loading requirements set forth in § 300-22.
E. Signs. All uses shall be subject to all requirements set forth in § 300-21.
A. Principal uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home.
(2) Bus terminals.
(3) Business offices.
(4) Convenience services.
(5) Convenience stores.
(6) Funeral home (undertaker).
(7) Gasoline stations.
(8) Health care facility.
(9) Hotel.
(10) Motel.
(11) Newspaper/publishing.
(12) Professional offices.
(13) Radio-television studios.
(14) Residential uses.
(15) Restaurants.
(16) Retail services.
(17) Retail stores.
(18) Rooming houses.
(19) Social/fraternal organizations.
(20) Day-care centers. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
(21) Banks. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
§ 300-9 MASSENA CODE § 300-10
300:20
§ 300-11. Commercial Auto-Related District CAR.
Commercial Auto-Related Districts CAR provide for land uses which commonly depend
upon the motoring public and which typically require larger land areas and more offstreet
parking than would be economical in the Village center. They may also have
aesthetic characteristics incompatible with the general nature of other commercial
districts. Site plan review is necessary to ensure proper aesthetic and traffic controls.
(22) Micro breweries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(23) Brewpubs. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(24) Taprooms. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(25) Micro wineries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(26) Micro distilleries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(27) Drinking establishments. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
B. Accessory uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Apartments (above first floor of commercial building).
C. Within any Commercial Transition CTD District as indicated on the Village of
Massena Zoning Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged
or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any industrial or manufacturing
purpose.
D. Off-street parking and loading. All uses shall be subject to all applicable off-street
parking and loading requirements set forth in § 300-22.
E. Signs. All uses shall be subject to all applicable requirements as set forth in
§ 300-21.
A. Principal uses permitted after site plan review:
(1) Animal hospital.
(2) Auto parts sales and installation.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home.
(4) Car wash.
(5) Convenience services.
(6) Convenience stores.
(7) Gasoline stations.
(8) Health care facility.
(9) Hotels.
(10) Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments and plants.
§ 300-10 ZONING § 300-11
300:21
(11) Motels.
(12) Motor vehicle sales.
(13) Motor vehicle repair shops, including body shops.
(14) Professional building.
(15) Rental/leasing of cars and trucks.
(16) Retail store complexes (exceeding 5,000 square feet floor space). [Amended
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(17) Restaurant.
(18) Truck terminal.
(19) Warehousing and storage.
(20) Day-care centers. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
(21) Banks. [Added 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
(22) Micro breweries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(23) Brewpubs. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(24) Taprooms. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(25) Micro wineries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(26) Micro distilleries. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(27) Drinking establishments. [Added 8-18-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
B. Within any Commercial Auto-Related CAR District as indicated on the Village of
Massena Zoning Map, no building, structure or premises shall be used or arranged
or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any industrial or manufacturing
purpose.
C. Off-street parking and loading. All uses shall be subject to all applicable off-street
parking and loading requirements set forth in § 300-22.
D. Signs. All uses shall be subject to all applicable requirements set forth in § 300-21.
§ 300-11 MASSENA CODE § 300-11
300:22
ARTICLE IV
Special Districts
§ 300-12. Planned Development Districts.
The purpose of this district is to provide a means of developing land areas within the
community considered appropriate for residential, recreational, commercial or industrial
use or a combination of these uses in a compatible and economical manner by a single
developer while ensuring the public health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience
of the public in general and of the occupants of the immediate neighborhood to the
maximum extent possible.
A. Planned residential district (PRD).
(1) Limited to the following specified purposes after site plan review:
(a) Apartments.
(b) Cluster developments/zero lot line developments.
(c) Playgrounds, parks and recreational facilities.
(d) Single-family residence.
(e) Two-family residence.
(f) Townhouse/condominium.
(2) Accessory structures permitted:
(a) Covered storage for firewood.
(b) Doghouse.
(c) Garages.
(d) Gazebo or screened enclosure.
(e) Greenhouse.
(f) Heat pump, ground, water and/or air-to-air.
(g) Playhouses.
(h) Tool/storage building.
(i) Wading/swimming pools.
(3) Accessory uses permitted:
(a) Separate living quarters within principal residence for servants or family
members not to exceed two adults.
B. Planned Commercial District (PCD), limited to the following specified purposes
after site plan review:
§ 300-12 ZONING § 300-12
300:23
(1) Entertainment/amusements.
(2) Professional buildings and area of Massena Memorial Hospital land.
[Amended 9-6-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
(3) Restaurant.
(4) Retail stores.
C. Planned Unit Development (PUD), limited to the following specified purposes after
site plan review:
(1) Any combination of uses permitted in the PRD and PCD Districts.
D. Planned Industrial Development (PID), limited to the following specified purposes
after site plan review: [Amended 4-17-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
(1) Any use permitted in the Planned Commercial District.
(2) Any combination of industry (assembly and/or manufacturing) and
warehousing.
E. Physical standards.
(1) Residential standards.
(a) District area minimum: two acres.
(b) Area minimum per dwelling unit: as per previous district requirements.
(c) Required setback. No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any other
building, and no building shall be closer than 60 feet to any boundary line
of the district. Setback from any street shall be as per previous district
requirement.
(d) Lot coverage maximum: as per previous district requirement.
(2) Commercial standards.
(a) District area minimum: 3 1/2 acres.
(b) Required setback. No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any lot
boundary line, and no building shall be closer than 60 feet to any district
boundary line.
(c) Lot coverage maximum: 40%.
(3) Industrial standards.
(a) District area minimum: five acres.
(b) Required setback. No building shall be closer than 100 feet to any lot
boundary line, and no building shall be closer than 100 feet to any district
boundary line.
(c) Lot coverage maximum: 35%.
§ 300-12 MASSENA CODE § 300-12
300:24
F. Review process. The Planned Development District application and review process
shall be as follows (before the formal review process begins, the applicant shall
meet with the Planning Board for an informal preliminary conference to discuss the
complete review process):
(1) Application for the establishment of Planned Development Districts.
(a) Application for creation of a Planned Residential, Planned Commercial,
Planned Industrial or Planned Unit Development District may be made
by any party with legitimate interest in the parcel(s) of land in question.
Ownership or holding a bona fide purchase offer shall be considered a
legitimate interest.
(b) Preliminary application (the applicant shall provide 17 complete copies,
including all maps, drawings and any text) for creation of a new district
shall be made to the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall, within five
working days, compare the preliminary application with the list of
required submissions given below and refer the preliminary application
to the Village Planning Commission if complete or shall return it if
deemed incomplete. The Village Clerk may confer with the Chairperson
of the Planning Commission and other Village officials in making the
determination of completeness. The Clerk's determination shall not
preclude the Planning Commission or Village Board from requiring
additional information from the developer. The Village Clerk shall make
any required referrals and notifications necessary pursuant to state law,
including NYCRR Part 617 (the state environmental quality review) and
§ 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
(c) The Planning Commission shall review such preliminary application. The
Planning Commission may require such changes as are found to be
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, to protect the
established permitted uses in the vicinity and to promote the orderly
growth and sound development of the Village. In evaluating the proposal
and in reaching its determination regarding the preliminary application,
the Planning Commission shall consider and make findings regarding
those considerations set forth under Subsection F(3), Applicable
considerations. The Planning Commission shall have the right to hold a
public hearing on the proposal and may hold such a hearing in
conjunction with the Village Board. The Planning Commission shall meet
and may recommend approval, disapproval or approval with
modifications. Such decision shall be reached within 45 days of referral
by the Village Clerk.
(d) Following the decision by the Planning Commission, the developer shall
have the right to withdraw and to resubmit the application. Such
resubmittal shall be considered a final application and shall be referred by
the Village Clerk as provided by Subsection F(1)(b) above. Should the
developer choose, the unmodified application may stand as the final
application. As in Subsection F(1)(c) above, the Planning Commission
shall reach a decision on a final application within 45 days of referral by
the Village Clerk.
§ 300-12 ZONING § 300-12
300:25
(e) The Planning Commission shall forward any final application to the
Village Board, together with a report of any public hearing it may have
held and a report of its action, within five days of its action.
(f) The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on the Zoning Map
amendment to create a Planned Development District and consider
thereat the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission and
all other comments, reviews and statements pertaining thereto. The Board
of Trustees may amend the Zoning Map to establish and define the type
and boundaries of a Planned Development District, and in so doing may
state specific conditions, in addition to those provided by this section,
further defining the nature or design of development. Should the Board
of Trustees wish to act contrary to any recommendation for disapproval
or approval with modifications made by the Village Planning
Commission or any such recommendation made by the County Planning
Board under § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, it may do so only
with a majority plus one vote of its full, authorized membership of five.
(2) For the approval of development within an established Planned Development
District:
(a) Amendment of the Zoning Map shall not constitute authorization for
development within the district.
(b) For such authorization, after a Planned Development District has been
established, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission such
plans and specifications, supporting documents and data as required
under final plan as set forth under § 300-31D(2), required submissions for
a final plan and such further documentation as may be required by the
Commission. The Planning Commission shall make its decision
regarding development within 45 days of submission of the final plan as
approved by the Village Board. This decision by the Planning
Commission shall constitute site plan review as provided in § 300-31.
(c) All conditions imposed by the Board of Trustees in its amendment of the
Zoning Map and all subsequent conditions required by the Planning
Commission during the site plan review shall not lapse or be waived as a
result of any change in tenancy or ownership of any or all of the
designated district.
(d) If construction of the development in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications has not been conclusively initiated within one year
after the date of approval of the site plan, all permits shall become null
and void, the approval shall be deemed revoked and vacated and the
Board of Trustees shall amend the map to restore the zoning designation
for the district to that which it had been prior to the application.
(3) Applicable considerations. The Planning Commission shall, in its review and
recommendation, and the Board of Trustees shall, in making its determination,
make written findings that the plans and facts submitted establish that:
(a) The proposal is consistent with the latest official Village Master Plan and
§ 300-12 MASSENA CODE § 300-12
300:26
as such plan may be subsequently amended, together with the regulations
and the purposes of the Planned Development District process.
(b) The proposal is consistent with the established character and adjoining
uses of the neighborhood and will provide all reasonable safeguards for
the protection of this character and property values.
(c) The proposal will be so located as to be efficiently served by the
trafficways, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater drainage, refuse
collection, school and fire and police protection systems.
(d) The proposal provides adequately for the movement of vehicular traffic
according to the following:
[1] It relates properly in terms of traffic volume, capacity and points of
access and egress to the existing road system outside the proposed
district.
[2] Internal roadways will be designed and improved according to
Village standards.
(e) The proposal provides adequately for all on-site utilities, including water,
sanitary and storm sewer, electric, gas and telephone services.
(f) The proposed locations of principal and accessory buildings on the site in
relation to that site, to one another and to adjoining uses are satisfactory.
(g) The proposed types of construction, building facade and bulk and height
of all structures are appropriate to their function and to structures in the
adjoining neighborhoods.
(h) The proposal provides for such open space, recreation areas, buffer areas
and pedestrian access and circulation as appropriate to the proposed uses.
(i) The proposal includes appropriate provisions for signing, lighting,
fencing and landscaping.
(4) Required submissions. Plans and data to be submitted in accord with the
procedure as outlined above shall be prepared by an engineer or architect
licensed by the State of New York and shall be as follows unless specifically
waived by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees:
(a) Preliminary plan shall include the following: a site plan with 17 copies,
at a preferred scale of one inch equals 40 feet, to include:
[1] Title, scale, North arrow and date.
[2] Property boundaries and Tax Map number of the parcel and all
adjoining parcels and the ownership of same.
[3] Existing site characteristics, including soils, drainage, vegetation
and topography (two-foot contours).
[4] Existing and proposed land use on and within 100 yards of the
§ 300-12 ZONING § 300-12
300:27
parcel.
[5] Lot layout or building arrangement, existing and proposed.
[6] Street layout, including right-of-way and improved surface widths.
[7] Location of utilities on and adjacent to the tract and proposed
connection thereto, including water supply, sewage disposal,
electric, telephone and other service facilities and solid waste
disposal.
[8] Location, dimension and purpose of any easement and the owner(s)
thereof.
[9] Location, dimension and description of land or facilities to be
dedicated or reserved for public use.
[10] Preliminary drawings for buildings to be constructed, including floor
plans, exterior elevations and sections.
[11] Off-street parking and service areas proposed.
[12] Landscaping and site amenities proposed, including trees to be
removed which exceed four inches in diameter three feet off the
ground.
[13] Total acreage of tract.
[14] Proposed timetable or stage for sale or development.
[15] Type of project, i.e., sale of lots, buildings, condominiums, etc.
[16] Proposed number of lots, typical lot size or building arrangement.
[17] Signs, including type, location and size, lighting and content.
[18] Names and addresses of owner(s) and developer.
(b) Final plan shall include the following: a site plan with 17 copies, scale to
be the same as for the preliminary plan, showing the following:
[1] Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines, easements and individual
lot lines with accurate dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves and the location and description of all
monuments.
[2] Reference to adjoining platted land or names of owners of record of
unplatted lands.
[3] Typical cross sections of streets, including pavement, shoulders,
ditches and walks, and cross sections of drainage easements, as
necessary.
[4] Profiles of street center lines showing vertical curve data, slopes of
tangents and elevations of street intersections and other critical
§ 300-12 MASSENA CODE § 300-12
300:28
§ 300-13. Greenbelt-Preservation District G-PD.
points.
[5] Utilities plans for water, gas and electric services, as applicable.
[6] Profiles of storm and sanitary sewers, if any, showing diameter of
pipe and distance between manholes.
[7] Final drawings for buildings to be constructed, including floor plans,
exterior elevations and sections, including sufficient data to assure
that applicable provisions of New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be complied with.
[8] Landscaping, lighting and all site improvements, including grading
plan.
(c) Accompanying development data shall be as is appropriate to the project,
including:
[1] Application and required fee, if any.
[2] Certification of title showing that applicant is the landowner or
possesses a signed purchase agreement.
[3] Certification by licensed land surveyor of survey and plat accuracy.
[4] Protective covenants in form for recording, including covenants
governing the maintenance of unceded public space or reservations.
[5] Offers of cession to dedicate streets, easements, open space and
other facilities.
[6] Endorsement and approval by the State Health Department, where
applicable, of sewer and water facility drawings and proposals.
[7] Copies of agreement showing the manner in which areas reserved by
the developer are to be maintained.
[8] Such performance bond or other acceptable guaranty to cover the
full cost of improvements proposed to be dedicated to the Village as
may be deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees.
[9] Any other data as may be required for the administration and
enforcement of this section.
(d) As-built drawings shall be required as follows: Construction drawings for
underground installations or any facility or improvement to be offered for
dedication to the Village will be filed upon completion of same. No
performance bond or other guaranty shall be released or certificate of
compliance issued until satisfactory as-built drawings have been filed
with and approved by the Board of Trustees.
A. The purpose of this district is to protect special and/or unique natural areas of the
§ 300-12 ZONING § 300-13
300:29
§ 300-13.1. Downtown Overlay District. [Added 8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
Village, including both public and private lands.
B. This district shall include: [Amended 5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
(1) All lands publicly and privately owned which are located south of the Grasse
River between the Main Street and Parker Avenue bridges and within the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's one-hundred-year flood hazard
boundary areas, but not to exceed 175 feet from the river bank. [Amended
7-16-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991]
(2) All lands with a slope of 15%.
(3) All Village lands used as parks or recreation areas.
C. No land shall be used, no fill added and no change in the natural grade shall be
made unless a permit has been authorized by the Village Planning Commission.
D. Permitted uses: parking, outdoor recreation, including but not limited to temporary
seasonal nonpermanent docks, playgrounds and parks, picnic areas, tennis courts,
walkways, ballparks and fishing access areas.
E. Site plan review shall be required for all uses in this district.
A. Findings and purpose. The Village of Massena finds that the integrity of site and
architectural design features within its downtown core area is a critical part of the
lifeblood to long-term community and economic development. Therefore, the
Village defined a set of site and architectural design standards intended to:
(1) Enhance the aesthetics of the downtown core area of the Village;
(2) Guide the design of future development and improvements to existing
structures within the downtown core; and
(3) Improve the public realm to create a positive pedestrian experience, enhance
the area's image, and generate long-term economic growth. It is the purpose of
this section to establish a set of requirements and recommendations for
renovation and development projects within the Downtown Overlay District.
B. Boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Overlay District are shown on the
official Zoning Map for the Village of Massena and are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk.
C. Applicability. The Downtown Overlay District is a designation in addition to the
existing zoning districts. The base zoning districts provide requirements regarding
permitted and conditionally permitted land uses, development standards, and
regulations.
D. Projects subject to compliance within Downtown Overlay District. Principal
projects subject to compliance with the Downtown Overlay District are identified
below.
(1) New construction: any new construction or addition to an existing structure
§ 300-13 MASSENA CODE § 300-13.1
300:30
that alters the exterior appearance of a building or site. Internal tenant
improvements are not subject to compliance with this chapter.
(2) Exterior modification of an existing structure: any exterior modification of an
existing structure, including but not limited to facade renovation, new and/or
additional windows and doors, and roof- or ground-mounted mechanical
equipment.
(3) Modification to site layout: any modification to site layout or site
improvements, including but not limited to parking, walls and fencing,
circulation, landscaping, accessory structures, or trash enclosures.
(4) Signage: installation of new signage or replacement of signs.
(5) Relocation of an existing structure.
(6) Erection of a fence or wall.
(7) Erection or alteration of a canopy or awning.
(8) Changes to exterior lighting and utilities.
(9) Parking facilities.
E. Exemptions from Downtown Overlay District requirements. The Village Zoning
Board of Appeals may approve a variance from the Downtown Overlay District
requirements for a project; however, it is contrary to the intent of this section to
circumvent the need for compliance with the Downtown Overlay District
requirements.
F. Downtown Overlay District standards.
(1) The Village of Massena design standards for the Downtown Overlay District
document,27 adopted by the Village Board on August 21, 2018, by Resolution
32-2018 and as may be amended thereafter, shall be used as an appendix to
this section, as an official listing of requirements for the Downtown Overlay
District.
(2) Ordinary maintenance and repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any existing exterior
architectural feature on any property in the Downtown Overlay District that
does not involve a change in design, material, or exterior appearance.
G. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State.
27. Said document is on file in the Village offices.
§ 300-13.1 ZONING § 300-13.1
300:31

ARTICLE V
Bulk and Design Standards
§ 300-14. Area requirements.
§ 300-15. Height restrictions.
A. Area restrictions. The maximum area of the principal building in relation to total lot
area shall be as follows for the several districts:


B. Minimum lot size. 
Across districts, the minimum lot size is 1,500 square feet.
The minimum area of lots, except for those existing at the time
of enactment of this chapter, shall be as follows in the several districts:
District
Size
(square feet)
Residential A 7,200 (9,600 for corner lots)
Residential B
1-family 7,200 (9,600 for corner lots)
2-family 12,000 (15,000 for corner lots)
Residential C
1-family 7,200 (9,600 for corner lots)
2-family 12,000 (15,000 for corner lots)
Multifamily 5,000 per dwelling unit
Central Business CBD 1,500
Commercial
Transition CTD
15,000
Commercial Auto-
Related CAR
30,000
District Maximum Lot Coverage
Residential A R-A 30%
Residential B R-B 30%
Residential C R-C 30%
Central Business CBD See §§ 300-16, 300-17 and 300-18
Commercial Transition CTD 50%
Commercial Auto-Related CAR 30%

A. The restrictions as to the height of buildings and structures in the several districts
shall be as follows:
§ 300-14 ZONING § 300-15
300:33
§ 300-16. Front yards.
District
Height
(feet)
Residential A 35
Residential B 35
Residential C 40
Central Business CBD 50
Commercial Transition CTD 35
Commercial Auto-Related CAR 40
Planned Development PDD As per original district
B. Exception to height limits. The provisions of this section shall not apply to church
spires and belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, flues, smokestacks, masts* or
aerials* that, in the aggregate, occupy not more than 5% of the roof area. (*NOTE:
Excepted in commercial districts only.)
A. Requirements.
(1) In the various districts, the required front yard, except as hereinafter
prescribed, shall be as follows:
District
Least Distance From Street Lot Line
Back to Any Part of Building or
Structure
(feet)
Residential A 30
Residential B 30
Residential C 30
Central Business CBD 0
Commercial Transition CTD 40
Commercial Auto-Related
CAR
60
(2) Corner lots.
(a) Obstruction to vision at street intersections. At all street intersections in
all residence districts and in all other districts requiring a front yard of 15
feet or more, no obstruction to vision exceeding 30 inches in height above
curb level shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle
formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn between points
along such street lines 30 feet in distance from their point of intersection.
(b) On a corner lot, front yards are required on both street frontages and one
yard other than the front yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard and the
§ 300-15 MASSENA CODE § 300-16
300:34
§ 300-17. Side yards.
other or others, side yards.
(3) Through lots. On a through lot, front yards are required on all street lines.
(4) Fences, hedges and terraces shall be set back at least two feet from the street
lot lines to permit snow removal.
B. Exceptions to front yard requirements.
(1) If the alignment of existing buildings within 100 feet on each side of the lot in
question and within the same block and district is nearer the street than the
setback line above prescribed, any building or structure may extend as near the
street lot line as the average formed by the prescribed setback and such
existing alignment.
(2) Bay or bow windows, chimneys, cornices or cantilevered roof may project not
more than three feet into a required yard. Belt courses, windowsills and other
ornamental features may project not more than six inches into a required yard.
Fences or walls not over six feet in height may be erected anywhere on the lot,
except as set forth in § 300-15.
(3) Fences or walls with height in excess of six feet shall conform to requirements
set forth herein for buildings. Except as otherwise provided in § 300-15, no
wall or fence in excess of three feet in height shall be erected in the front yard
of any residence district.
(4) Paved areas, other than such as are needed for access to the buildings on the
lot, shall not be closer than 15 feet to a street lot line or four feet to any lot line.
(5) Unenclosed stairways and landings not larger than four feet by five feet which
serve a first-floor entrance may not project more than a combined eight feet
into the required front yard.
A. Side yard restrictions. In any residence district, a yard extending through from the
front to the rear yard is required along each side lot line, except as hereinafter
prescribed. The restrictions as to side yards in the various districts shall be as
follows:
District
Least Width of Any Side Yard
(feet)
Residential A 10
Residential B 10
Residential C 10
Central Business CBD* 0
Commercial Transition CTD* 10
Commercial Auto-Related CAR* 10
§ 300-16 ZONING § 300-17
300:35
§ 300-18. Rear yards.
[*NOTE: Where any commercial lot abuts a residential district boundary, then that
side yard shall be a minimum of 30 feet.]
B. Side walls not parallel to lot lines. Where a side wall of a building is not parallel to
the side lot line, the required width of any side yard may be taken as the average
width, provided that said side yard shall not be narrower than five feet at any point.
C. Accessory structure: distance from lot line. In any residence district, no part of any
detached garage or other accessory storage structure situated within 55 feet of any
street line shall extend into any required side yard. Elsewhere on the lot it may not
be closer than four feet to the side lot line.
D. Mutual garages across lot lines. In any residence district, a detached garage may be
built across a common lot line by mutual agreement between adjoining property
owners when both lots are each 60 feet or less in width.
E. Fences and walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required side yard, other than
a retaining wall, shall be more than six feet high. Fences or walls not over six feet
in height may be erected anywhere on the lot, except as set forth in § 300-15.
F. Projections into side yards. Bay or bow windows, chimneys, cornices or
cantilevered roof may project not more than three feet into a required yard. Belt
courses, windowsills and other ornamental features may project not more than six
inches into a required yard.
G. Paved areas, other than such as are needed for access to the buildings on the lot,
shall not be closer than four feet to any lot line.
H. Unenclosed stairways and landings not larger than four feet by four feet which
serve a first-floor entrance may project no more than a total of four feet into the
required side yard.
§ 300-17 MASSENA CODE § 300-18
300:36
§ 300-19. Lot width.
A. Rear yard restrictions. In every district there shall be a rear yard on every lot, except
as hereinafter specified:
District
Least Distance from Rear Lot Line to
Principal Building
(feet)
Residential A 25
Residential B 30
Residential C 40
Central Business CBD* 15
Commercial Transition CTD* 20
Commercial Auto-Related CAR* 30
[*NOTE: Where any commercial lot abuts a residential district boundary, then that
rear yard shall be a minimum of 30 feet]
B. Projections into rear yards.
(1) Chimneys and fireproof outside stairways to upper stories may project not over
3 1/2 feet into a required rear yard.
(2) Unenclosed stairways and landings not larger than four feet by five feet which
serve a first-floor entrance may project no more than a combined eight feet
into the required rear yard.
(3) Cornices, bay windows, bow windows, chimneys or cantilevered roofs may
project not more than three feet into a required yard. Belt courses, windowsills
and other ornamental features may project not more than six inches into a
required yard. Fences or walls not over six feet in height may be erected
anywhere on the lot, except as set forth in § 300-15.
C. Accessory structure: distance from lot line. In any residence district, no part of any
detached garage or other accessory storage structure shall extend to within 10 feet
of the rear lot line.
D. Fences and walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required rear yard, other than
a retaining wall, shall be more than six feet high.
E. Paved areas, other than such as are needed for access to the buildings on the lot,
shall not be closer than four feet to any lot line.
A. The minimum width of lots, except for those existing at the time of enactment of
this chapter, shall be as follows in the several districts:
§ 300-18 ZONING § 300-19
300:37
§ 300-20. Solar access.
In all districts, solar access for the purpose of using solar energy for space heating and
water heating or the generation of electric power should he protected to the maximum
extent practical. These regulations establish a performance standard to protect a portion
of the buildable area of a lot from shading by structures and/or vegetation. Height
limitations shall be in effect for all new construction or new plantings. These limitations
shall be established by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be based on such
factors as lot size and position of features on each lot as set forth in the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's publication entitled "Site Planning for
Solar Access." This solar performance standard limits the maximum lot area that may be
shaded from an adjacent property to 20% of the buildable area on the lot on the winter
solstice.
§ 300-21. Signs.
District
Corner Lot
(feet)
Other Lot
(feet)
Residential A 85 70
Residential B
1-family 85 70
2-family 125 100
Residential C
1-family 85 70
2-family 125 100
Multiple dwelling 125 125
Central Business CBD 20 20
Commercial Transition CTD 75 75
Commercial Auto-Related CAR 150 150
Planned Development PDD As per original district
B. Irregular-shaped or -contoured residential lots may be used for residential purposes
as long as all other area requirements are met and the minimum lot width is 50 feet,
measured at the street line.
C. All incident structures shall be built a minimum of three feet from the sidewalk.
[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
A. Purpose. The objective of this section is to regulate existing and proposed signs in
order to create a more attractive and prosperous business climate, enhance and
protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the visual character of
the Village and reduce sign distractions and obstructions that may pose a vehicular
or pedestrian traffic hazard.
B. General requirements. The following general requirements shall apply to all signs:
§ 300-19 MASSENA CODE § 300-21
300:38
(1) Construction and maintenance.
(a) All signs shall be constructed of durable material, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated or in a state of disrepair.
Any sign no longer maintained in a satisfactory state of repair shall be
improved to a satisfactory condition or removed within 30 days from the
date of notification that such sign has been found to be in disrepair by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) Any sign for a business, service or activity no longer in existence at that
location shall be removed within one year from the date of the
discontinuation of the business, service or activity.
(c) Any wall, surface or other area from which any sign is removed shall be
made so that no remnant of the sign is visible.
(d) The back or reverse side of a single-face sign visible from any public
right-of-way shall be finished in an appropriate manner. This shall
include a backing consistent in materials and finish with the facing, and
the covering of all structural members of the sign as may be appropriate.
(e) All construction, fixtures, wiring and installation shall conform to the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, where
applicable.
(f) All wiring to new freestanding signs shall be underground and all
transformers or other such installations shall be located and screened to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board during its review of the site plan.
(g) The owners of any sign overhanging the public right-of-way shall provide
the Village of Massena with evidence of liability insurance coverage.
(2) Location.
(a) Every sign shall be designed and located so as not to physically or
visually impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic by design, illumination,
color or placement. In particular, no sign shall:
[1] Impair public safety.
[2] Restrict clear vision for vehicles entering and leaving the highway
or between a sidewalk and street.
[3] Create confusion relative to any traffic sign or signal.
[4] Prevent free access to any door, window or fire escape.
(b) No sign illumination shall be directed toward any public street or adjacent
uses in a manner that would interfere with safe travel on the street or
useful enjoyment of abutting properties.
(3) Type.
(a) No lights or string of lights will be used for the purpose of advertising,
§ 300-21 ZONING § 300-21
300:39
displaying or otherwise attracting attention to the premises when not part
of a sign or approved street or outdoor lighting.
(b) No moving, flashing, rotating or otherwise nonstationary or intermittently
lighted sign shall be permitted, except time and temperature signs, the
intermittently lighted portion of which shall contain no commercial
message, and except standard barber poles that denote the location of a
barbershop.
(c) Neon shall not be permitted to exceed 20% of the total permissible size
of any sign.
(d) No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving, fluttering or
revolving devices.
(e) No portable sign shall be permitted, except for periods not to exceed 72
hours, without a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. District requirements. In addition to the above-identified general requirements for
all signs, the following requirements shall pertain to signs located in the respective
zoning districts according to the following:
(1) Residential. In residential districts (Residential A, Residential B, Residential
C) or for residences in other districts, the following signs are permitted when
located on the same lot as the principal use:
(a) One sign, either attached or freestanding, indicating only the name of the
owner or occupant and the street number, not to exceed two square feet
in area. It requires no sign permit.
(b) One sign attached to the building face identifying an approved home
occupation or professional residence-office permitted in the applicable
residential district, not to exceed six square feet in area.
(c) One sign identifying any nonresidential building or use permitted in the
applicable residential district, not to exceed 20 square feet in area.
(2) Commercial. In the commercial districts the following building signs shall be
permitted at any time on any single business premise, except any parking or
directional sign(s) provided for under Subsection C(2)(e) below. The
following signs are permitted:
(a) The appropriate signs allowed for in the residential districts, where
applicable, and according to the restrictions identified in Subsection C(1)
above.
(b) One principal business sign per separate and distinct business
establishment, the total area of which shall not exceed one square foot for
each one linear foot of a single building frontage, except that no such
principal business sign shall exceed a maximum of 80 square feet in area.
(c) When more than one separate and distinct business or profession occupies
§ 300-21 MASSENA CODE § 300-21
300:40
a single building, whether on the same or separate floors, total allowable
sign size shall be based on the linear frontage of the building and may
be combined in one or more principal signs so long as the total allowable
sign area for the building is not exceeded, as is preferred by the applicant
and determined satisfactory by the Planning Commission under site plan
review process.
(d) One accessory business sign per each permitted principal business sign,
not to exceed 50% of the size of the area of a permitted principal business
sign and not located on the same building face or lot side as the principal
sign; or one window sign not to exceed 25% of the area of the largest
window or nine square feet, whichever is less.
(e) On-premises "parking," "unloading," "entrance," "parts and services,"
"sales" or other directional signs may be permitted, as deemed necessary
and approved by the Planning Commission. Such individual sign or
combination of signs is not to exceed 12 square feet in area.
(f) A single freestanding sign per premises shall be permitted in Commercial
Transition Districts CTD and in Commercial Auto-Related Districts
CAR.28
(3) Permits. All signs, except those specifically exempted by Subsections C(1)(a),
E, F and G, shall require a sign permit and shall be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission according to the process of site plan
review set forth under § 300-31 prior to their erection or alteration.
D. Supplementary requirements. In addition to the above-identified requirements for
all signs and those stipulated for the respective zoning districts, the following
requirements shall apply to the individual types of signs according to the following:
(1) Freestanding signs. A freestanding sign shall not be more than 18 feet in
Commercial Transition Districts CTD and 24 feet in Commercial Auto-
Related Districts CAR from ground level at the base of the sign. Such sign
shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any street line and 10 feet from any other
lot line. Every freestanding sign placed within 30 feet of the curbline of
intersecting streets and driveways shall have an open space of at least eight
feet from the ground to the base of the sign. The maximum area of permitted
signs shall be 60 square feet in Commercial Transition Districts CTD and 120
square feet in Commercial Auto-Related Districts CAR. A freestanding sign
which is more than 40 square feet in area shall not be closer than 100 feet to
any other freestanding sign more than 40 square feet in size.
(2) Wall signs. A wall sign shall be attached to the wall or face of the building and
shall not project more than one foot from such wall or face.
(3) Roof signs. A roof sign shall not exceed 40% of the portion of the roof area
which it occupies and shall not project beyond the eave and shall not project
above the peak.
28. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), Permits, which immediately followed, was repealed 2-20-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018.
§ 300-21 ZONING § 300-21
300:41
§ 300-22. Parking and loading.
(4) Double-face sign. A freestanding sign which is designed to be viewed from
two directions and which two faces are not more than three feet wide at any
point and are either parallel or at not more than a thirty-degree angle to one
another shall be considered to be one sign for the purpose of determining the
allowable number of signs. Only one face, the larger of the two if they are
different in size, shall be measured to determine the allowable sign area.
E. Exempt signs. Exempt signs shall be as follows:
(1) Flags, emblems or insignia of a nation, municipality, service organization or
school may be displayed in any district without a permit, except in connection
with a commercial purpose.
(2) Handbills, posters, flyers, announcements or advertisements of special sales or
events shall not require a permit. All such temporary signs shall be removed
within 15 days from the date relating to their original purpose or 60 days
following their date of placement, whichever occurs first. No such sign shall
be attached to any fence, utility pole, tree or any natural feature of the
landscape, and when placed in any window, such signs shall comply with the
above provisions for window signs [see Subsection C(2)(d)].
F. Temporary signs shall be as follows:
(1) Temporary unlighted real estate signs not to exceed three in number, each not
larger than six square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises or subdivision on which they are erected.
(2) A single temporary unlighted sign not larger than 15 square feet indicating the
name and address of the parties involved in construction on the premises.
(3) For a development of six or more lots or dwelling units, a real estate sign not
larger than 25 square feet at each visible street entrance to the development
from a prior existing street.
G. One memorial sign or tablet indicating the name of the building and/or the date of
construction (built in as an integral part thereof) requires no sign permit.
H. Temporary signs. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; amended 2-20-2018 by
L.L. No. 1-2018]
(1) No temporary signs of any design shall be allowed on Village property or in
the Village right-of-way in any zone within the Village of Massena. Any
temporary signs found to be on Village property or in the Village right-of-way
will be removed by the Village or its designee.
(2) Exception. A not-for-profit organization may place temporary signage on
Village property and/or within the Village right-of-way for not exceeding three
days and must be approved by the Code Official.
A. Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, are permitted
accessory to any use, subject to the following provisions:
§ 300-21 MASSENA CODE § 300-22
300:42
(1) Parking requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed,
shall be provided at the rate of one space for each employee for any use as
specified herein. Any land which is developed as a unit under single ownership
and control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose of these parking
regulations. Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for
structures and uses which do not fall within the categories listed herein shall
be determined by the Planning Commission during site plan review and upon
consideration of all factors entering into the parking needs of each such use.
[Amended 2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
(2) Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed as open or
enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage, carport or other
area available for parking, other than a street or a driveway, excepting those
driveways associated with one- and two-family dwellings. [Amended
2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
(3) Parking standards. [Added 2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
Parking Schedule Use Recommended Guidelines
(number of spaces)
Dwelling unit 2 per unit, not to be located in any
required front, side or rear yard
Office/dwelling used as doctor's or
dentist's office
4 for each doctor or dentist, plus 1 for
each 2 employees, plus one for the
dwelling unit
Dwelling used as a professional
office other than by a doctor or
dentist or in which there is conducted
a home occupation
3 or as determined by the Planning
Board based on the activity involved
Sanatoriums, nursing homes,
philanthropic or eleemosynary
institutions
1 for every 3 beds, plus 1 per
employee on the largest shift
Membership clubs and fraternal
lodges
1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for
each 300 square feet of floor area
Theater 1 for every 10 seats or as determined
by the Planning Board based on the
activity involved.
Bowling alley 2 per alley or as determined by the
Planning Board based on the activity
involved.
Retail business area 1 for each 300 square feet of sales
Service business 1 for each 300 square feet of floor
area
Restaurant 1 for each 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2
employees on the largest shift
§ 300-22 ZONING § 300-22
300:43
Parking Schedule Use Recommended Guidelines
(number of spaces)
Manufacturing, wholesaling and
warehousing
1 for each 600 square feet of floor
area or one per employee, whichever
is greater
Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, and
rooming houses
1 for each guest room and 1 for each
employee during the largest shift
Uses not listed As determined by the Planning Board
to be needed to prevent frequent
parking on the streets by persons
visiting or connected with such use
(4) Commercial parking requirements for lots with six or more spaces.
(a) Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet wide by 20 feet deep
and shall be served by an aisle not less than 20 feet wide. Where parking
is arranged back to back, each parking space may share a common backup
space.
(b) Each parking space shall be identified with a line (white or yellow traffic
color) four inches wide, set nine feet apart. These lines shall extend for
20 feet in length.
(5) Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided. Such
access shall consist of at least one ten-foot-wide lane for parking areas with
less than 20 spaces and at least two ten-foot-wide lanes for parking areas with
20 spaces or more. No entrance or exit for any off-street parking area with a
capacity of more than four spaces shall be located within 50 feet of any street
intersection in any residential district, nor closer than 50 feet to any street
intersection for any commercial parking area of up to five spaces or closer than
75 feet to any street intersection for any commercial parking area with six to
12 spaces, or closer than 100 feet to any street intersection for any commercial
parking area with more than 12 spaces, nor exceed a grade in excess of 6%
within 25 feet of any street line nor 10% at any other point.
(6) Drainage of surfaces. All parking areas shall be properly drained, and all such
areas, except for parking spaces accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling,
shall be provided with a dustless surface in accordance with specifications of
the Village of Massena. The maximum slope of a parking area shall not exceed
5%.
(7) Combined spaces. When any lot contains two or more uses having different
parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use shall apply to the
full extent. Where it can be conclusively demonstrated that one or more of
such uses will be generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during
periods when the other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the Planning
Commission may reduce the total amount which, in its judgment, will prevent
frequent parking on the street by persons working in or visiting the premises.
§ 300-22 MASSENA CODE § 300-22
300:44
§ 300-23. Prohibited uses.
(8) Enclosed facilities. Required parking areas may be constructed within or under
any portion of a main building, provided that the access driveway does not at
any point have a grade in excess of 10%.
(9) Location and ownership. Required accessory parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided upon the same lot as the use to which they are
accessory or elsewhere, provided that no required spaces are located farther
than 200 feet walking distance from such lot. In all such cases, the parking
spaces shall conform to all the regulations of the district in which the parking
spaces are located, and in no event shall such parking spaces be located in any
residence district unless the use to which the spaces are accessory is permitted
in such residence district or except upon approval by the Planning
Commission. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which
they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions, approved by the
Planning Commission, binding the owner and his heirs and assigns to maintain
the required number of spaces available either throughout the existence of the
use to which they are accessory or until such spaces are provided elsewhere in
a location and manner acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(10) On lots divided by district boundaries. When a parking lot is located partly in
one district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district
requiring the greater number of parking spaces shall apply to the entire lot.
Parking spaces on such lot may be located without regard to district lines,
provided that no such parking spaces shall be located in any residence district
unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such district or
except upon approval by the Planning Commission.
B. Off-street loading. Off-street loading spaces, open or enclosed, are permitted as an
accessory to any use, subject to site plan review.
(1) Size of spaces. Unless specified by the Planning Commission during site plan
review, required loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide, 33 feet long and
14 feet high.
(2) Location and access. Unobstructed access at least 10 feet wide to and from a
street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a
parking lot. All loading spaces shall be on the same lot as the use to which they
are accessory, and no entrance or exit for any loading area shall be located
within 50 feet of any street intersection. No off-street loading shall be
conducted in any front yard.
(3) Joint facilities. Loading facilities, open or enclosed, may be provided in spaces
designed to serve jointly two or more adjacent establishments.
A. Any use which is noxious, offensive or objectionable by reason of the emission of
smoke, dust, gas, odor or other form of air pollution is prohibited.
B. The deposit, discharge or dispersal of liquid or solid wastes, in any form, in a
manner or amount so as to cause permanent damage to the soil or stream or to
adversely affect the surrounding area is prohibited.
§ 300-22 ZONING § 300-23
300:45
§ 300-24. Residential swimming pools. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
C. The creation of a disturbance caused by any noise, vibration, electromagnetic
interference or any other form is prohibited.
D. Uses which involve any dangerous fire, explosive, radioactive or other hazard are
prohibited.
E. Uses which can cause injury, annoyance or disturbance to any of the surrounding
properties or to their owners and occupants are prohibited.
F. Any other process or use which is unwholesome and/or malodorous and may be
dangerous or prejudicial to health, safety or the general welfare is prohibited.
G. The raising of livestock, rabbits, poultry and other similar animals is prohibited.
H. The commercial kenneling of dogs, cats and other similar animals is prohibited.
I. Artificial lighting which directly illuminates any area beyond the lot lines is
prohibited.
J. Amusement parks, circuses and related activities, except for a temporary period on
special license from the Village Treasurer, are prohibited.
K. Junkyards or dumps are prohibited.
L. Two or more vending machines not enclosed by a building are prohibited.
M. Rendering facilities are prohibited.
N. Manufacture or storage of fireworks is prohibited.
O. Storage of explosives is prohibited in quantities exceeding those permitted by the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
P. Open-front retail stores arranged and designed for the purpose of making sales to
persons on the public street or sidewalk are prohibited.
Q. Abandoned and/or unused vehicles/recreational vehicles (including but not limited
to snowmobiles, watercrafts, trailers and campers, etc.) in residential yards and
parking spaces are prohibited. [Amended 8-19-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008;
2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
R. No lot shall be used for the final abandonment of any material, liquid or solid, or
the storage of hazardous waste.
S. Junkyards, to include auto demolition, are prohibited in all districts in the Village
of Massena. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
T. No person shall drain a pool or spa except to his closest street frontage. [Added
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 300-23 MASSENA CODE § 300-24
300:46
DWELLING — A building designed or used as living quarters for one or more
families.
DWELLING UNIT—A part of a dwelling designed for or used exclusively by one
family as a residence.
OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS — Any artificial pool or structure whether
permanently installed or temporarily placed on the premises of any person, intended
for the purpose of swimming, bathing or wading, and over 18 inches in depth,
whether above or below the finished ground level.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, association, organization, firm
or partnership.
B. Permit required; fee. No outdoor swimming pool shall be constructed, assembled,
enlarged or altered unless a permit is issued therefor. Permits shall be issued by the
Building Inspector of the Village of Massena upon payment of a fee of $10.
C. Application for permit. Application for a permit to construct an outdoor swimming
pool shall be made to the Building Inspector on the forms provided by him and shall
be accompanied by detailed plans and drawings, showing pool construction, lot
lines, proposed location, fence construction, outdoor lighting system, if any, water
supply system, drainage-water disposal system, appurtenances, filter system and
such other information as may be required.
D. Construction requirements. Pool wall and floors shall be constructed of an
impervious material which shall provide a tight tank and shall be of sufficient
strength to contain the water therein. All outdoor swimming pools and any facilities
in connection therewith shall be located and constructed in conformity with
approved plans. All outdoor swimming pools shall be constructed in such a manner
that all water, either overflowing or emptying from same, shall be disposed of on
the owner's land.
E. Maintenance and use regulations. All outdoor swimming pools are required to
comply with the following regulations.
(1) They shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall constructed of materials
which shall be durable enough to prevent entrance into the pool area except by
use of a gate or gates. If of wire-mesh construction, the fence is not to have
linkage of more than two inches in diameter. The entrance gate or gates shall
be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices. All gates shall be
equipped with locks and kept locked when the pool is unattended. The fence
and gates shall commence at the finished ground level and be at least four feet
above said finished ground level.
(2) An aboveground swimming pool shall not be required to be enclosed or fenced
if its walls or sides for a height of at least four feet above the bottom level of
the pool are smooth; if its walls provide no toeholds or other means of
climbing such walls or sides to gain access to such pool, and if no part of the
walls or sides of such pool are recessed into the ground, or abut a rise in the
ground, a sundeck, promenade or other structure from which access to such
pool may be had. In the event that any such aboveground pools are so recessed
or do so abut any such structure or rise in the ground, that portion of such pool
§ 300-24 ZONING § 300-24
300:47
as is recessed into the ground or abuts a rise in the ground, sundeck,
promenade or other structure shall be enclosed with a wall, fence or other
substantial enclosure, as required in Subsection E(1) of this section, between
the points where such pool wall is recessed into or abuts the ground or
other structure, unless such ground or structure shall be so constituted or so
constructed as not to be climbable for a height of four feet above the bottom
level of the pool. Any steps or ladders used to gain access to any aboveground
pool, if not within an enclosure, shall be removed from such pool, retracted to
a height of four feet above the ground or otherwise secured so as not to be able
to be used for access to the pool when the pool is not in actual use.
(3) Lights used to illuminate the pool or pool area shall be shielded or installed so
as to prevent said lights from shining directly upon the property of any
adjacent property owner.
(4) No pool wall or related equipment shall be located within eight feet of any
adjoining property in a Residential A Zoning District or within five feet of any
adjoining property in any other zoning district; except upon a variance granted
by the Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing.
(5) No overhead electric lines shall be maintained within 20 feet of the nearest
portion of a pool or appurtenances. All pools shall be grounded and conform
to generally accepted and approved Electrical Underwriter Laboratory
standards.
(6) Should the owner abandon the pool, he shall arrange to remove the depression
and return the surface of the ground to its original grade and approximately in
the same condition as before the pool was constructed, and the Building
Inspector shall be notified thereof.
(7) Outdoor swimming pools shall not be located within a front yard in any
residential zoning district of the Village of Massena.
(8) In all districts, no pool or pool-related equipment shall be placed on any lot
within the triangle formed by the street lot lines of such lot and a line drawn
between points along such street lot lines 30 feet in distance from their point
of intersection.
F. Existing outdoor swimming pools. Subsection A(1), (2), (3) and (6) herein shall
apply to existing outdoor swimming pools, except that a pool which is more than
500 feet from a dwelling unit other than one occupied by the owners shall not be
required to comply with Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) until such time as a dwelling
unit is constructed and occupied within such five-hundred-foot distance. Owners of
existing outdoor swimming pools shall have six months from the effective date of
this section to comply with the requirements of these subsections. Temporary pools
now in place but moved after the effective date of this section shall, in addition to
the foregoing, also comply with Subsection A(4), (5) and (7).
G. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector of the Village of Massena.
H. Penalties for offenses. Every violation of the provisions of this section shall be
§ 300-24 MASSENA CODE § 300-24
300:48
§ 300-25. Mobile homes.
§ 300-26. Fences. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
deemed to be a violation pursuant to penal law, punishable by a fine not less than
$50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days. Each day's
continued violation of this chapter, after written notice thereof, shall constitute a
separate and additional violation. In addition to the above-provided penalties and
punishment, or in lieu thereof, the Village Board may also maintain an action or
proceeding in the name of the Village in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of such section.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile home on any public or private
property except in accordance with this chapter, as follows:
(1) In an approved mobile home park.
(2) In an approved mobile home sales lot.
(3) Upon approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission to permit a mobile
home to be located on the construction site of a new residence for a period not
to exceed six months if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, not to do
so would cause a hardship.
B. Mobile home parks. No person shall construct or operate a mobile home park
without first obtaining a permit. Before such a permit may be issued, there must be
an approval of the site plan by a majority of the Planning Commission in
accordance with procedures set forth in § 300-31.
C. Mobile home standards. The following regulations shall apply to all mobile homes
and mobile home parks:
(1) Mobile home parks shall be at least five acres in area and shall provide for
individual mobile home lots, interior roadways and two parking spaces on
each lot.
(2) The lot for each mobile home shall be at least 6,000 square feet in area and at
least 60 feet wide by at least 100 feet in depth and shall front onto an interior
roadway.
(3) All interior roadways within a mobile home park must have a paved surface at
least 28 feet in width and comply with Village street design.
(4) Each mobile home shall be attached to Village water and sewer.
(5) No mobile home shall be located closer than 10 feet to a lot line.
(6) A strip of land at least 40 feet in width shall be maintained as a landscaped
buffer strip abutting all mobile home park property lines.
(7) All additions to a mobile home shall comply with the requirements of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and with all local
residential standards, including setback and lot coverage, etc.
§ 300-24 ZONING § 300-26
300:49
A. All fences constructed on any lot in the Village must be a two-foot minimum from
any lot line.
B. The good or finished side of any fence erected on any lot in the Village shall face
the neighboring lots.
C. All fences erected in the Village shall be constructed of approved fencing material
and the design approved by the Code Enforcement officials.
D. Fences that are not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated
with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
E. A permit is required to erect a fence anywhere on any lot.
F. All fences shall be maintained in a sturdy, safe condition. [Added 10-2-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007]
G. Fencing permit cost is $5.
§ 300-26 MASSENA CODE § 300-26
300:50
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 300-27. Interpretation and application.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to abrogate, annul or in any way
to impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or with any rules, regulations
or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to
law relating to the use of buildings or premises. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or
requires larger yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law or by such rules or regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 300-28. Contractor requirements. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
All contractors performing any work in the Village will register with the Village
Building Office. The requirements to register are:
§ 300-29. Building permits, certificates of occupancy and other fees.
A. Proof of liability insurance.
B. Proof of Workers' Compensation Insurance.
C. Three references.
A. Building permits and certificates of occupancy. No person, firm, corporation,
association or other organization shall commence the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, demolition of any building or
structure (including swimming pools, storage buildings, fencing, roofing and
siding), nor change the occupancy classification and/or install plumbing, electrical,
heating or ventilation systems without having applied for and obtained a permit
from the Village of Massena. However, no permit shall be required for the
performance of necessary repairs (such as the replacement of existing windows and
doors or the construction of patios at grade level) which are not of a structural
nature. Such work shall nevertheless be done in conformance with the Uniform
Code. [Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
B. Enforcement by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and all related rules, conditions and requirements adopted or
specified pursuant thereto.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer and his duly authorized assistant(s) shall have
the right to enter any building or enter upon any land at any reasonable hour as
necessary in the execution of their duties, provided that:
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the occupant before
§ 300-27 ZONING § 300-29
300:51
conducting any inspection.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer or his duly authorized assistant(s) shall
display identification from the Village of Massena upon commencing an
inspection.
(c) Inspections shall be commenced in the presence of the owner or his
representative or the occupant.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a record of complaints of a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, as well as action taken as a result of
such complaints.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall submit to the Village Board, for insertion
in the Board minutes, a written report summarizing for the month all permits
issued.
(5) Work for which a building permit is in effect shall be inspected for approval
prior to enclosing or covering each stage of construction, including building
location, site preparation, excavation, foundation, framing, superstructure,
electrical, plumbing and heating and air conditioning. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to inform the Code Enforcement Officer that the
work is ready for inspection.
(6) Existing buildings not subject to inspection under Subsection A(5) of this
section shall be subject to periodic inspections for compliance with the
Uniform Code. Notwithstanding any requirement of this section to the
contrary, no regular periodic inspections of occupied dwelling units shall be
required. This shall not be a limitation on inspections conducted at the
invitation of the occupant or where conditions on the premises threaten or
present a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.
C. Permits.
(1) Except as may be otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, all
applications for building permits and use permits as required by this chapter
shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or used; the size and location
of all existing and proposed structures on the lot; the existing and intended use
of each building or lot or part of each building or lot; the number of families
or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and such
topographic or other information with regard to the building, the lot or
neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine that the proposed
construction will conform to the provisions of this chapter. One copy of such
plans shall be returned when approved and one copy shall be kept on file by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot
to be built upon shall be based on a survey made by a licensed land surveyor,
and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started.
(3) No building permit or use permit shall be issued for any building or use subject
§ 300-29 MASSENA CODE § 300-29
300:52
to site plan approval by the Planning Commission, except in conformity
with the plan approved by said Commission or unless found by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be exempt from site plan approval pursuant to
§ 300-29E of these regulations. [Amended 10-5-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
(4) No building permit or use permit shall be issued for a building or use permitted
subject to a variance granted by the Board of Appeals, except in accordance
with all conditions which may have been prescribed by such Board.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 10 days after the filing of a
complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a building
permit. If a building permit is denied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall state
in writing to the applicant the reasons for such denial.
(6) Every building permit shall expire if the work authorized has not commenced
within three months after the date of issuance or has not been completed 12
months from such date for construction costing less than $1,000,000 or has not
been completed within 18 months from such date for construction costing in
excess of such amount. If no amendments to this Zoning Chapter or to other
codes or regulations affecting subject property have been enacted in the
interim, the Code Enforcement Officer may authorize, in writing, the
extension of either of the above periods for an additional six months, following
which no further work is to be undertaken without a new building permit.
(7) As soon as the foundation of a building or of any addition to an existing
building is completed and before first-story framing or wall construction is
begun, there shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer an accurate
survey signed by the person responsible for said survey, showing the exact
location of such foundation with respect to the street and property lines of the
lot.
(8) Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in
the fee schedule of the Village of Massena as shown below: [Amended
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
Construction Value Fee
Minimum fee $0 to $4,000 $25
For each $1,000 above $4,000 $2
Sidewalk permit $25
Demolition permit $10 for each $1,000 of
building assessed value
Add-on fee for not obtaining a building permit $50 for 1st violation, $100
for 2nd and further
violations
(9) No permit for excavation or construction shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer until the plans and specifications and the intended use
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 300-29 ZONING § 300-29
300:53
(1) Certificate required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of a building or
premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted,
restored or enlarged, moved wholly or partly, in its use or structure, until
a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Such certificate shall show that such building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that the
building and the proposed use thereof conform to all the requirements
herein set forth.
(b) No use or occupancy of a building or structure may be commenced until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued for that building or structure.
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer if the building or structure or a designated portion
of a building or structure is sufficiently complete so that it may be put to
the use for which it is intended. A temporary certificate of occupancy
shall expire in six months, but it may be renewed once.
(c) A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is required
for both initial occupancy and the continued occupancy and use of the
building or land to which it applies.
(2) Application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing
building which has been altered shall be made on forms furnished by the Code
Enforcement Officer, after erection of such building or part thereof has been
completed. In the case of a new building, such application shall be
accompanied by an accurate plot plan, or if not available, by a survey prepared
by a licensed land surveyor or engineer showing the location of all buildings
as built.
(3) If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable codes, laws and ordinances, a certificate of occupancy for the
use of vacant land or for a change of use shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer within 10 days after receipt of a properly completed
application. If a certificate of occupancy is denied, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall state the reasons, in writing, to the applicant.
(4) A record of all permits and certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office
of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(5) Fee for certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance: $25. [Added
10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
E. Construction commencing prior to enactment of this chapter. All permits for
buildings and structures issued prior to the enactment of this chapter which are
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void unless the
construction of said building or structure has been substantially commenced prior
to the enactment of this chapter. If building operations are discontinued for a period
of 12 months, any further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of
§ 300-29 MASSENA CODE § 300-29
300:54
§ 300-30. Board of Appeals.
this chapter.
F. Other fees. [Added 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(1) Site plan review application: $25 for 10,000 square feet or less; $10 for each
additional 10,000 square feet of building.
(2) Special use permit: $50.
(3) Variance application: $50.
(4) Zoning change application: $100.
(5) Rental inspection fee: $15 (done every three years).
A. The powers of the Board of Appeals shall be those specified by Village Law
§ 7-712 and as set forth below.
B. Appellate jurisdiction.
(1) The Board of Appeals, after the proper public hearing and notice, shall hear
and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer or other officer charged
with the enforcement of this chapter. Where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
chapter, such Board shall have the power, in passing upon appeals, to vary or
modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter
relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the
use of land so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured and substantial justice done.
(2) It may, in a specific case, with public notice and hearing and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant conditional and temporary
permits for a period of six months and may renew such permits for one
additional period of six months for use of existing structures not otherwise
permitted by this chapter in the district in which such structures are located.
C. Original jurisdiction. The Board of Appeals may, in a specific case, after public
notice and hearing, determine and vary the application of the regulations herein
established in harmony with their general purpose and intent.
(1) Variances. The Board of Appeals may vary or adapt the strict application of
any of the requirements of these regulations where strict application would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the
owner of the reasonable use of the land or building involved. [Amended
9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(a) Use variance. The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative official charged with the enforcement
of these regulations, shall have the power to grant use variances as
defined herein.
§ 300-29 ZONING § 300-30
300:55
[1] No such use variance shall be granted by a Board of Appeals without
a showing by the applicant that the applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove
such unnecessary hardship the applicant shall demonstrate to the
Board of Appeals that for each and every permitted use under the
zoning regulations for the particular district where the property is
located:
[a] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
[b] That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
[c] That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
[d] That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
[2] The Board of Appeals, in granting of use variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, and at the
same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood
and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(b) Area variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon
an appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative official
charged with the enforcement of these regulations, to grant area variances
as defined herein.
[1] In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making
such determination the Board shall also consider:
[a] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
[b] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by
some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an
area variance;
[c] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[d] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
[e] Whether the alleged difficulty was self created, which
§ 300-30 MASSENA CODE § 300-30
300:56
§ 300-31. Site plan approval.
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of
Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the
area variance.
[2] The Board of Appeals, in granting of area variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood
and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(c) Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in granting of both
use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property, and/or the period of time
such variance shall be in effect. Such condition shall be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this chapter, and shall be imposed for the purpose
of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the
neighborhood or community.
D. Whenever the circumstances of a proposed variance require, the variance
application shall be referred to the County Planning Board under § 239-m of the
General Municipal Law and § 300-32 of this chapter.
A. Purpose. It is the objective of this section to provide a process of detailed
examination of the particular features of a specific site and its proposed use in order
that the overall purpose of these regulations may be achieved in the most equitable
and exacting manner possible.
B. Planning Commission approval (site plan). The Planning Commission is hereby
empowered to review and approve site plans and to approve the issuance of any
building permit or use permit for those uses required to have such site plan
approved. In all districts, site plan approval by the Planning Commission shall be
required for: [Amended 10-5-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
(1) All uses of vacant land where the district regulations require site plan approval
for that use; or
(2) Any change in use or intensity of use which will affect the characteristics of
the site in terms of the considerations listed in § 300-31G; notwithstanding
that, a use may be exempted from site plan approval where the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed use would be conducted with no
change in provisions for traffic access, circulation, parking, landscaping and
screening as shown on a site plan previously approved by the Planning
Commission for a use within the same or similar land use category.
C. Objectives. In considering and acting upon site plans, the Planning Commission
shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare and the comfort
and convenience of the public in general and of the residents of the proposed
development and of the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe
such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the
result of its action shall, to the maximum extent possible, further the expressed
§ 300-30 ZONING § 300-31
300:57
intent of this chapter and the accomplishment of the following objectives in
particular.
(1) Traffic access. That all proposed traffic accessways are adequate but not
excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not
located too near street corners or other places of public assembly; and other
similar safety conditions.
(2) Circulation and parking. That adequate off-street parking and loading spaces
are provided to prevent the parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons
connected with or visiting the use, and that the interior circulation system is
adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking lots.
(3) Landscaping and screening. That all playground, parking and service areas are
reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent
residential lots and streets, and that the general landscaping of the site is in
character with that generally prevailing in the neighborhood. Existing trees
over eight inches in diameter, measured three feet above the base of the trunk,
shall be retained to the maximum extent possible.
D. Procedure. Site plan reviews shall be conducted according to the following:
(1) The Code Enforcement Official shall determine the completeness of any
application made for a use requiring site plan approval and shall notify the
applicant within seven days of the date of application submission if such
application is incomplete or deficient in any way and shall further specify the
deficiencies.
(2) The Planning Commission shall hold a presubmission conference with the
applicant to review the basic site design concept and determine the information
to be required on the final site plan.
(3) Within six months following the presubmission conference, eight copies of the
site plan and any related information shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer at least 10 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which approval is requested. If not submitted within this six-month
period, another presubmission conference may be required.
(4) The Planning Commission shall act to approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove any such site plan within 62 days after the meeting at which
approval is requested. Failure to act within 62 days shall be deemed approval.
Planning Commission disapproval shall include written findings upon any site
plan element found contrary to the provisions or intent of this chapter. In
reviewing the application, the Planning Commission may secure the advice or
assistance of one or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether
a proposed use will conform to the requirements of this chapter. The time
within which the Planning Board must render its decision may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and such Board. The decision of the Planning
Board shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five business days
after such decision is rendered and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant. The
Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law
§ 300-31 MASSENA CODE § 300-31
300:58
and its implementing regulations. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(5) Approval of amendments to an approved site plan shall be acted upon in the
same manner as the application for approval of the original site plan.
(6) Notice of the Planning Commission's decision shall be given to the Code
Enforcement Official, who shall forward this information to the applicant.
(7) A copy of the Planning Commission's determination shall be attached to the
final site plan and filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. A copy of such
determination and site plan shall be provided to the applicant.
(8) Whenever the circumstances of a proposed development require, the site plan
shall be referred to the County Planning Board under § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law and § 300-32 of this chapter.
(9) A site plan, following approval by the Planning Commission, shall be valid for
a period of 120 days from the date of such approval. If work is commenced
within the period of 120 days, such approval shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of approval. Upon application, the Planning Commission
shall have the right to extend any period of approval to not more than two years
from the date of original approval, provided that no single extension exceeds
one year in length.
E. Required submissions. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
require or to waive any or all of the following in its consideration of a site plan:
(1) Legal data.
(a) Section, plat, block and lot numbers of the property, taken from the latest
tax records.
(b) Name and address of the owner of record.
(c) Name and address of person, firm or organization preparing the map.
(d) Date, North point and written and graphic scale.
(e) Sufficient description or information to define precisely the boundaries of
the property. All distances shall be in feet and tenths of a foot. All angles
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds or closer. The error of closure
shall not exceed one in 10,000.
(f) Locations, names and existing widths of adjacent streets and curblines.
(g) Locations and owners of all adjoining lands as shown on the latest tax
records.
(h) Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements,
setbacks, reservations and areas dedicated to public use within or adjacent
to the property.
(i) A complete outline of existing deed restrictions or covenants applying to
the property.
§ 300-31 ZONING § 300-31
300:59
(j) Existing zoning.
(2) Existing structures and utilities.
(a) Location of uses and outlines of structures, drawn to scale, on and within
100 feet of the lot line.
(b) Paved areas, sidewalks and vehicular access between the site and public
streets.
(c) Locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing storm and
sanitary sewers, culverts and waterlines, as well as other underground and
aboveground utilities within and adjacent to the property.
(d) Other existing development, including fences, landscaping and screening.
(3) Proposed development.
(a) The location of proposed buildings or structural improvements.
(b) The location and design of all uses not requiring structures, such as offstreet
parking and loading areas.
(c) The location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed outdoor
lighting or public-address systems.
(d) Sign diagram, drawn to scale in ink on minimum sheet size of 8 1/2
inches by 11 inches, at an appropriate scale, and accompanying
information to illustrate the following:
[1] Location of building, structure or parcel of land to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected, including lot and building
dimensions and adjoining structures, land and signs.
[2] Size and individual dimensions of the sign, including height, width,
depth and clear distance from ground level.
[3] Description of sign, including construction materials, color scheme,
text, style, content and lighting, including construction details.
[4] Statement and description of all other signs located or proposed to
be located on the property or within the distance stipulated, to be
considered under these regulations.
(e) The location and arrangement of proposed means of access and egress,
including sidewalks, driveways or other paved areas; and profiles
indicating grading and cross sections showing width of roadway, location
and width of sidewalks.
(f) Any proposed screening and other landscaping, including types and
locations of proposed street trees.
(g) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants, and all
storm and sanitary sewer lines or alternate means of water supply and
sewage disposal and treatment.
§ 300-31 MASSENA CODE § 300-31
300:60
(h) An outline of any proposed easements, deed restrictions or covenants.
(i) Any contemplated public improvement on or adjoining the property.
(j) Any proposed new grades, indicating clearly how such grades will meet
existing grades of adjacent properties on the street.
(k) If the site plan only indicates a first stage, a supplementary plan shall
indicate ultimate development.
(4) Any other information deemed by the Planning Commission to be necessary
to determine conformity of the site plan with the spirit and intent of this
chapter.
F. No building permit or use permit shall be issued for any building or use subject to
site plan approval by the Planning Commission except in conformity with the plan
approved by said Commission.
G. Applicant considerations. In its consideration of an application for a site plan
approval, the Planning Commission shall determine that:
(1) The use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony
with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is
situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
districts and uses.
(2) The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout and its relation
to streets giving access to it shall be such that traffic to and from the use and
the assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous or
inconvenient to the neighborhood or conflict with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood. In applying this standard, the Commission shall consider,
among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic, particularly of
children, relation to main traffic thoroughfares and to street and road
intersections and the general character and intensity of development of the
neighborhood. The Commission specifically shall find that:
(a) All proposed traffic accessways are adequate but not excessive in
number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not located
too near street corners or other places of public assembly; and other
similar safety conditions.
(b) Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent
the parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons connected with or
visiting the use, and the interior circulation system is adequate to provide
safe accessibility to all required off-street parking lots.
(3) The locations and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls
and fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such
that the use will not hinder or discourage the proper development and use of
adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof or that the development
will not interfere with solar access by solar energy systems in existence on
adjacent lots.
§ 300-31 ZONING § 300-31
300:61
§ 300-32. Amendments.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, amend, revise or repeal this chapter,
including the Building Zone Map, on its own motion or upon recommendation by the
Planning Commission or upon petition from any individual or group of individuals.
Prior to the public hearing, every proposed amendment shall be referred by the Board
of Trustees to the Planning Commission for a report, which shall be rendered within 45
days of such referral.
(4) All playground, parking and service areas shall be reasonably screened at all
seasons of the year from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets, and
the general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally prevailing
in the neighborhood. Existing trees over eight inches in diameter, measured
three feet above the base of the trunk, shall be retained to the maximum extent
possible.
A. Report of the Planning Commission. In making such report on a proposed
amendment, the Planning Commission shall make a determination concerning the
items specified below:
(1) Concerning a proposed amendment to or change in the text of the chapter:
(a) Whether such change is consistent with the aims and principles embodied
in the chapter as to the particular districts concerned.
(b) Which areas, land uses, buildings and establishments in the Village will
be directly affected by such change and in what way they will be affected.
(c) The indirect implications of such change in its effect on other regulations.
(d) Whether such proposed amendment is consistent with the aims of the
Comprehensive Development Plan of the Village.
(2) Concerning a proposed amendment involving a change in the Zoning Map:
(a) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be appropriate
in the area concerned.
(b) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public facilities and
services, including roads, exist or can be reasonably expected to be
created to serve the needs of any additional dwellings or other uses likely
to be constructed as a result of such change.
(c) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed
plans in the vicinity.
(d) The effect of the proposed amendment upon the growth of the Village as
envisaged by the Comprehensive Development Plan.
B. By resolution adopted at a meeting of the Village Board, the Village Board shall fix
the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause notice
thereof to be given in accordance with the provisions of § 7-706 of the Village Law.
All notices of public hearing shall specify the nature of any proposed amendment,
§ 300-31 MASSENA CODE § 300-32
300:62
the land or district affected and the date when and the place where the public
hearing will be held. At least 10 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in the official newspaper.
C. Referrals to St. Lawrence County Planning Board.
(1) Should any proposed site plan, variance or amendment consist of or include
any of the following conditions, the Village Clerk shall, prior to final action,
refer the proposed amendment to the St. Lawrence County Planning Board.
The matters covered by this section shall include:
(a) Any amendment thereof which would change the district classification of
or the regulations applying to real property lying within a distance of 500
feet from the boundary of any city, Village or town, or from the boundary
of any existing or proposed county or state park or other recreation area,
or from the right-of-way of any existing or proposed county or state
parkway, throughway, expressway, road or highway, or from the existing
or proposed right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by the
county or for which the county has established channel lines, or from the
existing or proposed boundary of any county- or state-owned land on
which a public building or institution is situated.
(b) Any special permit, site plan or variance affecting such real property
within such distance of 500 feet.
(2) The term "proposed" shall be deemed to include only those recreation areas,
parkways, throughways, expressways, roads or highways which are shown on
a county plan adopted pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 239-d of the General
Municipal Law or adopted on an official map pursuant to § 239-g of such law.
(3) Within 30 days after receipt of a full statement of such referred matter, the
county, metropolitan or regional planning agency to which referral is made, or
an authorized agent of said agency, shall report its recommendations thereon
to the referring municipal agency, accompanied by a full statement of the
reasons for such recommendations. If such planning agency fails to report
within such period of 30 days or such longer period as may have been agreed
upon by it and the referring agency, the municipal body having jurisdiction to
act may do so without such report. If such planning agency disapproves the
proposal or recommends modification thereof, the municipal agency having
jurisdiction shall not act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation
except by a vote of a majority plus one of all the members thereof and after the
adoption of a resolution fully setting forth the reasons for such contrary action.
Within 30 days after final action by the municipal agency having jurisdiction
on the recommendations, modifications or disapproval of a referred matter,
such municipal agency shall file a report of the final action it has taken with
the county, metropolitan or regional planning agency which had made the
recommendations, modifications or disapproval. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L.
No. 2-2001]
D. Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the Board of Trustees. In case,
however, of a protest against such change signed by the owners of 20% or more of
§ 300-32 ZONING § 300-32
300:63
the area of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20%
or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the
owners of 20% or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet
from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of the members of the Board of
Trustees in Villages having three members on the Board of Trustees and 3/4 of the
members of the Board of Trustees in all the other Villages. The provisions of the
previous section relative to public hearings shall apply equally to all changes or
amendments.
§ 300-32 MASSENA CODE § 300-32
300:64
ARTICLE VII
Sexually Oriented Businesses
[Added 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 300-33. Purpose.
§ 300-34. Definitions. [Amended 10-2-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
As used in this article, the terms and definitions shall be in accordance with Chapter 233,
Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 300-35. Districts permitted.
A. It is recognized that buildings and establishments operated as sexually oriented
businesses have serious objectionable characteristics. In order to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Massena,
County of St. Lawrence and State of New York, it is necessary to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations for sexually oriented businesses within the
Village of Massena.
B. The regulation of sexually oriented businesses is necessary to prevent deterioration
and degradation of the vitality of the Village of Massena, New York before a
problem develops, rather than in a response to an existing problem. It is recognized
that some uses, which because of their nature, have serious objectionable
operational characteristics when several of them are concentrated under certain
circumstances, which produce a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, special
regulation of the uses is necessary to ensure that adverse effects will not contribute
to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary
reason for regulation is to prevent concentration of these uses in any one area which
could create adverse neighborhood affects.
C. It is not the intent nor affect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protested by the First Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market, nor is it the intent or affect of this
chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
A. Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in the Planned Industrial
Development District, subject to a special permit and subject to site plan review in
accordance with the Zoning Chapter.
B. Sexually oriented businesses shall be further subject to the following requirements
in addition to any other requirements of this chapter.
(1) Shall not be located within a five-hundred-foot radius of any area zoned
residential.
(2) Shall not be located within a five-hundred-foot radius of any other sexually
oriented business.
(3) Shall not be located within a five-hundred-foot radius of any school, church or
other place of religious worship, park, playgrounds or playing field.
§ 300-33 ZONING § 300-35
300:65
§ 300-36. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the offense
is continued shall constitute a separate and distinct violation hereunder.
(4) Shall not be located within 500 feet of any residential dwelling as defined in
this chapter.
C. The distances herein above shall be measured by following a straight line, without
regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon
which the adult business is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel of
property or the land use district boundary line from which the sexually oriented
business is to be separated.
§ 300-35 MASSENA CODE § 300-36
300:66
ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 300-37. Penalties for offenses; remedies for violations. [Added 7-16-1991 by L.L.
No. 6-1991]
A. Stop-work order. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop-work order to
preclude the continued and further violation of these regulations or to protect the
public health or safety. Such stop-work order shall stay all activity in conjunction
with any violation of these regulations. Any stop-work order will stipulate that
within 30 days a permit or certificate will be obtained noting compliance with these
regulations. If such permit or certificate is not obtained by the responsible party or
the work continues in violation of the stop-work order, action by the Village will be
initiated to compel compliance, for injunction or to assess such penalties as are
hereafter provided for.
B. Correct-work notice enforcement. The responsible party shall correct listed
violations in a correct-work notice within 30 days from the date of notification.
Failure to comply with said notice shall be reported to the Village Board within 10
days of the last date for compliance given in the notice. The Village Board may
direct the Village Attorney to institute proceedings to compel compliance and
correct violations to these regulations.
C. Permit revocation.
(1) A zoning/building permit, sign permit or special use permit (including site
plan approval) may be revoked by the Zoning Enforcement Officer if the
permit recipient fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with
plans submitted, the requirements of the zoning regulations or any additional
requirement lawfully imposed by the permit authorizing board.
(2) Before a permit may be revoked, notice and hearing requirements for hearings
of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be complied with. The notice shall
inform the permit recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
(3) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit-issuing
authority to conclude that a permit should be revoked shall be upon the party
advocating that position. The burden of persuasion shall also be upon that
party. Any decision by the permit-issuing board shall include, insofar as
practicable, a statement of the specified reasons or findings of fact that support
that decision. If the permit is revoked, a written statement of the decision,
along with the reasons for the action, shall be provided to the permittee in
writing.
(4) No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner
authorized by any zoning/building permit, sign permit or special use permit
after such permit has been revoked in accordance with this section.
D. Penalty. [Amended 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
(1) A violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions
§ 300-37 ZONING § 300-37
300:67
and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, site plan
approvals or the establishment of a planned unit development, shall constitute
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than
seven days, except that:
(a) When the person was found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than
$250 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days
for each violation; and
(b) When the person was found to have committed two or more such
violations within the preceding five years, the fine may be of not less than
$500 nor more $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both.
(2) Each week that any violation continues after notification that such violation
exists shall be considered a separate offense. These penalties shall be in
addition to any other penalty provided by law. The Village may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter.
E. Civil penalty. Any act constituting a violation of the zoning regulations, including
violation of any conditions or safeguards established in connection with grants of
variances, site plan approvals or the establishment of a planned unit development,
shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100. If the offender fails to pay
this penalty within 10 days after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be
recovered by the Village in a civil action in the nature of debt. A civil penalty may
only be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals if the offender was sent a final
notice of violation and filed an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30
days of its receipt. Each week that any violation continues after notification that
such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.
F. Injunction. In addition to the above provided penalties and remedies, the Village
Board shall reserve the right to take actions in the name of the Village to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of the zoning regulations.
G. Judicial review. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decisions of the Planning Board, Board of Appeals, Village Board or any officer of
the Village concerning these regulations may have the decision reviewed in the
manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, provided that
the proceeding is commenced within 30 days after the receipt of written notice of
the decision. Costs shall not be allowed against the Village unless it appears to the
court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the
decision appealed from.
§ 300-37 MASSENA CODE § 300-37
300:68
Appendix
§ 300-37 ZONING § 300-37
300:69

Chapter A307
ANNEXATIONS
§ 300-37 ANNEXATIONS § 300-37
A307:1

ARTICLE I
Massena Central School System Property
[Adopted 9-22-1969 as Ch. 8, Art. I, of the 1969 Code]
§ A307-1. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory, to wit:
Beginning at a point in the north bounds of property owned by the Massena Central
School System, which is also the south bounds of a development called "Westwood
Subdivision," dated August 7, 1955, which point is formed by the intersection of the
north bounds of the Massena Central School property and the present existing Massena
Village corporation line, which point is also 177.2 linear feet westerly from the center
line of Churchill Avenue, a village street, along said north bounds of Massena Central
School property; thence south 33° 20' east a distance of 1,200.70 linear feet along the
existing Massena Village corporation line to a point in the north bounds of the New
York State arterial highway right-of-way; thence, south 56° 34' west along said north
bounds of New York State right-of-way, a distance of 239.60 linear feet to a point,
which point is also the point of tangency of a curve of the right-of-way bounds whose
radius is 2,011.20 linear feet, and whose curve data for center-line curve is shown on
New York State Highway Department map, Massena South Side Route, Part 2, Federal
Aid Project No. UG-580(9), Sheet No. 26 of 47, year 1955; thence, south 68° 17' 23"
west along the chord of the right-of-way curve whose radius is 2,011.20, a distance
of 801.19 linear feet, to a point in the same said right-of-way curve whose radius is
2,011.20 linear feet; thence, north 33° 20' west, through property now owned by the
Massena Central School System, a distance of 1,037.55 linear feet to a point in the
north bounds of the Massena Central School System property, which is also the south
bounds of the West Massena Subdivision; thence, north 56° 33' 40" east along the said
north bounds of Massena Central School property a distance of 1,025.20 linear feet to
the point of beginning. The proposed annexation of 27.20 acres of land is to include
the remainder of the Massena Senior High School building into the Massena Village
Corporation.
§ A307-2. Territory annexed.
The territory described in § A307-1 of this article is hereby annexed to the Village of
Massena, New York, pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-3. Annexed territory to be included in No. 2 Election District.
The territory described in § A307-1 of this article and annexed to the Village of Massena,
New York, by this article shall be included in the No. 2 Election District of said village.
§ A307-4. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in § A307-1 of this article shall become
effective on the 12th day of May 1969.
§ A307-1 ANNEXATIONS § A307-4
A307:3

ARTICLE II
Shoen Petition
[Adopted 1-7-1975]
§ A307-5. Findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Massena finds:
§ A307-6. Annexation approved.
It is resolved that the annexation of the property set forth in the annexed petition to
the Village of Massena is in the overall public interest and is approved. Therefore, all
real or personal property and rights in real and personal property, including but not
limited to streets, avenues, roads, highways, bridges, overpasses, underpasses, culverts,
sidewalks, streetlighting fixtures and conduits, pipes, drains, either above or below the
ground surface, and appurtenances and appurtenant rights in relation thereto, owned by
the Town of Massena shall become the property of the Village of Massena as of the
date of such annexation, but the ownership of any real and personal property or rights in
real and personal property of, or acquired for, special or improvement districts in such
territory shall remain unaffected.
A. That the Town and Village Boards of Massena have been duly petitioned to annex
to the village the property described in said petition; and
B. That the said Boards conducted a joint public hearing pursuant to § 705 of the
General Municipal Law; and
C. That those persons entitled to notice of said petition and the public hearing were
duly notified and all persons in favor or opposed to said annexation having been
given an opportunity to be heard; and
D. That it is determined that said petition complies with the provisions of Article 17 of
the General Municipal Law; and
E. That the territory proposed to be annexed is uninhabited and portions thereof
consist of rear portions of parcels already located within the Village of Massena;
and
F. That the Village of Massena already provides water and sewer service to adjoining
areas to that sought to be annexed and the proposed annexation would not adversely
affect other areas in said village; and
G. That the remaining area of the Town of Massena not so included in the village
would not be adversely affected; and
H. That no school district, fire district or any other improvement district would be
adversely affected by said annexation; and
I. That there is no indebtedness or other liabilities charged to the property sought to
be annexed and requiring apportionment pursuant to § 708 of the General
Municipal Law.
§ A307-5 ANNEXATIONS § A307-7
A307:5
§ A307-7. Special election not required.
All of the qualified people eligible to vote living in the homes adjoining the proposed
area to be annexed have registered to vote in election districts inside the Village of
Massena and have appeared at said public hearing in favor of the annexation, and there
are no persons residing in the territory sought to be annexed and qualified to vote for
officers of the town. By reason of the foregoing the Town of Massena need not hold a
special election as required by General Municipal Law, Article 17, in that there are no
persons residing in the territory proposed to be annexed and qualified to vote for officers
of the town as the area is uninhabited except for the petitioners.
§ A307-7 MASSENA CODE § A307-7
A307:6
ARTICLE III
Massena Industrial Development Corporation Petition
[Adopted 9-5-1979]
§ A307-8. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Massena finds as follows:
§ A307-9. Annexation approved; description.
The consent and approval of the Town Board of the Town of Massena is hereby given
to the annexation of the territory now situated in the Town of Massena and described in
Exhibit A, petition to the Village of Massena:
Exhibit A
Pursuant to Article 17 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York,
as amended, the petitioner herein, the Massena Industrial Development Corporation,
petitions for annexation to the Village of Massena of all the territory which is not in
a city or village, which is in the Town of Massena, St. Lawrence County, New York,
which adjoins said village and which is described in Paragraph 2 of this petition; and
the petitioner states therefor as follows:
1. The Village of Massena is and for over 50 years last past has been an incorporated
village in the Town of Massena, County of St. Lawrence, State of New York.
2. Petitioner petitions to have annexed to said village territory in the Town of
Massena, St. Lawrence County, New York, which territory adjoins said village;
said territory, which petitioner petitions to have so annexed, is described as follows:
A. That the aforesaid petition for annexation29 substantially complies in form and
content with Article 17 of the General Municipal Law.
B. That the proposed annexation of certain territory in the Town of Massena to the
Village of Massena as described in the petition is in the overall public interest.
29. Editor's Note: The preamble to the enactment states that a petition was presented to the Town Board of the Town of
Massena requesting annexation of land in the town to the Village of Massena and that a joint hearing of the Town and
Village Boards was held on September 5, 1979.
§ A307-8 ANNEXATIONS § A307-9
A307:7
Beginning at the intersection of the division line between the Town of Massena and
the Village of Massena with the division line between the Town of Norfolk and the
Town of Massena; thence southeasterly along the Massena - Norfolk division line
2,005 feet more or less to a point, said point being the southwest corner of lands
acquired by the Massena Industrial Development Corporation (Massena IDC) from
Joseph A. and Ann Marie Giorgi by deed recorded in the St. Lawrence County
Clerk's office in Liber 935 of Deeds at Page 973; thence northeasterly along the
southerly bounds of the aforereferenced Massena IDC property 1,005 feet more
or less to the southeast corner of said Massena IDC lands; thence northwesterly
along the easterly bounds of said Massena IDC lands 1,142 feet more or less to
a point, said point being the southwest corner of lands acquired by the Massena
Industrial Development Corporation from Rose E. Syakos and William S. Crapser
by deed recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's Office in Liber 937 of
Deeds at Page 1139; thence northeasterly along the southerly bounds of the last
referenced Massena IDC property 668 feet more or less to the southeast corner of
said Massena IDC lands; thence northwesterly 400 feet more or less to a point, said
point being the intersection of the easterly bounds of the last mentioned Massena
IDC property with the southerly bounds of the lands owned by Fred and Flora
R. Thebert, as recorded in Liber 763 of Deeds at Page 500; thence southwesterly
along the southerly bounds of said Thebert property 3 feet more or less, said point
being the southwest corner of said Thebert property; thence northwesterly along
the easterly bounds of the last referenced Massena IDC property 438 feet more or
less to a point on the Town of Massena - Village of Massena division line; thence
southwesterly along said division line 1,655 feet more or less to the point and place
of beginning.
3. The petitioner herein is the owner of the majority in assessed valuation of the
property in said territory (which territory is described in Paragraph 2 of this
petition) assessed upon the last preceding Town Assessment Roll of the Town of
Massena.
4. The number of inhabitants of said territory (described in Paragraph 2 of this
petition) adjoining the Village of Massena, which territory the petitioner petitions
to have annexed to said Village of Massena is approximately 1.
5. Attached hereto, marked "Exhibit A," is an outline map of said territory (described
in Paragraph 2 of this petition) adjoining said Village of Massena, which territory
is herein sought to be annexed to said village.30
30. Editor's Note: A copy of the outline map, Exhibit A, is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ A307-9 MASSENA CODE § A307-9
A307:8
ARTICLE IV
Richard and Carol Maginn
[Adopted 6-3-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980]
§ A307-10. Territory described.
A. The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory:
All that tract or parcel of land, situated in Section No. 35 of the Town of Louisville,
County of St. Lawrence, State of New York, and being a part of the farm formerly
known as the Amab Casaw Farm and bounded thus: Beginning in the line between
the farms formerly known as the Casaw and the Nightengale Farms at a point
located south 20° 30' east 208.75 feet from the center of State Road No. 8100
leading from Massena to Raymondville and running thence along the Casaw (now
Premo) Nightengale line south 20° 50' east 2,013.9 feet to a point; thence south
68° 07' west 1,160 feet to a concrete monument in the east bounds of N.Y.S. Route
No. 37; thence along said east bounds north 44° 08' west 1,852.2 feet to a concrete
monument; thence along the south line of the lands now or formerly owned by
Oral S. Helmer and others north 59° 30' east 1,309.2 feet and thence north 60° 14'
east 609 feet to the place of beginning; containing 68.43 acres of land as surveyed
July 1, 1959, by Howard M. Smith, Surveyor No. 7744.
Also all that tract or parcel of land, situate in Section No. 35 of the Town of
Louisville, County of St. Lawrence and State of New York, and being a part
of the farm formerly known as the Amab Casaw Farm and bounded as follows:
Beginning in the center of the Massena-Raymondville State Road No. 8100 at a
point located south 60° 30' west 642.01 feet and south 59° 30' west 104.5 feet from
the intersection of the center of said road with the line between the Premo and
Nightengale Farms and running thence along the center of the road south 59° 30'
west 60 feet; thence south 30° 30' east 204.45 feet; thence north 59° 30' east 60 feet
and thence north 30° 30' west 204.45 feet to the place of beginning; as surveyed
July 1, 1959, by Howard M. Smith, Surveyor No. 7744.
Excepting and reserving therefrom all that tract or parcel of land bounded and
described as follows: Beginning at a point in the easterly bounds of N.Y.S. Route
No. 37 at the southwest corner of the land now or formerly owned by Oral Helmer,
which is also the northwest corner of the land now or formerly owned by Murray
Premo, thence north 59° 30' east a distance of 417.42 feet along the southerly
bounds of land owned by Oral Helmer to a point; thence south 44° 08' east a
distance of 429.53 feet to a point; thence south 59° 30' west a distance of 417.42
feet to a point in the easterly bounds of N.Y.S. Route No. 37; thence north 44° 08'
west a distance of 429.53 feet along said easterly bounds of said highway to the
point of beginning; containing 4.0 acres of land.
B. Further, petitioners herein respectfully petition and request that certain further land
now situated in the Town of Louisville, St. Lawrence County, State of New York,
and described as 405289, 1-36-12, LZ, Acres-4.50, CLS-321, Roll Sect-1,
SCH-405801, Road, LaPlante, LaPlante, Road, V L 9, 41/2 A, on the Tax Map of
the Town of Louisville, St. Lawrence County, State of New York, be annexed to
§ A307-10 ANNEXATIONS § A307-10
A307:9
the Village of Massena, St. Lawrence County, New York, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 17 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
C. The real property proposed to be annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
which is owned by petitioners, as owners in fee, is bounded and described as
follows:
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Louisville, County of St.
Lawrence and State of New York, being part of Mile Square, Lot No. Thirty-
Five in said town, and known more particularly as part of the Amab Casaw Farm,
so called and bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a point in the
center of the highway leading from Massena to Raymondville (an extension of
Andrews Street in the Village of Massena) and being known as State Highway No.
8100, said point being 806.51 feet westerly, measured along the center line of the
concrete road from the point where the easterly line of the Amab Casaw Farm, on
the south side of the highway, intersects the center of the highway and running
thence south 59° 30' west a distance of 1,397.9 feet along the center of the concrete
road to a point; thence south 30° 30' east a distance of 204.45 feet to a point; thence
north 59° 30' east a distance of 1,397.9 feet to a point; thence north 30° 30' west
a distance of 204.45 feet to the point of beginning; containing 6.56 acres, more or
less.
Excepting and reserving from the above-described premises, all the piece or
parcel of property hereinafter designated as Parcel No. 88, situate in the Town
of Louisville, County of St. Lawrence, State of New York, to be acquired in fee
for the reconstruction of the Raymondville-Massena Pt. 1, State Highway No.
8100, as shown on a map and described as follows: Beginning at a point on
the southeasterly boundary of the existing Raymondville-Massena Highway at
the intersection of said boundary with the division line between the property of
Kenneth Premo & Co. (reputed owners) on the southwest and the property of Oral
S. Helmer (reputed owner) on the northeast, said point being 321± feet distant
southeasterly, measured at right angles, from Station 651+ 19± of the hereinafter
described survey base line for the reconstruction of the Raymondville-Massena Pt.
1, State Highway No. 8100; thence northeasterly along said highway boundary line
181± feet to a point 32± feet distant southeasterly, measured at right angles, from
Station 653+00 of said base line; thence south 50° 40' west 183± feet to a point
on the division line between the property of Kenneth J. Premo & Co. (reputed
owner) on the southwest and the property of Oral S. Helmer (reputed owner) on the
northeast, the last mentioned point being 60± feet distant southeasterly, measured
at right angles, from station 651+ 19± of the said base line; thence northwesterly
along said division line 28± feet to the point of beginning; being 0.061 acres, more
or less.
The above-mentioned survey base line is portion of the survey base line for
the reconstruction of the Raymondville-Massena Pt. State Highway No. 8100, as
shown on a map on file in the office of the State Department of Public Works and
described as follows: Beginning at Station 650+31, thence north 59° 29' east 1,639
feet to Station 666+70; all bearings referred to magnetic North as the magnetic
needle pointed in 1941 A.D.
§ A307-10 MASSENA CODE § A307-10
A307:10
§ A307-11. Territory annexed.
The territory described in § A307-10 of this article is hereby annexed to the Village of
Massena, New York, pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-12. Inclusion in Election District No. 1.
The territory described in § A307-10 of this article and annexed to the Village of
Massena, New York, by this article shall be included in Election District No. 1 of said
village.
§ A307-13. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in § A307-10 of this article became
effective on the 20th day of May 1980 by the adoption of a resolution, findings and order
of the Village Board of the Village of Massena approving the petition of annexation.
Reference is hereby made to New York State Department of Public Works
Raymondville-Massena Pt. 1, State Highway No. 8100 Map dated April 6, 1945,
Map No. 56, Parcel No. 88.
Also, excepting and reserving all that certain plot, piece or parcel of land lying and
being in the Town of Louisville, County of St. Lawrence and State of New York,
being part of the Amab Casaw Farm, so called and being described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the southerly side of State Highway No. 8100 where the
same is intersected by the division line between premises hereinafter described and
lands of the State of New York shown as Parcel No. 13 on Map No. 10 as described
in Notice of Appropriation recorded in Liber 571, page 389; running thence along
said last mentioned land, south 19° 37' east 182.99 feet to a point; running thence
along other lands now or formerly of Antenna Systems Corporation, north 59°
30' east 52.55 feet; running thence along other lands now or formerly of Oral S.
Helmer, north 30° 30' west 179.70 feet to the southerly side of State Highway No.
8100; running thence along the same, south 59° 30' west 18 feet to the point of
beginning.
§ A307-10 ANNEXATIONS § A307-13
A307:11

ARTICLE V
Consolidated Rail Corporation Property
[Adopted 5-6-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
§ A307-14. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory, to wit:
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Norfolk, County of St. Lawrence
and State of New York, and being part of mile-square Lot Nos. 45 and 55, and more
particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point made by the intersection of the
easterly line of the Town of Norfolk with the southerly bounds of the Consolidated
Rail Corporation property; thence in a southerly direction south 21° 29' 05" east along
the east bounds of Norfolk Township, which is also the westerly bounds of Great Lot
No. 25, Tract M in the Town of Massena, a distance of 1,750 linear feet, more or
less, to a point; thence angle right westerly south 67° 18' 35" west through lands in
the Town of Norfolk, a distance of 366.66 linear feet, more or less, to a point; thence
in a northerly direction north 23° 06' 15" west, through lands in the Township of
Norfolk, a distance of 1,524.74 linear feet to the south bounds of the Consolidated Rail
Corporation property and the northwest corner of this parcel; thence along the south
bounds of the Consolidated Rail Corporation property along a curve to the right and
whose radius is 3,779.83 feet; a distance of 450 linear feet, more or less, to the point
of beginning. Containing 18.77 acres, more or less. Being a part of a farm conveyed by
Joseph A. and Ann Marie Giorgi to the Massena Industrial Development Corporation
September 20, 1978, recorded in Canton, New York, in Liber 935, page 973, and known
as "Parcel II (two)."
§ A307-15. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-16. Inclusion in Election District No. 7.
The territory described by this article shall be included in Election District No. 7 of said
village.
§ A307-17. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in this article became effective on the
6th day of May 1981 by the adoption of a resolution, findings and order of the Village
Board of the Village of Massena approving the petition of annexation.
§ A307-14 ANNEXATIONS § A307-17
A307:13

ARTICLE VI
Amab Casaw Farm
[Adopted 4-19-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
§ A307-18. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory:
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Louisville, County of St. Lawrence,
and State of New York, being part of the "Amab Casaw Farm," so called, located in
Mile Square Lot No. 35 and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning
at a point in the center of the highway leading from Massena to Raymondville (an
extension of Andrews Street in the Village of Massena) and being also known as "State
Highway No. 8100," said point being 208.71 feet westerly measured along the center
line of the concrete road from the point where the easterly line of the Amab Casaw
Farm, on the south side of the highway, intersects the center of the highway and running
thence south 60° 30' west, a distance of 433.3 feet along the center line of the highway;
thence south 59° 30' west, a distance of 104.5 feet still along the center of the highway;
thence south 30° 30' east a distance of 204.45 feet to a point; thence north 60° 30' east,
a distance of 506.7 feet to a point; thence north 20° 48' west, a distance of 208.71 feet
to the point of beginning, containing 2.46 acres, more or less.
Excepting and reserving from the above-described premises, situate in the Town of
Louisville, St. Lawrence County, New York, the following:
The premises conveyed to Harold J. Ashley and Mary Margaret Ashley by John
J. Mahoney and Katherine Agnes Mahoney by deed, dated the 10th day of
November 1949 and recorded January 4, 1950, in Liber 451 of Deeds at page 533,
reference to which is made for a more particular description of the premises.
The premises described in a deed from John J. Mahoney to Earl J. Woods and
Margaret G. Woods, dated July 27, 1967, and recorded September 25, 1967, in
Liber 794 of Deeds at page 84, reference to which deed is made for a more
particular description of the premises.
The premises conveyed to Harold J. Ashley and Mary M. Ashley by John J.
Mahoney, individually and as surviving spouse of Katherine Agnes Mahoney,
dated March 27, 1972, and recorded March 28, 1972, in Liber 866 of Deeds at
page 1139, reference to which deed is made for a more particular description of the
premises. Being a portion of premises described in a deed from Daniel Mahoney
and Maurice D. Mahoney as administrators of the estate of John J. Mahoney to
Maurice D. Mahoney and Muriel C. Mahoney, his wife, which deed was dated
December 18, 1975, and was recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office,
Canton, New York, on February 4, 1976, in Liber 906 of Deeds at page 544.
§ A307-18 ANNEXATIONS § A307-18
A307:15
Also, all that certain plot, piece or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Louisville,
County of St. Lawrence, and State of New York, being part of the "Amab Casaw Farm,"
so called, and part of Mile Square Lot No. 35 of the Town of Louisville, and being
more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point in the center line of the
highway leading from Massena Village to Raymondville (State Highway No. 8100),
formerly called the "Squires Road," now "Andrews Street Road," said point being the
northwest corner of property conveyed by Lay Realty Corporation to West Massena,
Inc. and running thence southerly along said line a distance of 208.71 feet to a point;
thence westerly and parallel to the center line of said highway, a distance of 208.71 feet;
thence northerly and parallel to the first-described line 208.71 feet to the center of the
highway; thence easterly along the center line of said highway, 208.71 feet to the point
of beginning, containing one acre of land more or less.
§ A307-19. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-20. Inclusion in Election District No. 1.
The territory described by this article shall be included in Election District No. 1 of said
village.
§ A307-21. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in this article became effective on the
19th day of April 1983 by the adoption of a resolution, findings and order of the Village
Board of the Village of Massena approving the petition of annexation.
§ A307-18 MASSENA CODE § A307-21
A307:16
ARTICLE VII
Planned Commercial District
[Adopted 12-20-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988]
§ A307-22. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory:
All that tract of land situate northeast of New York State Highway Route No. 37 in
the Town of Louisville, County of St. Lawrence and State of New York, bounded and
described as follows:
Beginning at a concrete highway monument found in the northeast boundary of New
York State Highway Route No. 37 where the same intersects the south boundary of
parcel No. 1 (6.56 acres) as described in a deed to Heritage Homes, Inc. (Liber 974,
Page 656), said monument also being distant 204.5 feet south of the center of Andrews
Street extension (New York State Highway Route No. 37), and running thence on a
recorded bearing of north 59° 30' 00" east a distance of 416.97 feet along the remains
of a fence in the boundary of Heritage Homes, Inc., to an iron pipe found; thence south
44° 19' 55" east a distance of 429.17 feet along the boundary of Heritage Homes, Inc.,
to an iron pipe found; thence south 59° 17' 40" west a distance of 416.97 feet along
the boundary of Heritage Homes, Inc., to an iron pipe found in the apparent northeast
boundary of New York State Highway Route No. 37; thence north 44° 17' 05" west
a distance of 430.62 feet along the apparent northeast boundary of New York State
Highway Route No. 37 to the point of beginning, containing 3.998 acres of land more
or less as prepared by Michael H. Webb L.S. 49557 of Webb Wilhelm Land Surveyors.
§ A307-23. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-24. Inclusion in Election District No. 2; zoning designation.
The territory described and annexed to the Village of Massena, New York, by this article
shall be included in Election District No. 2 of said village. The annexed property shall
be zoned Planned Commercial District.
§ A307-22 ANNEXATIONS § A307-24
A307:17

ARTICLE VIII
Andrews Street Property
[Adopted 10-1-1991 by L.L. No. 10-1991]
§ A307-25. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, in addition to the territory theretofore contained
within its boundaries, the following described territory:
All that tract of land generally described as Tax Map Identification Numbers 9.073-2-19
and 9.073-2-20 situated on Andrews Street in the Town of Louisville, New York.
§ A307-26. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-27. Inclusion in Election District No. 2; zoning designation.
The territory described and annexed to the Village of Massena, New York, shall be
included in Election District No. 2 of said village. The annexed property shall be zoned
Residential A.
§ A307-25 ANNEXATIONS § A307-27
A307:19

ARTICLE IX
Outer Andrews Street
[Adopted 9-6-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ A307-28. Territory annexed.
The following territory is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena:
Tax Map No. 9.073-7-22, Route No. 56, outer Andrews Street: Mile Square No.
35, commencing in the southerly boundary of New York State Route No. 56 at the
northwest corner of John Mahoney lot, proceed north 61 degrees 08 minutes 57 seconds
east, 265.09 feet along the southerly boundary of Route No. 56 to an iron pipe found
and thence the point of beginning; thence north 61 degrees 08 minutes 57 seconds east,
95.33 feet along the highway boundary to an iron pipe found at the northwesterly corner
of Heritage Homes, Inc. (liber 974, page 656); thence south 30 degrees 04 minutes 17
seconds east, 173.28 feet along the westerly boundary of Heritage Homes, Inc., to an
iron re-rod set in the town line of Louisville and the corporation line of the Village of
Massena; thence south 61 degrees 08 minutes 57 seconds west, 95.33 feet along said
town and village line to an iron pipe found; thence north 30 degrees 04 minutes 17
seconds west, 173.28 feet along the easterly line of Jerry R. and Carol T. Sharp (liber
921, page 379) to the point or place of beginning; containing 0.379 acres of land, as
surveyed by Haynes and Smith Associates, professional land surveyors, during October
of 1986.
§ A307-29. Zoning designation.
Said area shall be zoned Residential A.
§ A307-30. Inclusion in Election District No. 2.
The territory described and annexed to the Village of Massena, New York, shall be
included in Election District No. 2 of said village.
§ A307-28 ANNEXATIONS § A307-30
A307:21

ARTICLE X
Rose Hill Foundation, Inc.
[Adopted 1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ A307-31. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, in addition to the territory theretofore contained
within its boundaries, the following described territory, to wit:
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Massena, County of St. Lawrence
and State of New York, being a portion of the premises formerly conveyed by Heritage
Homes, Inc., to Rose Hill Foundation, Inc., by deed dated May 14, 1997, and recorded
in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office on November 16, 1998, as Instrument ID#
1998-00014733, and being more precisely described as follows:
Beginning at a point marked by a stone monument existing on April 25, 1997, at the
corner of the present (1997) boundary between the Town of Massena and the Village
of Massena, said point also being northwesterly corner of a 44.70 acres parcel of land
formerly conveyed by North Housing, Inc., to Hoot Owl Express Enterprises, Inc., by
deed dated August 17, 1993, and recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office on
September 22, 1993, in Liber 1072 of deeds at page 211,
And runs from thence along the present (1997) boundary between the Town of Massena
and the Village of Massena, being also the common boundary between the abovementioned
Rose Hill Foundation, Inc., premises and the aforesaid Hoot Owl Express
Enterprises, Inc., premises (as previously surveyed by Richard Cambridge, L.S. 30197
on October 23, 1989, as per the description contained in Liber 1072 of deeds, page 211)
S 31° 56' 40" E a distance of 1694.24 feet to a point in the apparent northerly bounds
of the Village of Massena as described in Book 1 of Incorporation of Villages, page 44,
recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office on June 14, 1927;
Thence along the apparent northerly bounds of the Village of Massena as described in
Book 1 of Incorporation of Villages, page 44, S 57° 21' 14" W a distance of 2750.06
feet to a point marked by a 3/4-inch diameter iron pipe set on June 23, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the apparent northerly bounds of the
Village of Massena aforesaid S 57° 21' 14" W a distance of 43.57 feet to a point in the
center of the right-of-way of the Town Line Road between the Towns of Louisville and
Massena;
Thence along the center of the right-of-way of the aforesaid Town Line Road N 33°
23' 52" W a distance of 413.54 feet to the southwesterly corner of premises formerly
conveyed by Linwood I. Nightingale and Betty M. Nightingale to Alan A. Avery and
Cindy M. Avery by deed dated March 26, 1984, and recorded in the St. Lawrence
County Clerk's office on April 5, 1984, in Liber 980 of deeds at page 710;
Thence along the southerly bounds of the aforesaid Avery premises, Liber 980 of deeds,
page 710, N 56° 36' 08" E a distance of 52.67 feet to a point marked by a 3/4-inch
diameter iron pipe set on June 23, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the southerly bounds of the aforesaid
Avery premises, Liber 980 of deeds, page 710, N 56° 36' 08" E a distance of 579.98
feet to the southeasterly corner thereof, said corner being marked by a 3/4-inch diameter
iron pipe set on April 25, 1997;
§ A307-31 ANNEXATIONS § A307-31
A307:23
Thence along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid Avery premises, Liber 980 of deeds,
page 710, N 33° 23' 52" W a distance of 200.00 feet to the northeasterly corner
thereof, being also the southeasterly corner of premises formerly conveyed by Richard
F. Clookey and Helen D. Clookey to Bruce J. Tusler and Charmaine A. Tusler by
deed dated July 19, 1988, and recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office on
February 24, 1989, in Liber 1027 of deeds at page 203, said corner being marked by a
3/4-inch diameter iron pipe set on April 25, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid Tusler
premises, Liber 1027 of deeds, page 203, N 33° 23' 52" W a distance of 200.00 feet to
the northeasterly corner thereof, said corner being marked by a 3/4-inch diameter iron
pipe set on April 25, 1997;
Thence along the northerly bounds of the aforesaid Tusler premises, Liber 1027 of
deeds, page 203, S 56° 36' 08" W a distance of 589.65 feet to a point marked by a 3/
4-inch diameter iron pipe set on June 16, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the northerly bounds of the aforesaid
Tusler premises, Liber 1027 of deeds, page 203, S 56° 36' 08" W a distance of 43.00
feet to the northwesterly corner thereof, being a point in the center of the right-of-way
of the aforesaid Town Line Road;
Thence along the center of the right-of-way of the aforesaid Town Line Road N 33°
23' 52" W a distance of 101.00 feet to the southwesterly corner of premises formerly
conveyed by Ronald William Miller and Barbara Gillan Miller to Wolfgang Schmenkel
and Frieda Schmenkel by deed dated May 12, 1989, and recorded in the St. Lawrence
County Clerk's office on June 7, 1989, in Liber 1029 of deeds at page 927, said corner
being additionally located S 33° 23' 52" E a distance of 952.00 feet, as measured along
the center of the right-of-way of the aforesaid Town Line Road, from its intersection
with the center of the Kingsley Road;
Thence along the southerly bounds of the aforesaid Schmenkel premises, Liber 1029
of deeds, page 927, N 56° 36' 08" E a distance of 53.52 feet to a point marked by a 3/
4-inch diameter iron pipe set on June 16, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the southerly bounds of the aforesaid
Schmenkel premises, Liber 1029 of deeds, page 927, N 56° 36' 08" E a distance of
579.13 feet to the southeasterly corner thereof, said corner being marked by a 3/4-inch
diameter iron pipe set on April 25, 1997;
Thence along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid Schmenkel premises, Liber 1029 of
deeds, page 927, N 33° 23' 52" W a distance of 366.50 feet to the northeasterly corner
thereof, being also the southeasterly corner of premises formerly conveyed by Ricky
A. Snyder to Joseph F. Durant and Mary A. Durant by deed dated May 20, 1993, and
recorded in the St. Lawrence County Clerk's office on June 15, 1993, in Liber 1069 of
deeds at page 220, said corner being marked by a 5/8-inch diameter iron rerod existing
on April 25, 1997;
§ A307-31 MASSENA CODE § A307-31
A307:24
Thence continuing on the same course along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid Durant
premises, Liber 1069 of deeds, page 220, N 33° 23' 52" W a distance of 200.00 feet
to the northeasterly corner thereof, being also the southeasterly corner of premises
formerly conveyed by Robert J. Morrell and Maureen D. Morrell to Kenneth L. Jacks
and Kim Jacks by deed dated March 5, 1979, and recorded in the St. Lawrence County
Clerk's office on March 23, 1979, in Liber 939 of deeds at page 558, said corner being
marked by a 5/8-inch diameter iron rerod existing on April 25, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid Jacks
premises, Liber 939 of deeds, page 558, N 33° 23' 52"Wa distance of 200.00 feet to the
northeasterly corner thereof, being also the southeasterly corner of premises formerly
conveyed by Michael P. McCarthy and Bonnie J. McCarthy to David L. Goolden and
Betty J. Goolden by deed dated August 26, 1980, and recorded in the St. Lawrence
County Clerk's office on September 9, 1980, in Liber 953 of deeds at page 169, said
corner being marked by a 3/4-inch diameter iron pipe set on April 25, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the easterly bounds of the aforesaid
Goolden premises, Liber 953 of deeds, page 169, N 33° 23' 52" W a distance of 200.00
feet to the northeasterly corner thereof, said corner being marked by a 3/4-inch diameter
iron pipe set on April 26, 1997;
Thence along the northerly bounds of the aforesaid Goolden premises, Liber 953 of
deeds, page 169, S 56° 36' 08" W a distance of 587.65 feet to a point marked by a 3/
4-inch diameter iron pipe set on June 16, 1997;
Thence continuing on the same course along the northerly bounds of the aforesaid
Goolden premises, Liber 953 of deeds page 169, S 56° 36' 08" W a distance of 45.00
feet to the norwesterly corner thereof, being a point in the center of the right-of-way of
the aforesaid Town Line Road, said point being additionally located N 33° 23' 52" W a
distance of 14.5 feet, as measured along the center of the right-of-way of the aforesaid
Town Line Road, from its intersection with the centerline of the Kingsley Road;
Thence along the center of the right-of-way of the aforesaid Town Line Road N 33° 23'
52" W a distance of 984.36 feet, more or less, to the northwesterly corner of the abovementioned
Rose Hill Foundation, Inc., premises, Instrument ID# 1998-00014733;
Thence along the northerly bounds of the above-mentioned Rose Hill Foundation, Inc.,
premises, Instrument ID# 1998-00014733, on an approximate bearing of N 55° 24' 08"
E (from the interior deed angle of 91° 12') a distance of 29.9 feet, more or less, to a
point marked by a 1-inch diameter iron pin existing on April 25, 1997;
Thence (the remaining courses herein to the point and place of beginning not fieldsurveyed,
but taken from the deed description in Instrument ID# 1998-00017433)
continuing on the same course along the northerly bounds of the above-mentioned Rose
Hill Foundation, Inc., premises, Instrument ID# 1998-00014733, on the approximate
bearing of N 55° 24' 08" E, a distance of about 2791.9 feet, more or less, to the
northeasterly corner thereof (total deed distance along said northerly bounds is 2821.8
feet);
Thence along the easterly bounds of the above-mentioned Rose Hill Foundation, Inc.,
premises, Instrument ID# 1998-00014733, on an approximate bearing of S 34° 04' 56"
E a distance of about 1267.5 feet, more or less (to mathematically close) to the point
and place of beginning,
§ A307-31 ANNEXATIONS § A307-31
A307:25
To contain 168.82 acres of land, more or less, as partially surveyed by Edgar G. Graves,
New York State Licensed Land Surveyor No. 45878, Madrid, New York, between April
25, 1997, and June 23, 1997.
Bearings used in the foregoing description are based on prior horizontal control
established by Edgar G. Graves, L.S. during Nov-Dec 1993 in conjunction with aerial
photography and mapping performed by LaFave, White and McGivern, L.S., P.C.,
between Nov 1993 and Jan 1994. Existing horizontal control furnished by LaFave,
White and McGivern, L.S., P.C., was based on the New York State Plane Coordinate
System, East Zone. It is noted for comparison purposes that the bearing of S 31° 56' 40"
E along the first course in the above description corresponds to the deed bearing of N
20° 55' 59" W along the same line as stated in the description of the Hoot Owl Express
Enterprises, Inc., 44.70 acres of land, Liber 1072 of deeds, page 211.
§ A307-32. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-33. Inclusion in Election District No. 9.
The territory described and annexed to the Village of Massena, New York, shall be
included in Election District No. 9 of said village.
§ A307-34. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in this article became effective on the
19th day of January 1999 by the adoption of a resolution, findings and order of the
Village Board of the Village of Massena approving the petition of annexation.
§ A307-31 MASSENA CODE § A307-34
A307:26
ARTICLE XI
Heritage Homes, Inc. (Richard E. Maginn)
[Adopted 5-20-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ A307-35. Territory described.
The Village of Massena shall contain, on and after the effective date of this section,
in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its boundaries, the following
described territory, to wit:
All that tract, piece or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Mile Square No. 45
in the Town of Louisville, County of St. Lawrence, State of New York, bounded and
described as follows: Beginning at a concrete highway monument on the northeasterly
boundary of New York State Highway Route 37 where it intersects the southerly
boundary of the lands now or formerly of Richard and Carol Maginn Liber 945 at Page
676 and thence the point of beginning; thence North 68 degrees 45 minutes 25 seconds
East 1,131.82 feet along a wire fence on the southerly boundary of said Maginn to an
iron re-rod on the westerly boundary of said Maginn in Liber 934 at Page 992; thence
South 21 degrees 16 minutes 30 seconds East 216.13 feet to an iron re-rod marking the
northeast corner of the lands now or formerly of the Board of Education of Massena,
Central School Liber 597 at Page 133; thence South 69 degrees 25 minutes 30 seconds
West 1,044.62 feet along the northerly boundary of said School to an iron re-rod on
the northeasterly boundary of the aforementioned Route 37, said re-rod distant 3.0 feet
northwest of a concrete highway monument; thence North 44 degrees 26 minutes 15
seconds West 221.89 feet along a fence on the boundary of said Route 37 to the point
or place of beginning. Containing 5.24 acres of land more or less as surveyed by David
A. Haynes, L.S. 49101, February, 1981.
Together with and subject to any easements, exceptions, rights, privileges, obligations,
convenants, conditions and restrictions of record.
As surveyed by David A. Haynes, Licensed Land Surveyor, Nicholville, New York,
February 1981.
Being the same premises set forth and described in that certain deed dated March
11, 1985, from Richard C. Buckley, St. Lawrence County Treasurer, as Limited
Administrator, to first party, said deed being recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the
County of St. Lawrence at Canton, New York, on the 22nd day of March 1985, in Liber
988 at Page 784.
§ A307-36. Territory annexed.
The territory described is hereby annexed to the Village of Massena, New York,
pursuant to the provisions of § 714 of the General Municipal Law.
§ A307-37. Inclusion in Election of District No. 2.
The territory described and annexed to the Village of Massena, New York, shall be
included in Election District No. 2 of said Village.
§ A307-35 ANNEXATIONS § A307-38
A307:27
§ A307-38. Effective date of annexation.
The annexation of the above territory described in this article shall take effect upon filing
with the Department of State.
§ A307-38 MASSENA CODE § A307-38
A307:28
Chapter A308
RADIO ANTENNA AGREEMENT
§ A308-1. Permission granted.
The consent, permission and authority of the Village of Massena, New York, be and
hereby is given and granted to the company, to erect and place and maintain a radio
antenna upon the water tank of the Village of Massena for the purpose of transmitting
and receiving communications concerning the operation and maintenance of the gas
lines and facilities of said corporation in the Village of Massena and surrounding
territories.
§ A308-2. Approval of Village Engineer.
That the company shall provide its Village Engineer with the plans and specifications for
the placing and erecting of said antenna and said Engineer shall approve the plans and
specifications before the erection and placing of the said radio antenna upon said water
tank. That the installation of said radio antenna shall be done to the satisfaction of said
Village Engineer.
§ A308-3. Indemnification of village.
The company shall at all times wholly indemnify the village from and against all loss,
damage and injury and expense to which the village may be put by reason of any damage
or injury to persons or property, including the village, caused by the construction, repair,
maintenance or operation by the company of said radio antenna upon said water tank, as
well as against any damage or injuries resulting from the imprudence, neglect or want of
skill of the employees or agents, maintenance or operation by the company of said radio
antenna.
§ A308-4. Insurance.
That the company shall provide the village with a certificate of insurance, naming the
village as an insured, with the limits of liability for both personal injury of at least
$100,000 each person and $300,000 each accident.
§ A308-5. Power to revoke.
That the franchise hereby granted shall be revocable at any time in the discretion of
the village; provided, however, that in the event that the village cancels the right of the
company to use said water tower for its radio antenna, that the company shall have the
necessary time to obtain approval from the Federal Communications Commission for a
new location for said radio antenna.
§ A308-6. Agreement and right subject to statutes, orders and rules.
This agreement and said right to use said water tower shall be subject to all statutes,
orders and rules made or to be made by lawfully constituted authority having jurisdiction
in the premises.
§ A307-38 RADIO ANTENNA AGREEMENT § A308-7
A308:1
§ A308-7. Notices; delivery.
Any notice to be given under any of the provisions hereof may be effectively given to
said village by delivering the same personally to the Village Clerk or by sending the
same to him by registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to "The Village Clerk of the
Village of Massena, New York" and to the company by delivering or sending the same
to the company by registered mail, addressed to its manager or chief officer in charge of
its place of business in the Village of Massena, New York. If any notice is sent by mail,
the same shall be deemed to have been given on the date succeeding the posting thereof.
§ A308-8. Effect of failure of village to enforce.
The failure of the village to enforce any of the provisions of this agreement or to require
at any time performance by the company of any of the provisions hereof shall in no way
be construed to a waiver nor in any way to affect the validity of this agreement or any
part thereof, or the right of the village to thereafter enforce each and every provision.
§ A308-9. Extension of agreement.
This agreement shall be extended to benefit the parties hereto, their successors and
assigns respectively.
§ A308-10. Purpose; third parties.
This agreement is solely for the purpose of benefiting the parties hereto and is not
intended to be the benefit of any third party, nor construed as a third party beneficiary
contract.
§ A308-11. Purpose restricted.
The parties hereto agree that this franchise to place said radio antenna shall be for the
sole purpose of enabling the said company to transmit and receive communications
concerning the operation and maintenance of the gas line or the facilities of the said
corporation and shall not give the said company the right to engage in any other
commercial activities for any other commercial activities for any other utilities and/or
businesses.
§ A308-12. Costs, charges and expenses of agreement.
The company expressly agrees to pay the costs and charges and the expenses of the
village incidental and necessary to the granting of this franchise agreement.
§ A308-7 MASSENA CODE § A308-12
A308:2
Chapter A309
TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM
§ A309-1. Right given.
The Antenna Systems Corporation (hereinafter called the "Corporation") is hereby given
and granted the right and privilege to erect and maintain in any and all existing or future
streets, avenues, lanes, highways and public alleys in said village, for the purpose of
transmission and distribution of television impulses, energy and signals, a community
antenna television system and a closed circuit television system.
§ A309-2. Right of maintenance.
At all times after the placing of said poles and installation of said wires the Corporation
shall be permitted to examine the same and to keep the same in proper condition and
repair and do all necessary work to properly maintain the construction and operation
thereof.
§ A309-3. Keeping of records; examination.
The Corporation shall at all times make and keep full and complete plans, maps and
records, showing the exact location of all equipment installed and used by the
corporation in the village, and the same shall be open for inspection by the Village
Engineer at all times.
§ A309-4. Location of poles, etc.
The location of all poles and wires on said highways shall be subject to the direction and
approval of the Board of Trustees or their duly authorized agent; and all such poles and
wires shall be in and along the sides of said highways, except that wires may be strung
across highways wherever necessary.
§ A309-5. Installation plans.
The Corporation, before beginning any new work in said village under this franchise,
save and except lateral services, shall file with the Village Engineer a plan showing the
highways in which it proposes to install said poles and wires, and the particular parts
thereof it proposes to occupy.
§ A309-6. Definition.
Wherever the word "highway" is used in this franchise it shall mean common and public
highways and shall include any street or bridge, under the jurisdiction of the village,
forming part of a highway.
§ A309-7. Indemnification.
The Corporation shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the village, its boards,
commissions, officers, agents and employees against any claim for injury to or death of
any person or any injury to any property caused by the Corporation in the construction
§ A308-12 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-7
A309:1
or operation of its property or arising out of the exercise of any right under this
franchise; and in the event of any determination of liability of the village, shall save
harmless and indemnify its boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees from
any and all liabilities growing out of or as a result of the violation or failure on the
part of the Corporation, its successors and assigns to observe its proper duty, or because
of negligence in whole or in part arising out of the construction, repair, extension,
maintenance or operation of its services or equipment of any kind or character used in
connection with this franchise.
§ A309-8. Insurance.
The Corporation shall procure and furnish and file with the Village Clerk before
proceeding with any work of installation or otherwise, personal liability insurance
with limits of not less than $100,000 to any one person and $300,000 for any one
accident, and a policy of property damage insurance with a limit of not less than
$50,000. In addition, said Corporation shall comply with the Workmen's Compensation
requirements of the State of New York.
§ A309-9. Standards of installation.
All installation of equipment, including wires and cables, shall be placed, erected and
maintained in a proper workmanlike manner and in accord with good engineering
practices, and of sufficient height to comply with all existing village regulations and
ordinances and state laws so as not to interfere in any manner with the rights of
the public or individual property owners; and shall not interfere with the travel and
use of public places; and during the construction, repair or removal thereof shall not
reasonably obstruct or impede traffic. In the event of any urban renewal or other public
improvement program, said Corporation agrees to remove and relocate its equipment,
poles, wires and apparatus at no expense to the village.
§ A309-10. Sale, assignment, transfer or subletting of franchise.
Except for a mortgage to secure a loan or loans to construct and operate said system,
and except for such transactions as may be required for liquidation, reorganization and/
or recapitalization of the Antenna Systems Corporation, Antenna Systems Corporation
shall not sell, transfer, assign or sublet its system and the privileges granted herein
without first securing the approval of the Village Board of the Village of Massena for
such sale, transfer, assignment or sublease. Such approval will not be unreasonably
withheld. The exceptions herein noted are made by reason of the understanding of the
parties hereto that in the rebuilding and reconstruction of the system to be provided by
Antenna Systems Corporation, that some changes as indicated may be required, and in
making this agreement the Village of Massena, through its Village Board, acknowledges
that it has knowledge and understanding of such possibility.
§ A309-11. Service to residents.
The Corporation agrees to provide the services of the Community Antenna Television
System and Closed Circuit Television System, together with all services provided in
this franchise, where economically feasible, to any and all residents of the village on all
village streets, with such service to use existing poles where space thereon permits and if
§ A309-7 MASSENA CODE § A309-11
A309:2
not, on Corporation poles, on approval thereof by the Board of Trustees of said village.
§ A309-12. Scope of service.
Said Corporation shall continue to provide its subscribers the five channels and F.M.
radio signal as heretofore, and in addition it shall rebuild the systems in the village so
as to provide two New York City independent stations and a Syracuse ABC affiliate, by
microwave. The Corporation shall also provide a channel for the broadcast of continuous
time and weather information, 24 hours per day, seven days per week, with F.M.
background music, which channel can be converted to local origination program, and
any other special off-the-air signals, or off-the-air educational channels as they may
become available, the monthly service charge therefor to be subject to negotiation by the
parties.
§ A309-13. Completion date.
If the rebuilding of said system for microwave, as provided in § A309-12 hereof, is not
completed by May 31, 1968, the Board of Trustees shall have the right to terminate this
agreement in accordance with provisions contained herein; provided that the failure to
complete said rebuilding is within the control of the Corporation.
§ A309-14. Standard of service requirements.
The Corporation shall provide an acceptable standard of picture and service throughout
the village to all its subscribers. Any degradation of picture quality resulting from the
Corporations operations will be repaired or corrected within a reasonable time.
§ A309-15. Limitations.
The Corporation shall not engage in the business of television repair service or the sale
of television sets.
§ A309-16. Termination; costs.
In the event of the lapse or termination of said franchise all equipment of said
Corporation shall be removed at no cost to the village.
§ A309-17. Cancellation or termination.
This franchise may be cancelled upon substantial failure of the Antenna Systems
Corporation to comply with the terms and conditions hereof, except as to those failures
to comply which are caused by acts of God, labor disputes, injunctions, judgments, fire,
flood, public disaster or other occurrences beyond the control of the Antenna Systems
Corporation after due notice and a hearing is had. In the event that such notice is given,
such hearing shall be had before either a Supreme Court Justice of the State of New York
sitting in St. Lawrence County, or before the County Judge of St. Lawrence County,
who shall have the power to hear and determine the issues raised by the notice given to
Antenna Systems Corporation. So far as applicable, the provisions of Article 75 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York shall govern such a proceeding.
In the event of a cancellation or other termination by reason of this provision of this
franchise or for any other reason, the Antenna Systems Corporation shall at its own
§ A309-11 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-17
A309:3
expense forthwith remove all of its construction and equipment from the streets, alleys
and public places in the Village of Massena and restore such to as good condition as
before, subject to ordinary wear and tear and damage by the elements, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Village Board of the Village of Massena.
§ A309-18. Hearing on rate increases.
No increases in rate charges to subscribers shall be made except as authorized by the
Village Board after a hearing affording due process to the public.
§ A309-19. Rates. [Amended 9-4-1973; 11-17-1976]
A. NewChannels' rates for services rendered to residential customers, persons living in
homes, apartments, condominiums, mobile homes or other residential units, shall
not exceed the following schedule:
Service Rate
Installation charge (first set, new installation) $20.00 (reduced from
$25.00)
Installation charge (first set, line already installed) $10.00
Installation charge (additional outlets, each) $5.00
FM installation (with existing CATV service) $7.50
FM installation (no CATV service, new
installation)
$20.00
FM installation (no CATV service, line already
installed)
$10.00
Additional location, each (same building) $5.00
Relocation of outlets, each $5.00
Reconnection $5.00
Transfer to new home (line already installed) $5.00
Transfer to new home (no existing line) $10.00
Monthly service charge for first set or FM receiver $6.00 (increased from
$5.50)
B. NewChannels' rates for services rendered to commercial customers (i.e.,
nonresidential) shall not exceed the following schedule:
Service Rate
Installation charge (first set) $20.00 plus cost of labor and materials, plus
15%
Installation charge (additional
outlets)
$5.00 plus cost of labor and materials, plus
15%
Monthly service charge for first
set or FM receiver
$9.90
§ A309-17 MASSENA CODE § A309-19
A309:4
§ A309-20. Term of agreement.
The franchise hereby granted shall be for the term of 12 years from and after the effective
date of the ordinance or local law granting said franchise, provided that if at any time
within two years of the expiration date of any renewal hereof, the Corporation shall
notify the Village Board of Trustees, in writing, that it desires a renewal thereof for a
further period, the said Board may but shall not be obligated to renew by ordinance or
local law this agreement, from time to time, for further periods not exceeding 10 years,
at any one time.
§ A309-21. Legal fees.
The Corporation shall pay the costs, charges and expenses of the village and its attorney,
incidental to the preparation and passing of such ordinance or local law and this
agreement.
§ A309-22. Payment to village for granting of franchise. [Amended 12-4-197331]
Service Rate
Monthly service charge for
extra outlets or FM receiver,
each
$1.50
C. NewChannels' rates for multiunit commercial establishments, such as hotels,
motels, hospitals and nursing homes, shall not exceed the following schedule:
Service Rate
Installation charge (first set) $20.00 plus cost of labor and
materials, plus 15%
Installation charge (additional outlets) $5.00 plus cost of labor and
materials, plus 15%
Monthly service charge for first set or
FM receiver
$9.90
Monthly service charge for extra
outlets or FM receiver, each
$2.00
D. NewChannels' rates for home box office (i.e., pay television) shall not exceed the
following schedule:
Service Rate
Installation charge (each set) $20.00
Monthly service charge (each set) $8.00
A. As a part of the consideration for this franchise, Antenna Systems Corporation shall
pay to the Village of Massena as additional consideration for the granting of this
franchise, for the period hereinbefore specified, a sum computed at 2% of the gross
31. Editor's Note: This amendment also approved the proposed merger of the Antenna System Corporation into its parent,
New Channels Corporation.
§ A309-19 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-22
A309:5
§ A309-23. Restrictions on wires, etc.
It is understood that the privileges granted hereunder shall not include the right or
privilege of stringing wire or cables from house to house or upon trees along the streets
not within the highway, nor shall the Corporation erect or construct its lines through
backyards, from housetop to housetop, or from or through adjacent rear properties.
§ A309-24. Validity.
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase or paragraph of the local law or ordinance for
any reason be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity of any other section, sentence, clause, phrase or paragraph of said ordinance,
local law or agreement. If said agreement becomes substantially unworkable because
of any such invalidity or illegality then this franchise shall be subject to revision or
amendment.
billings derived from monthly service charges only for the sale of its services in
the Village of Massena under this new franchise, such new franchise to permit
the Antenna Systems Corporation to commence its monthly service charge to
customers as of the beginning of the month following the completion of the
installation of the service provided for in this franchise, and such two-percent
additional consideration to apply to such monthly service charge billings as such
installations are completed, it being understood in amplification of this statement
that the Corporation shall commence charging with the commencement of the
providing of the new service designed to be provided by this franchise, and shall
be obligated to pay on its gross billings as the result thereof to the village the
percentage indicated coincident with the commencement of making of such charge
for such new service. No two-percent payment shall be required for continuation
of existing service. The computations for the purpose of making the payments
required hereunder shall be made at least quarterly, based upon the preceding
calendar year. Concurrently with such payment, the Antenna Systems Corporation
shall provide the Village of Massena with a certified public accountant's statement
of the full true and complete record of its gross billings for monthly service charges
only during the period for which payment is being made and with respect only to the
monthly service charges which have been billed for the new service being provided
under this franchise. Such payment shall be in lieu of any other tax or increased
rate of tax or other imposition, assessment or charge except real property taxes. The
taxes referred to herein are intended to mean taxes imposed or otherwise assessed
by the Village of Massena.
B. Antenna Systems Corporation shall make its books, vouchers, contracts and
records, with respect to the monthly service billings made by it which are by this
franchise subjected to the two-percent payment hereinabove required, available to
the auditors of the Village of Massena at all reasonable times for the purpose of
ascertaining the gross monthly service billings in the Village of Massena upon
which said Antenna Systems Corporation is obligated to the Village of Massena for
the payments hereinabove prescribed.
§ A309-22 MASSENA CODE § A309-25
A309:6
§ A309-25. Extension of benefit.
This franchise shall extend to, benefit and bind the parties hereto, their successors and
assigns.
§ A309-26. Execution of agreement.
The Mayor of the Village of Massena is authorized to execute an agreement with the
Corporation in accordance with the terms contained herein.
§ A309-27. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Village of Massena, New York, inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such
repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all other respects this
chapter shall be in addition to the other ordinances regulating and governing the subject
matter covered by this chapter.
§ A309-28. Quality of materials; performance of work. [Added 11-17-1976]
In the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of its cable system,
NewChannels will use material of good and durable quality. In the operation of its
system, NewChannels will employ personnel with training, skill and experience in
electronics and communications. In the event of war or other similar national emergency
when such materials and/or personnel are not available, NewChannels is hereby
authorized to use whatever materials or personnel as may be available as a substitute. All
work involved in construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the system will be
performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner.
§ A309-29. Posting of security. [Added 11-17-1976]
A. NewChannels shall execute, deliver and file security in the amount of $5,000 in the
form of a bond deposited with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the approval of
the amendment of the franchise to guarantee the faithful performance by
NewChannels of the obligations of the franchise.
B. NewChannels shall not abandon the franchise or any portion of it or any service
provided without the written consent of the Village Board.
C. If NewChannels curtails or abandons service to any portion of the franchise area,
other than for nonpayment of fees, without the written consent of the Village Board,
NewChannels shall forfeit the sum of $5,000 to the village until such time as service
to the area is restored.
D. If the bond or any portion of it should be forfeited to the village, NewChannels shall
post additional security to cover the amount so forfeited, so that at all times during
the term of the franchise security posted by NewChannels will remain at $5,000.
E. Upon the termination of the franchise, any moneys deposited with the village by
NewChannels and not forfeited to the village, in accordance with this amendment,
shall be returned to NewChannels.
§ A309-25 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-30
A309:7
§ A309-30. Resolution of customer complaints. [Added 11-17-1976]
§ A309-31. Municipal property repair or replacement. [Added 11-17-1976]
Any municipal property damaged or destroyed by NewChannels shall be promptly
repaired or replaced by NewChannels and restored to serviceable condition.
§ A309-32. Employment discrimination prohibited. [Added 11-17-1976]
NewChannels will not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment,
nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges
of employment because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex.
§ A309-33. Right to promulgate rules and regulations. [Added 11-17-1976]
The right is hereby reserved to the village to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein
contained and existing, applicable ordinances and such additional regulations as it shall
find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such regulations, by
ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the laws of the State
A. Local office. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof,
NewChannels shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of
resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions
and similar matters. The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints
from subscribers during normal business hours, and in no event less than from 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Any complaints from subscribers shall
be acted upon as soon as possible, but in no case later than the following scheduled
business day after receipt. This provision shall be complied with if NewChannels
maintains a local business office outside the village in a place easily accessible to
village residents.
B. Complaints. Any complaints received at the local office regarding quality of
service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes and other matters which cannot be
resolved to the satisfaction of the subscriber within three business days of their
receipt may be forwarded to NewChannels' main office by the subscriber. The right
to register a complaint with either NewChannels' local office or main office exists
independently of this section and nothing contained in this section is intended to
limit this right.
C. Within five business days after receipt of such complaints at the main office,
NewChannels shall contact the subscriber, investigate the complaint and take
whatever reasonable steps as may be necessary to resolve the complaint.
NewChannels shall advise the subscriber in writing of any and all steps taken to
resolve the complaint and preclude any recurrence of the matter complained of.
D. NewChannels shall post a notice of the procedure outlined in this section, together
with the address and telephone number of NewChannels' main office, in a
conspicuous place in the local office. NewChannels shall also provide notice to
each subscriber annually of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints.
Notice of the procedures for reporting and resolving complaints will be given to
each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable system.
§ A309-30 MASSENA CODE § A309-33
A309:8
of New York. However, any substantive change in any of the rights or obligations of
NewChannels shall not be effective until NewChannels has had an opportunity to be
heard thereon and afforded due process of law with respect to any additional, amended
or changed regulations.
§ A309-34. Right of access to records. [Added 11-17-1976]
The village shall have access, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours,
to all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements and other like materials of
NewChannels relating to the property and operation by NewChannels of the franchise
and to all other records required to be kept hereunder.
§ A309-35. Administration of franchise. [Added 11-17-1976]
The Mayor of the village shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the
franchise and for the implementation of the complaint procedures.
§ A309-36. Approval. [Added 11-17-1976]
The terms of this franchise are subject to the approval of the New York State
Commission on Cable Television.
§ A309-37. Time limitations on operating authorization requests. [Added
11-17-1976]
NewChannels shall file requests for all necessary operating authorizations with the
New York State Commission on Cable Television and the Federal Communications
Commission within 60 days from the date the franchise is awarded or extended.
§ A309-38. Conformance with federal and state standards. [Added 11-17-1976]
NewChannels will conform to all federal and state laws and regulations; and any
modification of federal or state franchise standards, rules or regulations will, to the
extent applicable, be considered as part of the franchise as of the effective date of the
amendment and shall be incorporated into the franchise by specific amendments thereto
by action of the Village Board within one year from the effective date of the amendment
or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first.
§ A309-39. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ A309-33 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-39
A309:9

Disposition List
§ A309-39 TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM § A309-39
A309:11

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local
Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2001 12-4-2001 Telecommunications towers Ch. 273
1-2002 1-2-2002 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
2-2002 3-5-2002 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
3-2002 7-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
4-2002 7-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
1-2003 5-20-2003 Annexations: Heritage Homes,
Inc.
Ch. A307, Art. XI
2-2003 6-17-2003 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
3-2003 7-15-2003 Water amendment Ch. 290
4-2003 8-19-2003 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
5-2003 10-21-2003 Sewers amendment; storage,
collection and disposal of solid
waste amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 230; 240, Art. I;
290
1-2004 1-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
2-2004 4-6-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
3-2004 8-17-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
4-2004 10-19-2004 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
5-2004 10-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
1-2005 6-21-2005 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
2-2005 11-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
3-2005 12-6-2005 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 162
1-2006 7-18-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
2-2006 10-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
3-2006 10-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
4-2006 10-17-2006 Water Ch. 290
1-2007 6-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
2-2007 10-2-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
§ A309-39 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Local
Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2008 1-15-2008 Officers and employees:
appointments
Ch. 53, Art. IV
2-2008 2-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
3-2008 2-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
4-2008 4-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
5-2008 6-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
6-2008 7-15-2008 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
7-2008 7-15-2008 Water amendment Ch. 290
8-2008 7-15-2008 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
9-2008 8-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
10-2008 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
11-2008 11-5-2008 Sewers amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 230; 290
1-2009 1-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
2-2009 5-19-2009 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
3-2009 5-19-2009 Solid waste: storage, collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
4-2009 5-19-2009 Water amendment Ch. 290
5-2009 11-10-2009 Taxation: termination of status
as assessing unit
Ch. 266, Art. V
1-2010 1-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
2-2010 5-18-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
3-2010 5-18-2010 Solid waste: storage, collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
4-2010 5-18-2010 Water amendment Ch. 290
5-2010 9-7-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
6-2010 9-7-2010 Water amendment Ch. 190
7-2010 10-5-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
8-2010 10-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
1-2011 4-19-2011 Officers and employees:
residency requirements repealer
Ch. 53, Art. II,
footnote only
2-2011 7-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
3-2011 7-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
1-2012 1-17-2012 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
§ DL-1 MASSENA CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Local
Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2012 2-7-2012 Tax levy limit override Ch. 266, Art. VI
3-2012 3-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
4-2012 3-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
5-2012 9-18-2012 Curfew Ch. 130
6-2012 10-2-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
1-2013 2-15-2013 Tax levy limit override
amendment
Ch. 266, Art. VI
2-2013 2-6-2013 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
3-2013 5-21-2013 Moratorium on new building in
Main Street area
NCM
4-2013 6-18-2013 Public nuisances Ch. 218
1-2014 2-4-2014 Tax levy limit override
amendment
Ch. 266, Art. VI
2-2014 5-20-2014 Storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
3-2014 10-21-2014 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
4-2014 10-21-2014 Water amendment Ch. 290
1-2015 4-7-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 280
2-2015 4-7-2015 Blighted property abatement Ch. 105
3-2015 7-21-2015 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 31
4-2015 9-1-2015 Tobacco control policy Ch. 275
5-2015 10-20-2015 Water amendment Ch. 290
1-2016 7-19-2016 Taxation: exemption for
residential-commercial
development
Ch. 266, Art. VII
2-2016 11-15-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 300 (table only)
1-2017 2-21-2017 Streets and sidewalks: complete
streets
Ch. 246, Art. III
2-2017 4-4-2017 Taxicabs and vehicles for hire
amendment
Ch. 270
3-2017 11-21-2017 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 162
4-2017 11-21-2017 Housing Code amendment Ch. 186
5-2017 12-5-2017 Brush, grass and weeds;
dumping amendment
Ch. 110
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Local
Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2017 12-5-2017 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
7-2017 12-5-2017 Streets and sidewalks: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 246, Art. I
1-2018 2-20-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
2-2018 2-20-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
3-2018 2-20-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
4-2018 3-20-2018 Water amendment Ch. 290
5-2018 3-20-2018 Taxation: Cold War veterans'
exemption
Ch. 266, Art. VIII
6-2018 4-17-2018 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 240
7-2018 8-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
1-2019 4-16-2019 Fires and Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 162
Local
Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2-2019 9-17-2019 Solid Waste: Storage,
Collection and Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I 48.2
3-2019 12-17-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 290 49
1-2020 2-18-2020 Sewers Amendment Ch. 230 49.1
2-2020 8-18-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300 49.2
3-2020 12-15-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300 50
1-2021 5-18-2021 Filming Ch. 156 50.1
2-2021 5-18-2021 Solid Waste: Storage,
Collection and Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I 50.1
3-2021 5-18-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 280 50.1
4-2021 6-15-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 280 51
5-2021 6-15-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 280 51
6-2021 10-19-2021 Cannabis: On-Site
Consumption Opt-Out
Ch. 125, Art. I 51
§ DL-1 MASSENA CODE § DL-1
DL:4