PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE I, Title and Purpose
Body:
§ 70-1.  Short title.

 

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "New York Mills Building Code Enforcement Ordinance." 

 

§ 70-2.  Purpose.

 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for enforcement procedures in the Village of New York Mills of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code effective January 1, 1984, and all rules and regulations and all amendments thereto.  


PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE II, Enforcement Officer
Body:
§ 70-3.  Designation of Code Enforcement Officer.

 

There is hereby designated in the Village a public official to be known as the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall administer and enforce the provisions of the Building Codes of New York and all other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the location, design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment, maintenance, use, occupancy, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures and their appurtenances located in the Village. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the "Zoning Officer" as designated in Chapter 200, entitled "Zoning," the "Building Inspector" as designated in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, and the enforcement officer of the Multiple Residence Law and shall perform such other and related duties as may be assigned to him by the Board of Trustees. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the head of the Building Department of the Village. 

 

§ 70-4.  Appointment and qualifications of Code Enforcement Officer. 

 

A.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees at a compensation to be fixed by the Board of Trustees. The Code Enforcement Officer may be employed by the Board of Trustees in conjunction with one or more other municipalities. 

B.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall be a person who shall have had satisfactory experience or professional training, or both, in the field of building construction and design.   

 

§ 70-5.  Appointment and qualifications of Deputy Code Enforcement Officers. 

 

A.  The Board of Trustees may appoint one or more Deputy Code Enforcement Officers, as the need may appear, to act under the supervision of the Code Enforcement Officer and to exercise any portion of his powers and duties. The compensation of such Deputy Code Enforcement Officers shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. 

B.  Each Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall be a person who has had satisfactory experience or training, or both, to perform the duties assigned to him.   

 

§ 70-6.  Other employees.

 

The Board of Trustees may appoint such other employees as may be necessary from time to time to carry out the functions of the Code Enforcement Officer. 

 

§ 70-7.  Acting Code Enforcement Officer.

 

In the absence of the Code Enforcement Officer or in the case of his inability to act for any reason, the Board of Trustees shall have the power to designate a person to act in his behalf and exercise all of the powers conferred upon him by this chapter. 

 

§ 70-8.  Restrictions on officers and employees.

 

No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the Building Department; nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the Village, excepting only that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from such activities in connection with the construction of a building or structure owned by him, and not constructed for sale. 

 

§ 70-9.  Relief from personal responsibility.

 

No official or employee of the Building Department shall, while acting pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties, provided that such acts are performed in good faith and without gross negligence. 

 

§ 70-10.  Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer. 

 

A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Building Codes of New York and laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures, and the installation and use of materials and equipment therein, and the location, use, occupancy and maintenance thereof. 

B.  He shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts thereof and shall examine the premises for which such applications have been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of insuring compliance with the Building Codes of New York and laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing building construction. 

C.  He shall issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during construction with the requirements of the Building Codes of New York and such laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. He shall make all inspections which are necessary or proper for the carrying out of his duties, except that he may accept written reports of inspection from Deputy Code Enforcement Officers or other employees of the Building Department or from generally recognized and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided the same are certified by a responsible official thereof. 

D.  Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure compliance with the provisions of the Building Codes of New York and applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations covering building construction, he may require the performance of tests in the field by experienced, professional persons or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories, or service bureaus or agencies. 

E.   It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village to designate the street number for each and every building upon each and every street or highway of the Village and upon request of a property owner or tenant or other occupant of the buildings to be numbered upon the streets or highways of the Village to designate the number to be used for said building or buildings.   

 

§ 70-11.  Department records and reports. 

 

A.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and activities conducted by him, including all applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and collected, inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such records shall be public records open to public inspection during business hours. 

B.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall, annually, submit to the Board of Trustees a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer, including permits and certificates issued, fees collected, orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and appeals or litigation pending.   

 

§ 70-12.  Cooperation of other departments.

 

The Code Enforcement Officer may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of all other municipal officials and departments exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of buildings or the installation of equipment therein.  

 

§ 70-13.  Duties of architect or professional engineer. 

 

A.  Inspections and reports. The architect or professional engineer whose seal and signature appear on the drawings for buildings or structures other than one- or two-family dwellings, or his designated representative, shall be responsible for making periodic visits to the construction site to familiarize himself with the progress and quality of the construction, and to determine in general if the construction is proceeding in accord with the drawings, specifications and addenda thereto which have been approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. He shall file reports with the Code Enforcement Officer at regular intervals indicating the times of such visits, the status of the construction, and of any defects or discrepancies between the actual construction and the approved drawings and specifications affecting structural, fire, health or safety which he may observe. He shall advise the Code Enforcement Officer when such discrepancies have been corrected. 

B.  Limitation on duties. The architect or engineer shall not be required to make exhaustive or continuous on-site inspections to check the construction. He shall not be responsible for construction means, methods, techniques, sequences or procedures, or for safety precautions and programs in connection with the construction, nor shall he be responsible for the contractor's failure to carry out the construction in accord with the approved drawings and specifications.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE III, Building Permits
Body:
§ 70-14.  Application for building permit. 

 

A.  No person shall commence the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion, or change in the nature of the occupancy of any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer for each such building or structure; except that no fee shall be required for a building permit, for the performance of ordinary repairs which are not structural in nature. 

B.  Application to Code Enforcement Officer by owner or owner's agent; required information. 

(1)   Application for a building permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by him and shall contain the following information: 

(a)  A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done. 

(b)  A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and of the building or structure. 

(c)  The valuation of the proposed work. 

(d) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant, and the names and addresses of their responsible officers if any of them are corporations. 

(e)  A brief description of the nature of the proposed work. 

(f)  A duplicate set of plans and specifications as set forth in Subsection C of this section. 

(g)  Such other information as may reasonably be required by the Code Enforcement Officer to establish compliance of the proposed work with the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Building Codes of New York, building laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.   

(2)   Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. Where such application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or applicant that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized to make such application.   

C.  Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan drawn to scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature of the work to be performed and the materials to be incorporated, distance from lot lines, the relationship of structures on adjoining property, widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks and alleys, and where required by the Code Enforcement Officer, details of structural, mechanical, and electrical work, including computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical data. Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design and drawings. The Code Enforcement Officer may waive the requirement for filing plans. 

D.  Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications accompanying the same may be filed at any time prior to the completion of the work, subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. 

E.   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by proof of workers' compensation insurance and disability benefits coverage or an affidavit that the applicant has not engaged an employer or any employees to perform work relating to the building permit.

 

§ 70-15.  Issuance of building permit by Code Enforcement Officer. 

 

A.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents filed therewith. He shall approve or disapprove the application within a reasonable time. 

B.  Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of the legal fees therefor, he shall issue a building permit to the applicant upon the form prescribed by him and shall affix his signature or cause his signature to be affixed thereto. 

C.  Upon the approval of the application, both sets of plans and specifications shall be endorsed with the word "approved." One set of such approved plans and specifications shall be retained in the files of the Code Enforcement Officer and the other set shall be returned to the applicant together with the building permit and shall be kept at the building site open to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative at all reasonable times. 

D.  If the application together with plans, specifications and other documents filed therewith describe proposed work which does not conform to all of the requirements of the applicable building and zoning regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer shall disapprove the same and shall return the plans and specifications to the applicant. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause such refusal, together with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the applicant in writing. 

E.   Where the Code Enforcement Officer refuses to grant a permit and the application is referred or appealed to the Board of Appeals, a building permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer when and if directed so to do by the Board of Appeals and upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by such Board.   

 

§ 70-16.  Performance of work under building permit. 

 

A.  A building permit shall be effective to authorize the commencing of the work for a period of six months after date of its issuance. A building permit shall expire one year after date of issuance unless the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the work is being diligently and reasonably prosecuted and in which case an extension or extensions may be granted by him for two periods not exceeding six months each. Any additional extension can only be granted by the Planning Board. 

B.  The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations. All work shall conform to the approved application, plans and specifications.   

 

§ 70-17.  Building permit fees.   

 

A.  Upon the filing of an application for a building permit, the applicant shall pay a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. 

B.  Applicants to the Board of Trustees, Zoning Board or Planning Board will be required to reimburse the Village for the cost of engineering, planning, legal, technical or environmental consultants needed to review any application. If the Village refers an application to a professional employed by the Village, the applicant may be charged for a fee for the time of the Village employee.   

 

§ 70-18.  Revocation of building permit.

 

The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke a building permit theretofore issued and approved in the following instances: 

A.  Where he finds that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or specifications on which the building permit was based. 

B.  Where he finds that the building permit was issued in error and should not have been issued in accordance with the applicable law. 

C.  Where he finds that the work performed under the permit is not being prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application, plans or specifications. 

D.  Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.   

 

§ 70-19.  Stop orders.

 

Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted in violation of the provisions of the Building Codes of New York or other applicable building laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or not in conformity with the provisions of an application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a building permit was issued, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the person performing the work, to suspend all work, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building activities until the stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to him, or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a copy of the same by registered mail. 

 

§ 70-20.  Right of entry.

 

Any building official, upon the showing of proper credentials and in the discharge of his duties, may enter upon any buildings, structure or premises at any reasonable hour, and no person shall interfere with or prevent such entry.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE IV, Certificate of Occupancy
Body:
§ 70-21.  Certificate of occupancy. 

 

A.  No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. 

B.  No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered, or upon which work has been performed which required the issuance of a building permit shall continue to be occupied or used for more than 30 days after the completion of the alteration or work unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. 

C.  No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an existing building unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing such change shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. 

D.  The owner or his agent shall make application for a certificate of occupancy. Accompanying this application and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer an affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who filed the original plans, or of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who supervised the construction of the work, or the superintendent of construction who supervised the work and who, by reason of his experience, is qualified to superintend the work for which the certificate is sought. This affidavit shall state that the deponent has examined the approved plans of the structure for which a certificate of occupancy is sought, that the structure has been erected in accordance with approved plans, and as erected complies with the provisions of the Building Codes of New York and all other laws governing building construction except insofar as variations therefrom have been legally authorized. Such variations shall be specified in the affidavit.   

 

§ 70-22.  Inspection prior to issuance of certificate.

 

Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Code Enforcement Officer shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a building permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or change the use of occupancy; and he may conduct such inspections as he deems appropriate from time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a building permit has been issued. There shall be maintained in the Building Department a record of all such inspections and examinations together with a record of findings in violations of the law. 

 

§ 70-23.  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 

 

A.  When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been completed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Building Codes of New York, building laws, ordinances, rules and regulations; and also in accordance with the application, plans and specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the building permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by him. If it is found that the proposed work has not been properly completed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy and shall order the work completed in conformity with the building permit and in conformity with the applicable building regulations. 

B.  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, where appropriate, within 30 days after application therefor is made. Failure to act upon such application within 30 days shall constitute approval of such application and the building or portion thereof may thereafter be occupied as though a certificate of occupancy had been issued. 

C.  The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been completed, and that the proposed use and occupancy is in conformity with the provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances and regulations, and shall specify the use or uses and the extent thereof to which the building or structures or its several parts may be put.   

 

§ 70-24.  Temporary certificate of occupancy.

 

Upon request, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the building permit shall have been completed provided such portion or portions as have been completed may be occupied safely without endangering life or the public welfare. 

 

§ 70-25.  Tests.

 

Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material, construction, equipment or assembly does not conform with the requirements of the Building Codes of New York or other applicable building laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the same to be subjected to tests in order to furnish proof of such compliance.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE V, Assistance of New York Board of Fire Underwriters
Body:
§ 70-26.  Authorization to make inspections.

 

The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed Inspectors of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other qualified inspection agency approved by the Village are hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the Village to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations hereinafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be a charge against the Village. 

 

§ 70-27.  Duties of Inspector. 

 

A.  It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report to the Code Enforcement Officer all violations of or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions of the Building Codes of New York and the Municipal Code. The Inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on properties in the Village upon the written request of the Code Enforcement Officer or Chief of the Fire Department or as herein provided. 

B.  The Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties within the Village where he deems it necessary for the protection of life and property with the exception of single-family dwellings. He shall inspect single-family dwellings only upon request of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Chief of the Fire Department. 

C.  In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of the Village. 

D.  It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the proper officials of the Village and owners and/or lessees of property where defective electrical installations and equipment are found upon inspection. 

E.   He shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with the Building Codes of New York or with the Municipal Code and he shall direct that a copy of the certificate of compliance be sent to the Code Enforcement Officer.   

  

§ 70-28.  Schedule of rates.

 

The schedule of rates charged for inspection shall be filed with the Village Clerk and the Code Enforcement Officer. 

 

§ 70-29.  Exemption permits. 

 

A.  The Code Enforcement Officer is empowered and directed to issue a permit granting exemption from the provisions of this article to each person, firm or corporation engaged in the conduct of manufacturing in or on properties in the Village upon written application of such person, firm or corporation, hereinafter called the "applicant," setting forth that:  

(1)   The applicant is engaged in the conduct of manufacturing in the Village. 

(2)   The applicant regularly employs one or more journeyman electricians, whose principal duties are the installation, maintenance and repair of electrical machinery, appliances, equipment and wiring for electric light, heat or power, hereinafter called "electrical work," in or upon the premises used by the applicant in the conduct of manufacturing. 

(3)   By reason of the amount and frequency of electrical work so performed upon the applicant's premises, compliance with the provisions of this article would impose an undue burden on the applicant's conduct of manufacturing operations.   

B.  The term "journeyman electrician" shall mean a person who has completed an apprentice course, or received equivalent training, or has equivalent experience of at least three years in electrical work. 

C.  Each permit so issued shall be for a period of one year and such permit shall be renewed for successive one-year periods upon supplemental application by the applicant, certifying that the statements contained in the original application remain true and correct.  

 

§ 70-30.  Exceptions. 

 

A.  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the electrical installations in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility in the exercise of its function as a utility, and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. 

B.  This article shall not apply to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as their principal business. 

C.  This article shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the Government of the United States or the State of New York.   

 

§ 70-31.  No waiver or assumption of liability.

 

This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village or the New York Board of Fire Underwriters be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this article. 

 

§ 70-32.  Violations of article. 

 

A.  It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to install or cause to be installed, or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat or power, in or on properties in the Village until an application for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters. 

B.  It shall be a violation of this article for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power, to any source of electrical energy supply, prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate, or a certificate of compliance, by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters. 

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 70, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ARTICLE VI, Penalties
Body:
§ 70-33.  Penalties for offenses.

 

In accordance with § 381 of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of New York: 

A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision of this chapter or to fail in any manner to comply with a notice, directive or order of the Code Enforcement Officer, or to construct, alter or use and occupy any building or structure or part thereof in a manner not permitted by an approved building permit or certificate of occupancy. 

B.  Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the Code Enforcement Officer within the time fixed for compliance therewith, and any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents, or any other person taking part of assisting in the construction or use of any building who shall knowingly violate any of the applicable provisions of this chapter, or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Code Enforcement Officer made thereunder shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 

C.  Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a crime and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment, and shall not impose any liability upon or affect or impair the credibility as a witness, or otherwise, of any person convicted thereof. 

D.  This section shall not apply to violations of the provisions of the Building Codes of New York punishable under § 382 of the Executive Law of the State of New York; nor to violations of the provisions of the Multiple Residence Law punishable under § 304 of the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.   

 

§ 70-34.  Abatement of violation.

 

Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises or to prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties prescribed in the preceding section. 

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 73, BUILDINGS, UNSAFE, ARTICLE I, Inspections and Enforcement Procedures
Body:
§ 73-1.  Purpose.

 

The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the health, welfare and property of residents of and owners of property located within this Village by providing a method for the removal or repair of buildings and structures within the limits of this Village, that, from any cause, may now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the public. 

 

§ 73-2.  Unsafe building or structure not permitted.

 

No person, firm, corporation or association owning, possessing or controlling a building or structure in this Village shall permit, suffer or allow said building now or hereafter to be or become dangerous or unsafe to the public, from any cause whatsoever. 

 

§ 73-3.  Defects deemed unsafe or dangerous.

 

All buildings and structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "unsafe or dangerous" within the meaning of this chapter: 

A.  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 

B.  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 

C.  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 

D.  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of this Village. 

E.   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 

F.   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 

G.  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 

H.  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 

I.    Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this Village.   

 

§ 73-4.  Inspections and reports.

 

The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the enforcement officer of this chapter and shall make inspections of all unsafe buildings and structures within the Village. The Code Enforcement Officer shall report to the Board of Trustees all unsafe buildings and structures which from time to time may be found within the limits of the Village. When it is reported to the Board of Trustees that a building or structure is in an unsafe or dangerous condition, the Board of Trustees shall direct the Code Enforcement Officer to inspect the same and to report the condition of the same and his finding to the Board of Trustees with all convenient speed. 

 

§ 73-5.  Board of Trustees to determine if repairs can be made.

 

The Board of Trustees shall thereafter consider the report of the Code Enforcement Officer and by resolution determine, if in its opinion the report so warrants, that the said building or structure is unsafe and dangerous and order its removal or repair if the same can be safely repaired, and further order that a notice shall be given to interested persons or corporations in the manner as hereinafter provided. 

 

§ 73-6.  Repair and removal notice requirements.

 

The notice shall contain the following: 

A.  A description of the premises. 

B.  A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous. 

C.  An order requiring the same to be made safe and secure, or removed. 

D.  That the securing or removal of the said buildings or structures shall commence within 30 days of the serving of the notice, as hereinafter provided, and shall be completed within 60 days thereafter. 

E.   That in the event of neglect or refusal of the persons and/or corporations served with the notice to comply with the same, a survey of the premises will be made by an inspector and architect or engineer to be named by the Board of Trustees, and a practical builder, engineer or architect appointed by the said persons or corporations so notified. 

F.   That in the event of the refusal or neglect of the persons or corporations so notified to appoint a surveyor, the two surveyors named by the Board of Trustees shall make the survey and report.   

 

§ 73-7.  Service of notice.

 

The said notice shall be served in the following manner: 

A.  By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner or some one of the owners, executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the premises as shown by the last preceding completed assessment roll of the Village, such service to be complete, and the thirty-day time period recited in the said notice to commence upon filing of an affidavit of personal service upon the owner with the Village Clerk; 

B.  Or by mailing a copy of the said notice to such owner as aforesaid, by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the owner, and by affixing a copy of the said notice to the premises, such service to be complete, and the thirty-day time period recited in the said notice to commence 10 days after the filing of the return receipt and the affidavit of posting with the Village Clerk; 

C.  And by personal service of a copy of said notice upon any adult residing in or occupying said premises; or, if no such person can be reasonably found, by posting a copy of said notice upon the premises.   

 

§ 73-8.  Noncompliance with order.

 

In the event of neglect or refusal of the persons so notified to comply with said order of the Board of Trustees, a survey of said premises shall be made in the following manner: 

A.  The Board of Trustees shall appoint an inspector and architect or engineer and the persons so notified shall appoint a practical builder, engineer or architect who shall make the said survey and submit a written report thereon in regard to the unsafe or dangerous condition of said building or structure. If the persons so notified shall refuse or neglect to appoint a surveyor within 40 days after service of the notice, the two surveyors appointed by the Board of Trustees shall proceed and report. 

B.  A signed copy of such report shall be posted on the said structure.   

 

§ 73-9.  Application to Supreme Court for order.

 

In the event the building or other structure shall be reported unsafe or dangerous under such survey, the Board of Trustees may pass a resolution directing the Mayor to make an application to the Supreme Court for an order determining the building or other structure to be a public nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured or taken down and removed. 

 

§ 73-10.  Compensation of surveyors.

 

The said surveyors shall be paid reasonable compensation for the service performed by them in making their survey and in preparing the report thereof. 

 

§ 73-11.  Assessment of costs and expenses.

 

All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the proceedings to remove or secure, including the cost of actually removing said building or structure, shall be assessed against the land on which said buildings or structures are located.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 73, BUILDINGS, UNSAFE, ARTICLE II, Alternate or Additional Procedures
Body:
§ 73-12.  Emergency work. 

 

A.  In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, actual and immediate danger of the falling of a building or structure so as to endanger public safety, life or property, or actual or immediate menace to health or public welfare as a result of the conditions present in or about a building or structure, he shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or structure temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed in this chapter for unsafe or dangerous buildings or structures has been instituted or not. 

B.  When emergency work is to be performed under this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the owner thereof to be served personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, and if served by registered mail shall post on the premises a notice to comply containing a description of the premises, a statement of the facts in which the structure is unsafe or dangerous, and orders and directions to correct the said conditions which constitute an emergency within a specified period not to exceed three days from actual or constructive receipt of the notice. 

C.  In the event the emergency does not permit any delay in correction, the notice shall state that the Village has corrected the emergency condition. 

D.  In both cases, the notice shall state that the corrective costs of the emergency will be assessed against the owner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.   

 

§ 73-13.  Alternate or additional procedures.

 

Pursuant to the authority and powers granted in the statute of local governments, particularly Subdivision 5 of Section 10 thereof, the following alternate or additional procedures may be followed: 

A.  Upon the making of a survey report by the Code Enforcement Officer that the building or structure is reported unsafe or dangerous to the public, the Board of Trustees may direct the Code Enforcement Officer to serve a notice upon the owner, and all other persons having an interest in such property or structure, either personally or by registered mail, addressed to his last known address as shown by the records of the Village Assessor and/or in the office of the County Clerk, containing a description of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order of the Code Enforcement Officer requiring same to be repaired or removed; and if such service is made by registered mail, for the posting of such notice on the premises. 

B.  Such owner so served shall commence the repair or removal of such building or structure within 30 days after service of such notice. 

C.  A hearing shall be held before the Code Enforcement Officer at a time and place specified in the notice to repair or demolish not sooner than two weeks nor later than the date given to commence repair or removal, if the owner requests same at least one week before the scheduled date for the hearing. If no hearing is requested, the order so served shall take effect as provided in the notice. 

D.  At the hearing, the owner, the Village, and any other interested parties may present witnesses and any other proof relating to the matters and all parties may appear in person or with their attorneys. 

E.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a determination in writing and a copy of same shall be served either personally or by registered mail on all parties who appeared therein. 

F.   The determination shall state whether the original survey report is sustained, modified or reversed. If reversed, no further proceeding shall be had. 

G.  If the original survey is sustained, in whole or in part, the Code Enforcement Officer shall also include an order directing the owner to proceed in accordance therewith and shall further specify that unless the work is commenced within 10 days after service and completed within a reasonable time thereafter, which the Code Enforcement Officer shall designate, the penalties hereinafter provided shall be invoked.   

 

§ 73-14.  Removal or repair of unsafe or dangerous building or structure.

 

Upon notification that the owner of the unsafe building or structure has failed or refused to repair the unsafe building or structure within the time specified in the final order, the Code Enforcement Officer shall report same to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may direct that the Village shall cause the repair or removal of the unsafe building. After the work has been completed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall file with the Board of Trustees a verified statement of all the direct costs of same, together with a charge of 50% in addition thereto as compensation to the Village for administering, supervising and handling said work. 

 

§ 73-15.  Assessment and lien.

 

Upon receipt of the verified statement, the Board of Trustees shall direct that the amount thereof, including the charges added thereto, shall constitute a lien against the said premises and direct that the same shall be added to the next assessment roll of general village taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time and under the same penalties, as the general village tax and as a part thereof. In addition thereto, interest shall run thereon from the date of filing the verified statement to the date of actual payment at 7 1/2% per annum. 

 

§ 73-16.  Personal liability.

 

Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the Village may at its election institute suit against the owner of the said premises for the direct costs, together with a charge of 50% in addition thereto as compensation to the Village for administering, supervising and handling said work, and enter judgment thereon against the owner personally for the aforesaid amount. The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty hereinafter prescribed shall not bar the right of the Village to collect the costs of the removal or repair of any unsafe building or structure as herein prescribed. 

 

§ 73-17.  Completion of work.

 

The failure of the owner to complete the repairs or to remove the unsafe building or structure as specified in the final notice of the Code Enforcement Officer shall subject the owner to the same procedure and penalties as herein set forth.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 73, BUILDINGS, UNSAFE, ARTICLE III, General Provisions
Body:
§ 73-18.  Transfer of title.

 

The transfer of title by the owner of premises upon which an unsafe building or structure is located shall be no defense to any proceedings under this chapter. 

 

§ 73-19.  Superseding Village law.

 

Pursuant to the authority of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 1, Paragraph e, Subparagraph 3, the provisions of the Village Law are modified and superseded in their application to the Village so as to authorize the additional or alternate procedures and penalties specified in this chapter. 

 

§ 73-20.  Penalties for offenses.

 

Any person upon whom a notice as provided in this chapter has been served, who fails, neglects or refuses to place such unsafe building or structure in a safe condition as designated in such notice, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or orders given pursuant thereto or who shall resist or obstruct the Code Enforcement Officer in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation and shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than $250. Each week on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 131, MOBILE HOMES
Body:
§ 131-1.  Title.

 

This chapter shall be known as the "Mobile Homes, Trailers and Camp Law of the Village of New York Mills, New York". 

 

§ 131-2.  Purpose. 

 

A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of New York Mills, New York by the regulation of mobile homes, mobile home parks, trailers, trailer camps, and other seasonally occupied camps, cottages, cabins, etc., within the Village of New York Mills, New York. It is also the intent of this chapter to enforce minimum standards for said facilities, establishing requirements for the design, construction, alteration, extension and maintenance of such uses and its related utilities and facilities; authorizing the issuance of permits or licenses for the construction, alteration and extension of such uses; authorizing the inspection of said facilities; and fixing penalties for violations. 

B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, install or occupy as a dwelling or otherwise, a mobile home on any public or private property in the Village of New York Mills.   

 

§ 131-3.  Penalties for offenses.

 

Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or to imprisonment for a period of not less than one day nor more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and, in addition, the violation of this chapter or any of the provisions thereof shall subject the person, firm or corporation violating the same to a civil penalty in the sum of $250, and when a violation of this chapter or any of the provisions thereof is continuous, each week (seven days) thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation; said penalty to be reserved by the Village of New York Mills in a civil action. The application of the above penalty or penalties or the prosecution for the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license issued pursuant thereto. 

 

§ 131-4.  Construal of provisions.

 

In any case where any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health law or ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection and promotion of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where provisions of this chapter are found to be in conflict with the provisions of any other ordinance or code of the Village of New York Mills existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the protection and promotion of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail and such other ordinances, laws or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be in conflict with this chapter. 

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE I, Declaration of Policy
Body:
§ 175-1.  Planning Board authorized to approve plats.

 

By the authority of the resolution of the Village Board of the Village of New York Mills, New York adopted on February 28, 1966, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 64 of the Village Law of the State of New York, the Planning Board of the Village of New York Mills, New York is authorized and empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, to approve the development of entirely or partially undeveloped plats already filed in the office of the Clerk of the County and to conditionally approve preliminary plats within the Village of New York Mills. 

 

§ 175-2.  Policy.

 

It is declared to be the policy of the Planning Board to consider land subdivision plats as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development of the Village. This means, among other things, that: 

A.  The site can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace; 

B.  Proper provision shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewerage and other needed improvements; 

C.  All proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with the development pattern of the neighboring properties; 

D.  The proposed streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to the Official Map, and shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the Comprehensive Plan, and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of fire-fighting equipment to buildings; and 

E.   Proper provision shall be made for open spaces for parks and playgrounds.   

 

§ 175-3.  Approval and adoption of regulations.

 

In order that land subdivisions may be made in accordance with this policy, these regulations which shall be known as, and which may be cited as, the "Village of New York Mills Subdivision Regulations," have been approved by the Village Board on July 13, 1970, and adopted by the Village Planning Board on June 29, 1970.  


PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE II, Definitions
Body:
§ 175-4.  Definitions.

 

For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN  -- The materials, written and/or graphic, including but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and other descriptive material that identify the goals, objectives, principles, guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for the immediate and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and development of the Village.  

EASEMENT  -- Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.  

OFFICIAL MAP  -- The map established by the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to § 7-724 of the Village Law, showing streets, highways, parks and drainage, both existing and proposed.  

PLANNING BOARD or BOARD  -- The Planning Board of the Village.  

PRELIMINARY PLAT  -- A drawing or drawings clearly marked "preliminary plat," showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in Article V, § 175-23 of these regulations, submitted to the Planning Board for purposes of consideration prior to submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise the Planning Board of the layout of the proposed subdivision.  

SKETCH PLAN  -- A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing the information specified in Article V, § 175-21 of these regulations to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Board as to the form of the layout and objectives of these regulations.  

STREET  -- Includes streets, roads, avenues, lanes, or other trafficways between right-of-way lines.  

STREET, COLLECTOR  -- A street which serves or is designed to serve as a trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major street.  

STREET, CUL-DE-SAC  -- A street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular traffic outlet and having a turning loop or similar arrangement at the closed end.  

STREET, MAJOR  -- A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.  

STREET, MINOR  -- A street intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.  

STREET PAVEMENT  -- The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by vehicular traffic.  

STREET WIDTH  -- The width of right-of-way, measured at right angles to the center line of the street.  

SUBDIVIDER  -- Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein, either for himself or others.  

SUBDIVISION  -- The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, plots or sites, or other division of land, with or without streets or highways, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and shall include resubdivision, in whole or in part, of any plat, filed or unfiled, which is entirely or partially undeveloped.  

SUBDIVISION, MAJOR  -- Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of municipal facilities.  

SUBDIVISION, MINOR  -- Any subdivision containing not more than four lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance or these regulations.  

SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT  -- A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by law and by these regulations to be presented to the Planning Board for approval, and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in the office of the County Clerk or Registrar.  

VILLAGE ENGINEER  -- A licensed professional engineer designated by the Village.   

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE III, Procedure for Filing Subdivision Applications
Body:
§ 175-5.  Written application for approval required.

 

Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made, and before any contract for the sale of, or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or any part thereof is made, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or his duly authorized agent shall apply in writing for approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures. 

 

§ 175-6.  Sketch plan. 

 

A.  Submission of sketch plan. Any owner of land shall, prior to subdividing or resubdividing land, submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board, two copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision, which shall comply with the requirements of Article V, § 175-21, for the purpose of classification and preliminary discussion. 

B.  Discussion of requirements and classification. 

(1)   The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the requirements of these regulations for street improvements, drainage, sewerage, water supply, fire protection, and similar aspects, as well as the availability of existing services and other pertinent information. 

(2)   A determination is to be made at this time by the Planning Board as to whether the proposed subdivision is a minor or major subdivision as defined in these regulations. The Board may require, however, when it deems it necessary for protection of the public health, safety and welfare, that a minor subdivision comply with some or all of the requirements specified for major subdivisions. If the sketch plan is classified as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall then comply with the procedure outlined in Article III, §§ 175-7 and 175-11, of these regulations. If it is classified as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall then comply with the procedures outlined in Article III, §§ 175-8, 175-9, 175-10 and 175-11.   

C.  Study of sketch plan. The Planning Board shall determine whether the sketch plan meets the purposes of these regulations and shall, where it deems it necessary, make specific recommendations in writing to be incorporated by the applicant in the next submission to the Planning Board.   

 

§ 175-7.  Approval of minor subdivision. 

 

A.  Application and fee. 

(1)   Within six months after classification of the sketch plan as a minor subdivision by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a minor subdivision plat. The plat shall conform to the layout shown on the sketch plan plus any recommendations made by the Planning Board. Said application shall also conform to the requirements listed in Article V, § 175-22. Failure to comply with any of the above will require resubmission of the sketch plan to the Planning Board for reconsideration. 

(2)   All applications for plat approval for minor subdivisions shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.   

B.  Number of copies. Three copies of the minor subdivision plat shall be presented to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior to a scheduled monthly meeting of the Planning Board. 

C.  Subdivider to attend Planning Board meeting. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the minor subdivision plat. 

D.  The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing and take formal action to approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the minor subdivision plat in accordance with the requirements of § 7-728, Subdivision 6, of the Village Law.  

 

§ 175-8.  Preliminary plat for major subdivision. 

 

A.  Application. Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a major subdivision plat, the subdivider shall file an application for the consideration of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, in the form described in Article V, § 175-23, hereof. The preliminary plat shall comply with the requirements set forth in the provisions of Article V, § 175-23, of these regulations, except where a waiver may be specifically authorized by the Planning Board. 

B.  Number of copies. Three copies of the preliminary plat shall be presented to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior to a regular monthly meeting of the Planning Board. 

C.  Subdivider to attend Planning Board Meeting. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the preliminary plat. 

D.  Study of preliminary plat. The Planning Board shall study the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, and Chapter 200, Zoning. 

E.   When officially submitted. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing and take formal action to approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the preliminary layout submission in accordance with the requirements of § 7-728, Subdivision 5, of the Village Law. 

F.   Conditional approval of the preliminary plat. When granting conditional approval of a preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to: the specific changes which it will require in the preliminary plat; the character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been requested and which in its opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare; and the amount of improvement or the amount of all bonds therefore which it will require as prerequisite to the approval of the subdivision plat. The action of the Planning Board, plus any conditions attached thereto, shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one retained by the Planning Board and one forwarded to the Village Board. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the subdivision plat, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the plat which will be submitted for approval of the Planning Board and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. Prior to approval of the subdivision plat, the Planning Board may require additional changes as a result of further study of the subdivision in final form or as a result of new information obtained at the public hearing.   

 

§ 175-9.  Plat for major subdivision. 

 

A.  Application for approval and fee. The subdivider shall, within six months after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, file with the Planning Board an application for approval of the subdivision plat in final form, using the approved application blank available from the Secretary of the Planning Board. All applications for plat approval for major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. If the final plat is not submitted within six months after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board may require resubmission of the preliminary and final plats. 

B.  Number of copies. A subdivider intending to submit a proposed subdivision plat for the approval of the Planning Board shall provide the Secretary of the Board with a copy of the application and three copies (one copy in ink on linen) of the plat, the original and one true copy of all offers of cession, covenants, and agreements, and two prints of all construction drawings, at least 10 days in advance of the regular monthly Planning Board meeting at which it is to be officially submitted. 

C.  When officially submitted. The time of submission of the subdivision plat shall be considered to be the date of the regular monthly meeting of the Planning Board, at least 10 days prior to which the completed application and exhibits for approval of the subdivision plat have been filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board. In addition, if the applicant elects to construct any or all required improvements [as specified in Article III, § 175-10A(2)], the applicant shall agree to having the Village place an inspector on the improvements, and the total expense of such inspector shall be borne by the applicant. The Village Engineer shall file a certificate with the Village Board stating that these improvements have been satisfactorily installed before the subdivision plat shall be officially accepted. 

D.  Endorsement of state and county agencies. Water and sewer facility proposals contained in the subdivision plat shall be properly endorsed and approved by the Village Engineer and the State Department of Health. Applications for approval of plans for sewer or water facilities will be filed by the subdivider with all necessary Village, county and state agencies. Endorsement and approval by the State Department of Health shall be secured by the subdivider before official submission of the subdivision plat. 

E.   Public hearing and action on proposed subdivision plat. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing and take formal action to approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the final major subdivision layout submission in accordance with the requirements of § 7-728, Subdivision 6, of the Village Law. However, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the authorized officers of the Planning Board for recording until the subdivider has complied with the provisions of § 175-10 of this article.   

 

§ 175-10.  Required improvements. 

 

A.  Improvements and performance bond. Before the Planning Board grants final approval of the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedure set forth in either Subsection A(1) or (2) below: 

(1)   The subdivider shall either file with the Village Clerk a certified check to cover twice the full cost of the required improvements, or a performance bond to cover twice the full cost of the required improvements. Any such bond shall comply with the requirements of § 7-736 of the Village Law and shall be satisfactory to the Village Board and Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period of one year (or such other period as the Planning Board may determine appropriate, not to exceed three years) shall be set forth in the bond within which required improvements must be completed. 

(2)   The subdivider shall complete all required improvements to the satisfaction of the Village Board, which shall file with the Planning Board a letter signifying the satisfactory completion of all improvements required by the Board. For any required improvements not so completed, the subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk a bond or certified check covering the costs of such improvements and the cost of satisfactorily installing any improvement not approved by the Village Board. Any such bond shall be satisfactory to the Village Board as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. 

(3)   The required improvements shall not be considered to be completed until the installation of the improvements has been approved by the Village Board and a map satisfactory to the Planning Board has been submitted indicating the location of monuments marking all underground utilities as actually installed. If the subdivider completes all required improvements according to Subsection A(2), then said map shall be submitted prior to endorsement of the plat by the appropriate Planning Board officer. However, if the subdivider elects to provide a bond or certified check for all required improvements as specified in Subsection A(1), such bond shall not be released until such a map is submitted.   

B.  Modification of design of improvements. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Village Board that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such required improvements, the Village Board may authorize modifications, provided that these modifications are within the spirit and intent of the Planning Board's approval and do not extend to a waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the Board. The Village Board shall issue any authorization under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the Planning Board at their next regular meeting. 

C.  Inspection of improvements. At least five days prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the subdivider shall notify the Village Board in writing of the time when he proposes to commence construction of such improvements so that the Village Board may arrange for inspections to be made to assure that all Village specifications and requirements shall be met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Planning Board. 

D.  Proper installation of improvements. If the Village Engineer finds, upon inspection of the improvements performed before the expiration date of the performance bond, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications filed by the subdivider, he shall so report to the Village Board, Building Inspector and Planning Board. The Village Board then shall notify the subdivider and, if necessary, the bonding company, and take all necessary steps to preserve the Village's rights under the bond. No plat shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider is in default on a previously approved plat.   

 

§ 175-11.  Filing of approved subdivision plat. 

 

A.  Final approval and filing. Upon completion of the requirements in § 175-7, or §§ 175-9 and 175-10 above and notation to that effect upon the subdivision plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and shall be certified by the appropriate officer of the Planning Board and filed in the office of the County Clerk as provided in Village Law § 7-728, Subdivisions 7 through 11. Any subdivision plat not so filed with the County Clerk within 62 days of approval shall expire. 

B.  Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning Board and such Board approves any modifications. In the event that any such subdivision plat is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County Clerk.   

 

§ 175-12.  Public streets, recreation areas. 

 

A.  Public acceptance of streets. The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Village of any street, easement, or other open space shown on such subdivision plat. 

B.  Ownership and maintenance of recreation areas. When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on a plat, the approval of said plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the Village of such area. The Planning Board shall require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the Village Board covering future deed and title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any such recreation area.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE IV, General Requirements and Design Standards
Body:
§ 175-13.  Standards to be minimum requirements.

 

In considering applications for subdivision of land, the Planning Board shall be guided by the standards set forth hereinafter. The said standards shall be considered to be minimum requirements and shall be waived by the Board only under circumstances set forth in Article VI herein. 

 

§ 175-14.  General requirements for use of land. 

 

A.  Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. 

B.  Conformity to Official Map and Comprehensive Plan. Subdivisions shall conform to the Official Map of the Village and shall be in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan. 

C.  Specifications for required improvements. All required improvements shall be constructed or installed to conform to the Village specifications which may be obtained from the Village Clerk.   

 

§ 175-15.  Street layout. 

 

A.  Width, location and construction. Streets shall be of sufficient width, suitably located, and adequately constructed to conform with the Comprehensive Plan, and to accommodate the prospective traffic and afford access for fire fighting, snow removal and other road maintenance equipment. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no undue hardship to adjoining properties and shall be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system. 

B.  Arrangement. 

(1)   The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of principal streets of any adjoining subdivision, and for proper projection of principal streets into adjoining properties which are not yet subdivided, in order to make possible necessary fire protection, movement of traffic and the construction or extension, presently or when later required, of needed utilities and public services such as sewers, water and drainage facilities. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, topographic or other conditions make such continuance undesirable or impracticable, the above conditions may be modified. 

(2)   Subdivisions containing 20 lots or more shall have at least two street connections with existing public streets, or streets shown on the Official Map, or streets on an approved subdivision plat for which a bond has been filed.   

C.  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 

D.  Special treatment along arterial streets. When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Board may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 

E.   Provision for future resubdivision. Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the minimum size required in the zoning district in which a subdivision is located, the Board may require that streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision in accordance with the requirements contained in these regulations. 

F.   Dead-end streets. The creation of cul-de-sac or loop residential streets will be encouraged wherever the Board finds that such type of development will not interfere with normal traffic circulation in the area. In the case of such streets, where needed or desirable, the Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement to provide for continuation of pedestrian traffic and utilities to the next street. 

G.  Block size. Blocks generally shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length. In general, no block width shall be less than twice the normal lot depth. In blocks exceeding 800 feet in length, the Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement through the block to provide for the crossing of underground utilities and pedestrian traffic where needed or desirable, and may further specify at its discretion that a paved walk at least four feet wide be included. 

H.  Intersections with collector, major or arterial streets or roads. Minor or secondary street openings into such roads shall, in general, be at least 500 feet apart. 

I.    Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 

J.    Angle of intersection. In general, all streets shall join each other so that for a distance of at least 100 feet the street is approximately at right angle to the street it joins. 

K.  Relation to topography. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall bear a logical relationship to the topography of the property, and all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. 

L.   Other required streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Board may require a street approximately parallel to such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land (as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts). Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.  

 

§ 175-16.  Street design. 

 

A.  Widths of rights-of-way and street pavements. Streets and pavements shall have the following widths. The classification of streets shall be determined by the Board:

 

  

 

 Minimum Right-of-Way
(feet) 

 Minimum Pavement
(feet)    

  

Major streets 

 72 

 40  

  

Collector streets 

 66 

 30  

  

Minor streets 

 60 

 30    

 

B.  Required street improvements. 

(1)   Not later than 90 days after the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or shall have furnished adequate bond or other security for the installation within a specified time of the required improvements listed and described in this section. All of the required improvements shall be made by the subdivider in full compliance with the specifications for each of the various units of work, as required by the Village Board, according to the nature of the improvements. All of the requirements as to subgrade, base course and final course shall be done at the developer's expense. 

(a)  Subgrade. The developer shall grade the street from street line to street line to a grade and cross section approved by the Village Board. 

(b)  Base course. After the subgrade has been properly established, there shall be placed on the roadway section a sufficient quantity of Item 4, subbase coarse select granular material in accordance with New York State Department of Transportation specifications, to result in a pavement width as shown above and a compacted thickness of 12 inches after being properly rolled with a roller weighing not less than 10 tons. 

(c)  Final course. After the base course has been properly established and rolled, an application of RT-2, New York State Specification Item 74A shall be made thereon, at a rate of 0.5 gallon per square yard. Immediately after the application of this material, clean and dry No. 1 stone shall be uniformly spread over the entire roadway surface at the rate of 35 or 40 pounds per square yard. This shall then be thoroughly compacted with a roller weighing not less than 10 tons. An application of RT-7 or RT-8 New York State Specification Item 73A then shall be made at the rate of 0.5 gallon per square yard. Immediately after this second application has been made, clean and dry No. 1 stone shall be uniformly spread over the entire area at the rate of 35 pounds per square yard. This surface shall then be thoroughly rolled with a roller weighing not less than 10 tons.   

(2)   No street shall be accepted until backfill in trenches has been in place for at least three months; where conditions warrant, the Village Board may require a longer period of time for settlement of such backfills.   

C.  Street drainage. 

(1)   Street and road culverts, headwalls, or other appurtenances shall be installed by the developer where necessary. Where there is no natural stream or watercourse for the drainage of surface water from the proposed street or road, the developer shall secure rights-of-way and construct ditches or install stormwater drains to a natural waterway or as the Village Board directs. All street storm and sanitary sewers shall be constructed according to the grades on the plat submitted at the public hearing. Any changes in grade shall require the approval of the Village Board. 

(2)   Driveway culverts shall be not less than 12 inches in diameter and 20 feet in length and shall be of corrugated metal or reinforced concrete. Installation is to be approved by the Village Board.   

D.  Utilities in streets. 

(1)   The Planning Board shall require that underground utilities be placed in the street at locations approved by the Village Board. The subdivider shall have installed underground service connections in the street to the property line of each lot within the subdivision for such required utilities before the street is paved. Installation of fire hydrants shall be in conformity with all requirements of standard thread and nut as specified by the New York Fire Insurance Rating Organization and the Division of Fire Safety of the State of New York. 

(2)   Utility poles, if used, shall be installed at locations approved by the Village Board.   

E.   Utility easements. Where topography is such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width shall be provided with satisfactory access to the street. Wherever possible, easements shall be continuous from block to block and shall present as few irregularities as possible. Such easements shall be cleared and graded where required. 

F.   Grades. 

(1)   Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and shall be not less than 0.75% nor more than 5% for major, 7% for collector, or 10% for minor streets in residential areas, but in no case more than 3% within 50 feet of any intersection. 

(2)   All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length and radius as meet with the approval of the Village Board so that clear visibility shall be provided for a safe distance. 

(3)   A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.   

G.  Curves and visibility at intersections. 

(1)   All street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be rounded by curves of at least 25 feet radius and curbs shall be adjusted accordingly. 

(2)   In order to provide visibility for traffic safety, that portion of any corner lot (whether at an intersection entirely within the subdivision or of a new street with an existing street) which is within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line joining said lines at 30 feet distant from the point of intersection shall be cleared of all growth (except isolated trees) and obstructions more than three feet higher than the center line of the street. If directed, ground shall be excavated to achieve visibility.   

H.  Culs-de-sac. Where cul-de-sac streets are designed to be so permanently, they should, in general, not exceed 500 feet in length, and shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of 65 feet and pavement radius of 55 feet. At the end of temporary dead-end streets a temporary turnaround with a minimum pavement radius of 50 feet shall be provided, unless the Planning Board approves an alternate arrangement. 

I.    Watercourses. 

(1)   Where a watercourse separates a proposed street from abutting property, provision shall be made for access to all lots by means of culverts or other structures of design approved by the Village Board. 

(2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way as required by the Village Board, and in no case less than 20 feet in width.   

J.    Curve radii. In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each other at any point shall be connected with an appropriate curve. 

K.  Reserve strips prohibited. Reserve strips of land, to be used to control access from the proposed subdivision to any neighboring property, or to any land within the subdivision itself shall be prohibited. 

L.   Free flow of vehicular traffic abutting commercial developments. In front of areas zoned and designed for commercial use, or where a change of zoning to a zone which permits commercial use is contemplated, the street width shall be increased by such amount on each side as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board to assure the free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or parking vehicles, and to provide adequate and safe parking space for such commercial or business district.   

 

§ 175-17.  Street names.

 

All street names shown on a preliminary plat or subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning Board. In general, streets shall have names and not numbers or letters. Proposed street names shall be substantially different so as not to be confused in sound or spelling with present names except that streets which join or are in alignment with streets of an abutting or neighboring property shall bear the same name. Generally, no street should change direction by more than 90° without a change in street name. 

 

§ 175-18.  Lots. 

 

A.  All lots shall have area and width equal to minimum requirements of the zoning regulations, if any, and local and State Department of Health regulations applying to the district in which they are located but in no case hereafter shall any lot shown on any subdivision plat have a frontage of less than 75 feet and an area of less than 10,000 square feet. 

B.  Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines, unless a variance from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. 

C.  Corner lots. In general, corner lots should be a minimum of 25% larger than interior lots to provide a desirable building site with proper building setback from each street. 

D.  Driveway access. Driveway grades between the street and the setback line shall not exceed 7%. 

E.   Access from private streets. Lots on private streets shall be deemed acceptable only if such streets are designed and improved in accordance with these regulations. 

F.   Monuments and lot corner markers. Permanent monuments meeting specifications approved by the Village Engineer as to size, type and installation shall be set at such block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and other points as the Village Engineer may require, and their location shall be shown on the subdivision plat.   

 

§ 175-19.  Drainage improvements.

 

Adequate storm drainage systems shall be required in all new subdivisions. The drainage system shall be designed by a person licensed to perform such work. 

A.  Removal of spring and surface water. Any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to, or as a result of, the subdivision shall be carried away by pipe or open ditch. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in permanent easements having a minimum width of 20 feet, and are subject to approval of the Village Engineer. 

B.  Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream. A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside of the subdivision. The Village Engineer shall approve the design and size of facility based on anticipated runoff from a "ten-year" storm under conditions of total potential development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance in the watershed. The cost of a culvert or other drainage facility in excess of that required for the particular subdivision may be deemed to be the responsibility of the Village, or may be prorated among the upstream property owners. 

C.  The subdivider shall provide for the management of stormwater quantity and quality and soil erosion and sediment control as described in Chapter 170, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007] 

D.  Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding or land deemed by the Planning Board to be uninhabitable because of flooding, soil conditions, or other such hazards to person or property shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or improved in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board and Village Board to remedy said hazardous conditions. 

E.   All subdividers shall present an individual lot drainage plan for each lot in their proposed subdivision. Such plan shall be used in the grading of lots before a certificate of occupancy is granted, as required by the Zoning Ordinance. No roof leaders or footing drains which carry stormwater will be permitted to use a sanitary sewer, nor a so-called dry well in an area where the dominant soil is hardpan, but shall be adequately disposed of upon the grand surface.   

 

§ 175-20.  Parks, open spaces and natural features. 

 

A.  Recreation areas. 

(1)   The Planning Board shall require that the plat show sites of a character, extent, and location suitable for the development of a park, playground, or other recreation purpose in or adjacent to the subdivision. Where a proposed park, playground or open space shown on the Village Plan is located in whole or in part in the subdivision, the Board shall require that such area or areas be shown on the plat in accordance with the requirements specified above. Such area or areas may be dedicated to the Village by the subdivider if the Village Board approves such dedication. A maximum of 10% of the area of the subdivision may be required for dedication for park, playground or other recreation purpose. 

(2)   In the event that an area suitable for a park or playground is located in the subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the Board, prior to final approval, three prints (one on cloth) drawn in ink, showing, at a scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch, such area and the following features thereof: 

(a)  The boundaries of the said area. 

(b)  Existing features such as brooks, ponds, clusters of trees, rock outcrops and structures. 

(c)  Existing, and if applicable, proposed changes in grade and contours of the said area and of area immediately adjacent.     

B.  Waiver of plat designation of area for parks and playgrounds. 

(1)   In cases where the Planning Board finds that due to the size, topography, or location of the subdivision, land for park, playground or other recreation purpose cannot be properly located therein, or, if in the opinion of the Board it is not desirable, the Board may waive the requirement that the plat show land for such purposes. The Board may then require as a condition to approval of the plat, a payment to the Village of a minimum of $200 per gross acre of land which otherwise would have been acceptable as a recreation site, as determined by the standards set forth herewith. Such area or areas may be dedicated to the Village by the subdivider if the Village Board approves such dedication. 

(2)   Such amount shall be paid to the Village Board at the time of final plat approval, and no plat shall be signed by the authorized officer of the Planning Board until such payment is made. All such payments shall be held by the Village Board in a special Village Recreation Site Acquisition and Improvement Fund to be used for the acquisition of land that is suitable for permanent park, playground or other recreational purposes; and is so located that it will serve primarily the general neighborhood in which the land covered by the plat lies; and shall be used only for park, playground or other recreational land acquisition or improvements. Such money may also be used for the physical improvement of existing parks or recreation areas serving the general neighborhood in which the land shown on the plat is situated, provided the Planning Board finds there is a need for such improvements.   

C.  Preservation of natural features. The Planning Board shall, wherever possible, establish the preservation of all natural features which add value to residential developments and to the community, such as large trees or groves, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic sites, vistas and similar irreplaceable assets. No tree with a diameter of eight inches or more as measured three feet above the base of the trunk shall be removed unless such tree is within the right-of-way of a street as shown on the final subdivision plat, or individual house sites and driveways. Removal of additional trees shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE V, Documents to be Submitted
Body:
§ 175-21.  Sketch plan.

 

The sketch plan initially submitted to the Planning Board shall be based on tax map information or some other similarly accurate base map at a scale (preferably not less than 200 feet to the inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet. The sketch plan shall show the following information: 

A.  The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the entire tract, and the distance to the nearest existing street intersection. 

B.  All roads, structures, wooded areas, streams, utilities and other physical features within the portion to be subdivided and within 100 feet thereof. If topographic conditions are significant, contours shall also be indicated at intervals of not more than 10 feet. 

C.  The name of the owner and all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records. 

D.  The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers, if any. 

E.   The proposed pattern of lots (including lot width and depth), street layout, recreation areas, systems of drainage, sewerage, and water supply (see §§ 175-22 and 175-23 below) within the subdivided area. 

F.   All existing restrictions on the use of land, including easements, covenants, or zoning lines.   

 

§ 175-22.  Minor subdivision plat.

 

In the case of minor subdivision only, the subdivision plat application shall include the following information: 

A.  A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or part of the tract. 

B.  An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on the ground and marked by monuments as approved by the Village Board, and shall be referenced and shown on the plat. 

C.  All on-site sanitation and water supply facilities shall be designed to meet the minimum specifications of the State Department of Health, and a note to this effect shall be stated on the plat and signed by a licensed engineer. 

D.  Proposed subdivision name, name of the village and county in which it is located. 

E.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of record owner and subdivider. 

F.   The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed or drawn on Mylar or its equivalent or be clearly drawn in India ink upon tracing cloth. The size of the sheet shall conform with requirements of the County Clerk.   

 

§ 175-23.  Major subdivision preliminary plat and accompanying data.

 

The following documents shall be submitted for conditional approval: 

A.  Five copies of the preliminary plat prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet but preferably not less than 50 feet to the inch, showing: 

(1)   Proposed subdivision name, name of village and county in which it is located, date, true north point, scale, name and address of record owner, subdivider and engineer or surveyor, including license number and seal. 

(2)   The name of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the name of the owners of record of all adjacent unsubdivided property. 

(3)   Zoning district, including exact boundary lines of district, if more than one district, and any proposed changes in the zoning district lines and/or the zoning ordinance text applicable to the area to be subdivided. 

(4)   All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication. 

(5)   Location of existing property lines, easements, buildings, watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, single trees with a diameter of eight inches or more as measured three feet above the base of the trunk, and other significant existing features for the proposed subdivision and adjacent property. 

(6)   Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and drains on and adjacent to the property, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow. 

(7)   Contours with intervals of five feet or less as required by the Board, including elevations on existing roads. Approximate grading plan if natural contours are to be changed more than two feet. 

(8)   The width and location of any streets or public ways or places shown on the Official Map or the Comprehensive Plan within the area to be subdivided, and the width, location, grades and street profiles of all streets or public ways proposed by the developer. 

(9)   The approximate location and size of all proposed water lines, valves, hydrants and sewer lines connection to existing lines or alternate means of water supply or sewage disposal and treatment as provided in the Public Health Law. 

(10) Storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size of proposed lines or channels. 

(11) The proposed lot lines.   

B.  If the application covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a map of the entire tract, drawn at a scale of not less than 400 feet to the inch showing an outline of the platted area with its proposed streets and indication of the probable future street system with its grades and drainage in the remaining portion of the tract and the probable future drainage layout of the entire tract shall be submitted. The part of the subdivider's entire holding submitted shall be considered in the light of the entire holdings. 

C.  A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or part of the tract.   

 

§ 175-24.  Major subdivision final plat and accompanying data.

 

The following documents shall be submitted for plat approval: 

A.  The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed upon Mylar or its equivalent or be clearly drawn in India ink upon tracing cloth. The size of the sheets shall conform with Village standards. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 100 feet to the inch and oriented with the north point at the top of the map. When more than one sheet is required, a key map, or an additional index sheet of the same size, shall be filed showing to scale the entire subdivision with lot and block numbers clearly legible. The plat shall show: 

(1)   Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the village and county in which the subdivision is located, the name and address of record owner and subdivider, name, license number and seal of the licensed land surveyor. 

(2)   Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use. 

(3)   Sufficient data acceptable to the Village Engineer to determine readily the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where applicable, these should be referenced to monuments included in the state system of plane coordinates, and in any event should be tied to reference points previously established by a public authority. 

(4)   The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, length of curves and central angles of all curves, and tangent bearings shall be given for each street. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall also be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and inches. The plat shall show the boundaries of the property, location, graphic scale and true north point. 

(5)   The plat shall also show by proper designation thereon all public open spaces for which deeds are included and those spaces title to which is reserved by the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with the subdivision plat copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which such areas are to be used and maintained and the provisions made therefor. 

(6)   All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance of unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency. 

(7)   Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered and lettered in alphabetical order in accordance with the prevailing Village practice. 

(8)   Permanent reference monuments shall be shown, and shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the Village Board. When referenced to the state system of plane coordinates, they shall also conform to the requirements of the State Department of Transportation. They shall be placed as required by the Village Board and their location noted and referenced upon the plat. 

(9)   All lot corner markers shall be at least 3/4 inches (if metal) in diameter and at least 24 inches in length, and permanently located in the ground to existing grade in a manner satisfactory to the Village Board. 

(10) Monuments of a type approved by the Village Board shall be set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided; and at all street intersections, angle points in street lines, points of curve and such intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer.   

B.  Construction drawings include plans, profiles and typical cross-sections, as required, showing the proposed location, size and type of streets, sidewalks, street lighting standards, street trees, curbs, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains, pavements and subbase, manholes, catch basins and other facilities. As-built drawings shall also be filed with the Village Board and Planning Board if the construction has deviated significantly from the plans approved by the Boards.    

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE VI, Variances and Waivers
Body:
§ 175-25.  Variance.

 

Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations it may adjust the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official Map, the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning Ordinance.

 

§ 175-26.  Waiver.

 

Where the Planning Board finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. 

 

§ 175-27.  Conditions of variance or waiver.

 

In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 175, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ARTICLE VII, Penalties
Body:
§ 175-28.  Penalties for offenses.

 

Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250, imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE I, Title, Purpose and Definitions
Body:
§ 200-1.  Title.

 

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of New York Mills Zoning Ordinance." 

 

§ 200-2.  Purposes.

 

The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of this community. Such requirements are deemed necessary for the following purposes: 

A.  Promote orderly development. To protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, business, and manufacturing areas within the Village, and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas. 

B.  Regulate intensity of use. To regulate the intensity of use of zoning lots, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air, privacy, and convenience of access to property, and to protect the public health. 

C.  Regulate location of buildings. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, commercial, manufacturing, or other uses within such lines. 

D.  Establish standards of development. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform. 

E.   Prohibit incompatible uses. To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures which are incompatible with the character of development or the permitted uses within specified zoning districts. 

F.   Regulate alterations of existing buildings. To regulate such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder. 

G.  Limit congestion in streets. To limit congestion in the public streets and so protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare by providing for off-street parking of automobiles and for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles. 

H.  Protect against hazards. To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort, and the general welfare. 

I.    Conserve taxable value of land. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village.   

 

§ 200-3.  Definitions. 

 

A.  Terms. For the purposes of this chapter certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 

(1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 

(2)   The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 

(3)   The word "building" includes the word "structure." 

(4)   The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "built, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 

(5)   The word "shall" is mandatory.   

B.  Words. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 

ACCESSORY BUILDING  -- A building subordinate to the principal building on a lot used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal building.  

ACCESSORY USE  -- A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.  

ALLEY  -- A service way which affords a secondary public means of vehicular access to abutting property.  

ALTERATION (as applied to a building or structure)  -- A change or rearrangement in the structural parts, or in the entrance and exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another.  

AUTO WASH  -- A building or portion thereof, the use of which is devoted to the washing of automobiles; including, but not limited to, one of the following types:  

(1)   Conveyor type. An auto wash facility where automobiles progress through the washing process pulled by an electrically operated chain conveyor, or by some means other than their own power.  

(2)   Drive-through type. An auto wash facility where automobiles are driven through the washing process under their own power.  

(3)   Self-service type. An auto wash facility where automobiles are washed by the drivers of the automobiles using machinery provided by the manager of the facility.    

BAKERY  -- A facility where breads or pastries are prepared and baked and which may be sold for wholesale or retail consumption and serving food to the public for consumption on the premises within the principal building. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

BANK  -- An institution in which the primary business is the holding, lending, transfer and/or investment of money. The term includes credit unions and savings and loan institutions. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

BASEMENT  -- A space of full story height partly below grade and having at least half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground, and which is not designed or used primarily for year-round living accommodations.  

BED-AND-BREAKFAST  -- An owner-occupied one-unit dwelling with which is provided overnight accommodations for transient guests who stay up to five nights, and which includes the serving of breakfast, but no other meals to such guests. No cooking facilities are permitted in individual rooms, one bedroom and one full bathroom shall be provided for the owner-occupant, and one full bathroom shall be provided for every two guest sleeping rooms. [Added 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]  

BUILDING  -- Any roofed structure intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. When a building is divided into separate parts extending from the ground up, each part so divided is deemed a separate building.  

BUILDING AREA  -- The total ground floor area of a principal building and accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, parapets, steps and terraces.  

BUILDING COVERAGE  -- That area of the lot or plot covered by a building.  

BUILDING, DETACHED  -- A building surrounded by open space on all sides on the same lot.  

BUILDING, FLOOR AREA  -- The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, including basement areas devoted to residential occupancy and the area of bays, dormers, roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.  

BUILDING, HEIGHT OF  -- The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.  

BUILDING LINE  -- A line established by law or by agreement, usually parallel with a property line, beyond which a structure may not extend.  

BUILDING, PRINCIPAL  -- A building in which the main use of the lot is conducted.  

CELLAR  -- That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade, which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.  

DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT or REFRESHMENT STAND  -- Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages to persons in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on the premises.  

DRIVEWAY  -- A short private road leading from the street to a house, garage, or parking lot. [Added 9-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]  

DUMP  -- Any place or parcel of land used for disposal by burial, pickup, burning or any other means or for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.  

DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY  -- A building or group of buildings designed for year-round occupancy by more than two families, including apartment houses and group houses, but excluding hotels and rooming houses.  

DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY  -- A detached building, other than a trailer or other temporary structure, designed for exclusive year-round occupancy by one family only.  

DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE  -- A building consisting of attached one-family dwelling units with a common wall between each two adjacent units.  

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY  -- A detached building, other than trailer or other temporary structure, designed for exclusive year-round occupancy by two families living independently of each other.  

DWELLING UNIT  -- One or more rooms with provision for living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. A factory-finished living unit delivered to the owner's lot in sections and capable of complying with all applicable local and state building codes shall be deemed to be a dwelling unit.  

FAMILY  -- One or more persons related by blood, or marriage, or other recognized family relationship maintaining a common household.  

GARAGE, PRIVATE  -- A roofed space for the storage of one or more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car is leased to a nonresident of the premises.  

GARAGE, PUBLIC  -- A building or part thereof operated for gain and used for the storage, hiring, selling, greasing, washing, servicing, or repair of motor-driven vehicles.  

GARAGE, STORAGE  -- A building or part thereof used only for the storage of vehicles for gain, and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold.  

GASOLINE STATION  -- Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline or oil or other motor vehicle fuel and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not including the painting or major repair thereof. The term "gasoline station" shall be deemed to include "filling station" and "service station." [Amended 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]  

GROCERY STORE  -- A structure in which perishable and nonperishable food and related items are sold for retail consumption. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

HOME OCCUPATION  [Amended 4-13-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]  

(1)   Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on only by the inhabitants thereof which use is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling as a place of residence and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit is used in the conduct of the home occupation; and further provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except as may be produced by the immediate family residing therein, or is incidental to the service which is provided. In particular, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to, the following:  

(a)  Art or photographic studio, dressmaker or seamstress; teaching of musical instruments limited to one pupil at a time; barber or beauty shop and other similar occupations operated only by a resident of the premises and in which no nonresidents are employed or engaged.  

(b)  Professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, and other similar professions in which not more than one nonresident is employed.    

(2)   A permit (no charge) shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer to engage in a home occupation.  

(3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.  

(4)   Traffic generated by such home occupation shall not be of greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the home occupation shall be provided off the street, and not in a required front yard.  

(5)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot; and in the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.  

(6)   The home occupation is not transferable to a subsequent buyer of the property or to another home occupation in the same residence.  

(7)   The Code Enforcement Officer will revoke a permit if the applicant uses the property for a different use other than approved or violates a condition of approval.    

HOSPITAL  -- A building or structure for the diagnosis and medical or surgical care of human sickness or injuries, including facilities for the temporary housing of patients.  

HOSPITAL, ANIMAL  -- A building or structure for the diagnosis and medical or surgical care of sick or injured animals, including facilities for the temporary housing of such animals.  

HOTEL or MOTEL  -- A building or group of buildings where transient guests are lodged for hire, but excluding rooming houses.  

JUNKYARD, AUTOMOBILE  

(1)   Any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, where two or more unregistered, old or secondhand motor vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, are held, whether for the purpose of resale of used parts therefrom, for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials therein, whether metal, glass, fabric, or otherwise, for the purpose of disposing of the same or for any other purpose.  

(2)   Such term shall include any place of storage or deposit for any such purpose of used parts or waste materials from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal in bulk two or more such vehicles; provided, however, the term "junkyard" shall not be construed to mean an establishment having facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap and whose principal produce is scrap iron, steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes. Auto wrecking: The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or the storage, sale, salvaging or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts. As used herein, the term "vehicle" shall mean passenger-type automobile, truck, tractor-truck, trailer, bus, motorcycle, snowmobile, or other vehicle, however propelled, as well as tractors, bulldozers, machinery and similar equipment.    

JUNKYARD, GENERAL  -- A lot, land or structure or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metals, used or salvaged building materials, or other discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles, and for the sale of the parts thereof.  

LAUNDERETTE  -- A business premises equipped with individual clothes washing or cleaning machines for use by retail customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided in an apartment, fraternity, sorority, residential hotel or club.  

LOT  -- A parcel of land considered as a unit, occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or use and accessory buildings or uses, or by a group of buildings united by a common use or interest; and including such open spaces as are required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage on a public street or an officially approved place.  

LOT, AREA OF  -- The total area included within lot lines. No part of the area within a public right-of-way may be included in the computation of lot area.  

LOT, CORNER  -- A lot located at the intersection of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets, and having an interior angle at the corner of intersection of less than 135°.  

LOT DEPTH  -- The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.  

LOT, INTERIOR  -- A lot other than a corner lot.  

LOT LINES  -- The property lines bounding the lot.  

(1)   FRONT LOT LINE -- The lot line separating the lot from the street right-of-way.  

(2)   REAR LOT LINE -- The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.  

(3)   SIDE LOT LINE -- Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.    

LOT, THROUGH  -- A lot having frontage on two approximately parallel, or converging, streets other than a corner lot.  

LOT, WIDTH  -- The distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at a distance from the front lot line equal to the front yard specified for the district.  

MOBILE HOME  -- A factory-finished movable dwelling unit designed and built on frame and wheels to be towed on its own chassis to its destination; such unit to have been designed and installed in compliance with the State Code for the Construction and Installation of Mobile Homes and Standards, Rules and Regulations for Mobile Homes, effective January 15, 1974, and as it may be amended [as set forth in Volume 9 Executive (B) of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York]; and further, any such unit shall bear the required seal noting such compliance. A travel-trailer is not to be considered a mobile home. [Amended 2-9-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]  

MOBILE HOME COURT  -- A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for nontransient use. The term shall include mobile home court, mobile home park or other area planned and/or improved for two or more mobile homes.  

NONCONFORMING BUILDING or USE  -- The use of a building or of land which was lawfully existing prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Zoning Chapter but which fails to conform to the use regulations for the district in which such use is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment,  

NONCONFORMING LOT  -- Any zone which was lawfully existing prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Zoning Chapter but which fails to conform with the minimum area and/or dimensions required in the district in which it is situated or with the characteristics normally required of lots in the district where located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment. [Amended 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]  

NURSERY SCHOOL  -- Facilities for the daytime care or instruction of two or more children from two to five years inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.  

NURSING HOME  -- A proprietary facility, licensed or regulated by the State of New York for the accommodation of convalescents or other persons who are not acutely ill and not in need of hospital care but who require skilled nursing care and related medical services which are prescribed by or performed under the direction of a person or persons licensed to provide such care or services in accordance with the laws of the State of New York.  

OFFICE  -- A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

PARKING SPACE  -- An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways thereto.  

PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT  -- A tract of land in single ownership, or controlled by an individual, partnership, cooperative, or corporation designed or capable of being designed and used as a unit or group of related units and having certain facilities in common such as yards, open space, recreation areas, garages, or parking areas. A planned development district may be residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, or a combination of such uses.  

PROFESSIONAL OFFICE  -- A room or suite of rooms in which an individual or group of individuals operates a private professional practice, including but not limited to medical, osteopathic, dental, podiatric, chiropractic, optometric, legal, psychiatric, accounting, architectural and engineering. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

PUBLIC BUILDING OR USE  -- Any land, structure or combination thereof owned, used or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of the Village, town, Oneida County, State of New York, or federal government without reference to the ownership of the building or structure and/or the land on which it is situated. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

RETAIL STORE  -- Any building where the primary occupation is the sale of merchandise in small quantities, not for resale. Retail sales establishments shall not be interpreted to include automobile-oriented uses, convenience stores and service establishments. [Added 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]  

SIGN  -- Any device affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.  

SIGN, ADVERTISING  -- A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.   

SIGN, BUSINESS  -- A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. A "For Sale" or "To Let" sign relating to the lot on which it is displayed shall be deemed to be a business sign.  

SIGN, FLASHING  -- A "flashing sign" is any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.  

SPECIAL EXCEPTION  -- A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in a certain zoning district as a special exception if specific provision for such special exceptions is made in this chapter.  

STORY  -- That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.  

STORY, HALF  -- That part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, and having a floor area at least half as large as the floor below. Space with less than five feet clear headroom shall not be considered as floor area.  

STREET  -- A public or private way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.  

STRUCTURAL ALTERATION  -- Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.  

STRUCTURE  -- Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.  

THEATRE, OUTDOOR  -- An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant structures and facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.  

TRAILER CAMP  -- An area occupied or designed for occupancy by two or more travel trailers.  

TRAVEL TRAILER  -- A mobile unit designed and built for camping, recreational travel, or vacation use which is equipped to provide portable housing, including temporary housekeeping facilities.  

YARD, FRONT  -- An open space extending across the principal street side of a lot measured between the side yard lines, the depth of which yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than steps and unenclosed balconies, not extending more than eight feet from the front of the building, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.  

YARD, REAR  -- An open space extending across the rear of a lot measured between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building or any projection thereof other than steps and unenclosed balconies not extending more than eight feet from the rear of the building, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. On both corner and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.  

YARD, SIDE  -- An open space from the front yard to the rear yard between the building and the nearest side lot line unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for steps and as otherwise specified in this chapter.   

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE II, Districts and Use Regulations
Body:
§ 200-4.  Designation of districts.  [Amended 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]

 

For the purpose of this chapter the Village of New York Mills is divided into the following districts:

 

 R-1 

Residential District  

 R-2 

Residential District  

 R-3 

Residential District  

 C-1 

Retail Commercial District  

 C-2 

General Commercial District  

 M-1 

Manufacturing District  

 Planned Development District: P-D  

  

P-R 

Planned Unit Residence District  

  

P-C 

Planned Commercial District  

  

P-M 

Planned Manufacturing District  

  

PDMU 

Planned Development Mixed Use    

 

§ 200-5.  Zoning Map.

 

The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on the Zoning Map of the Village of New York Mills, dated February 15, 1973, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part of this chapter. 

 

§ 200-6.  Interpretation of district boundaries. 

 

A.  The district boundary lines are intended generally to follow the center lines of streets; the center lines of railroad rights-of-way; existing lot lines; the center lines of creeks, streams, and other waterways; and Village boundary lines. Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary line as indicated. 

B.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundary. 

C.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center of right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. 

D.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 30 feet into the more restricted portion, provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. 

E.   In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the Zoning Officer shall make a determination with respect thereto.   

 

§ 200-7.  Application of regulations.

 

Except as hereinafter otherwise provided: 

A.  No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. 

B.  No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located. 

C.  No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area, and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located. 

D.  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 

E.   No lot in any R-1 or R-2 Residential District shall be used for more than one residential structure, unless lot area and yard requirements are met for each dwelling, including required street frontages.   

 

§ 200-8.  Residential districts. 

 

A.  Purpose. 

(1)   The purpose of these regulations is to delineate those areas where predominantly residential development has occurred or will be likely to occur in accordance with the Village Plan. 

(2)   To improve the character of residential areas by requiring standards of land use and lot and building size which accurately reflect existing and desirable development. 

(3)   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the intermixture of incompatible nonresidential uses.   

B.  R-1 Residential District. In the R-1 Residential District no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 

(1)   Uses permitted: 

(a)  One-family dwelling. 

(b)  Public or parochial school. 

(c)  Church, parish house, convent, rectory. 

(d) Public park or playground. 

(e)  Public library, fire house, or other public building or use. 

(f)  Golf course, country club. 

(g)  Accessory building or use.   

(2)   Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

(a)  Public utility station or structure. 

(b)  Customary home occupation. 

(c)  Greenhouses and nurseries. [Added 1-14-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980]     

C.  R-2 Residential District. In the R-2 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: [Amended 1-14-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980; 4-13-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999] 

(1)   Uses permitted: 

(a)  R-1 Residential District uses. 

(b)  Two-family dwelling. 

(c)  Three- or four-family dwelling, by conversion of existing structure and conforming with lot area requirements of Schedule A. 

(d) Rooming or boarding house. 

(e)  Customary home occupation. 

(f)  Accessory building or use.   

(2)   Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

(a)  Public utility station or structure. 

(b)  Greenhouses and nurseries. 

(c)  Bed-and-breakfast.     

D.  R-3 Residential District. In the R-3 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 

(1)   Uses permitted: 

(a)  R-2 Residential District uses. 

(b)  Townhouses, multiple-family dwellings.   

(2)   Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

(a)  Public utility station or structure. 

(b)  Greenhouses and nurseries.  [Added 1-14-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980]       

 

§ 200-9.  Commercial districts. 

 

A.  C-1 Retail Commercial District. 

(1)   The purpose of this subsection is to delineate an area where retail stores, personal services and offices; recreational, institutional and cultural facilities; and municipal buildings and services are provided for the community; and to encourage new development in the Retail Commercial District by providing for public and commercial off-street parking areas for patrons of the businesses in the district. 

(2)   In the C-1 Commercial District no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 

(a)  Uses permitted: 

[1]   Existing residential uses. 

[2]   Retail store, bakery for retail sale of goods primarily on the premises. 

[3]   Personal service shop. 

[4]   Launderette. 

[5]   Restaurant, tavern. 

[6]   Business or professional office, studio. 

[7]   Educational, eleemosynary, religious, or philanthropic institutions. 

[8]   Florist shop. 

[9]   Funeral home. 

[10] Club or lodge, except those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 

[11] Radio, television, or household appliance sales or service. 

[12] Antique sales and accessory service. 

[13] Nursing home and/or extended care facilities. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, the uses enumerated in this subsection shall not be permitted in any other zoning district. 

[14] Public utility station or structure. 

[15] Business signs. 

[16] Customary accessory uses. 

[17] Business office equipment, business machine sales and service. [Added 12-9-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]   

(b)  Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

[1]   Gasoline station.       

B.  C-2 General Commercial District. 

(1)   The purpose of this subsection is to delineate areas appropriate for commercial uses which are oriented either to highway use or intended for service to vehicles, or non-retail commercial uses. 

(2)   In the C-2 General Commercial District, no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 

(a)  Uses permitted: 

[1]   Uses permitted in the C-1 Retail Commercial District, except residences. 

[2]   Motel, restaurant, tavern. 

[3]   Automobile, boat, farm implement, mobile home, trailer, snowmobile, or motorcycle sales or rental. 

[4]   Garage, gasoline station. 

[5]   Used car sales. 

[6]   Laundry, dry-cleaning plant. 

[7]   Office equipment, business machines sales and service. 

[8]   Letter press shop, printing plant. 

[9]   Animal hospital, kennel. 

[10] Hardware, building supplies. 

[11] Heating, plumbing, air-conditioning, electrical, cabinet or similar fabrication shop. 

[12] Bowling alley, billiard or pool hall. 

[13] Business sign. 

[14] Customary accessory uses.   

(b)  Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

[1]   Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand. 

[2]   Auto wash.         

 

§ 200-10.  M-1 Manufacturing District. 

 

A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to delineate those areas best suited for industrial use because of location, transportation, topography, existing facilities, and relation to other land uses; and to preserve the integrity of the manufacturing areas by excluding uses which are incompatible with industry. 

B.  In the M-1 Manufacturing District no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 

(1)   Uses permitted: 

(a)  Uses permitted in the C-2 Commercial District. 

(b)  Metal fabrication, welding. 

(c)  Concrete products. 

(d) Machine shop. 

(e)  Light manufacturing or assembly plant. 

(f)  Wholesale, storage, or warehouse facility. 

(g)  Cold storage or meat packing plant. 

(h)  Development or research center. 

(i)   Business sign. 

(j)   Customary accessory building or use.   

(2)   Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals: 

(a)  Auto wash. 

(b)  Truck terminal. 

(c)  Junkyard, automobile junkyard.       

 

§ 200-11.  Planned development districts. 

 

A.  Purpose. [Amended 4-4-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977; 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004] 

(1)   The purpose of this section is to provide for new residential, commercial or manufacturing districts in which economies of scale, or creative architectural or planning concepts may be utilized by the developer without departing from the spirit and intent of this chapter; and to insure that the regulations of this section are so interpreted and applied that the benefits of this chapter to the residents or occupants of the planned development district and the residents or occupants of adjacent properties will be protected. 

(2)   To further the purposes of planned development, certain areas on the Zoning Map have been designated P-D without specifying whether they are P-R, P-C, P-M, or PDMU. The intent of this section is to require owners of property designated as P-D to apply to the Village Board of Trustees for a Zoning Map amendment changing the zone classification of their property from P-D to P-R, P-C, P-M, or PDMU or an appropriate combination of such classifications pursuant to Subsection B(1), below, and be granted such rezoning, prior to becoming eligible to apply for construction of a building project pursuant to Subsection B(2) below.   

B.  Procedure to establish planned development districts. Planned development districts and building projects within a planned development district may be established in accordance with the procedure specified below. [Amended 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004] 

(1)   Application for designation of a planned development district by amendment of the Village Zoning Map shall be made to the Village Board. The Village Board shall refer the application to the Planning Board within 10 days after receipt of the application. The applicant shall furnish basic data pertaining to the boundaries of the proposed planned district, existing zoning, topography, drainage, and soil conditions, and such preliminary plans as may be be required for an understanding of the proposed development, with the petitions for the desired zoning change. 

(2)   Application for construction of a building project with an established planned district shall be made to the Village Board. The Village Board shall refer the application to the Planning Board within 10 days after receipt of the application. The applicant shall furnish necessary data regarding topography, building types and layout, setback, off-street parking and loading, ingress and egress, signs, existing and proposed amenities such as screening, planting and ornamental features, and such preliminary construction plans and other data as may be required for an understanding of the proposed development.   

C.  Use, area and height limitations and other regulations. The use, areas and height limitations and access, parking and loading, regulations for planned development districts shall be as follows: [Amended 4-4-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977; 9-22-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 4-13-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004] 

(1)   Uses permitted in P-R Planned Residential District: 

(a)  One-family dwellings. 

(b)  Townhouses. 

(c)  Two-family dwellings. 

(d) Neighborhood park or playground, golf course. 

(e)  Multiple-family dwelling.   

(2)   Uses permitted in P-C Planned Commercial District: 

(a)  Retail stores or shopping center. 

(b)  Business or professional offices. 

(c)  Bank or other monetary institution. 

(d) Data processing center. 

(e)  Motel, restaurant. 

(f)  Personal service shops, such as barber or beauty shop. 

(g)  Bowling alleys. 

(h)  Office equipment or business machines sales and rental. 

(i)   Laundry or dry-cleaning plant, launderette.   

(3)   Uses permitted in P-M Planned Manufacturing District: 

(a)  Planned commercial district uses. 

(b)  Development or research center. 

(c)  Light manufacturing. 

(d) Printing or publishing plant. 

(e)  Tool, dye, machine or metal craft shop.   

(4)   Uses permitted in PDMU Planned Development Mixed Use: 

(a)  Retail store. 

(b)  Office. 

(c)  Professional office. 

(d) Bank. 

(e)  Bakery. 

(f)  Grocery store. 

(g)  Public building/use. 

(h)  Multifamily dwelling.   

(5)   Within the planned districts, the following regulations shall apply: 

(a)  Area. 

[1]   Minimum lot size in a planned district shall be as recommended by the Planning Board using Schedule A as a guideline, subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. 

[2]   The calculation of area for a planned district shall not include easements, existing parks, existing streets or otherwise dedicated land; water areas in excess of 10% or the minimum gross acreage; lands designated on the official map for public purposes; or land undesirable by reason of topography, drainage, or adverse subsoil conditions.   

(b)  Yard dimensions. Exterior yards at district boundaries shall be a minimum of 50 feet from commercial to commercial or industrial, and 200 feet from commercial, or industrial to any residential district. Planned Development Mixed Uses shall be limited as recommended by the Planning Board subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. 

(c)  Building height. The height of buildings shall be limited as recommended by the Planning Board subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. 

(d) Ingress and egress. Locations for ingress and egress shall be approved by the Planning Board, and in the case of planned commercial or industrial districts, shall be so arranged as not to connect with local residential streets. 

(e)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking requirements in any planned district shall be as recommended by the Planning Board using Schedule B (§ 200-20) as a guideline, subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. 

(f)  Off-street parking in a planned commercial district. Parking in any front yard in a planned commercial district shall be separated from the street or highway right-of-way by a lawn or planting area 20 feet or more wide. Parking or loading in any planned commercial district shall be adequately separated and screened from any adjacent residential district. 

(g)  Off-street parking in a planned manufacturing district. Off-street parking in a planned manufacturing district shall be confined to the side or rear yard, and shall be adequately separated and screened from any adjacent residential district. 

(h)  Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for each commercial or manufacturing establishment and shall be so arranged as not to interfere with pedestrian or motor traffic on the public highway, or any adjacent residential area. 

(i)   Residential living area. Minimum living area requirements shall be as recommended by the Planning Board using § 200-17 as guidelines, subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees.     

D.  Review by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review any planned development district application and may require such changes in the preliminary plans as are found to be necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, to protect the established or permitted uses in the vicinity, and to promote the orderly growth and sound development of the community. In reaching its decision on the proposed development and changes, if any, in the preliminary plans, the Planning Board shall consider, among other things, the following: 

(1)   The existing character of the neighborhood. 

(2)   The location of principal and accessory buildings on the site in relation to one another and to other structures and uses in the vicinity. 

(3)   The pedestrian circulation and open space in relation to structures. 

(4)   The traffic circulation features within the site, and the amount, location, access to automobile parking areas and loading areas. 

(5)   The height and bulk of buildings. 

(6)   The proposed location, type, and size of signs, driveways, and landscape features. 

(7)   The safeguards provided to minimize possible detrimental effects of the proposed use on adjacent properties and the neighborhood in general. 

(8)   Storm drainage, sanitary and solid waste disposal in and adjacent to the area.   

E.   Approval by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove an application: 

(1)   For designation of a planned development district amendment of the Zoning Map of the Village; or 

(2)   For a building project within an established planned development district, and shall report its findings to the Village Board within 45 days following the date of referral to the Planning Board by the Village Board. Planning Board approval of the preliminary plans shall not constitute nor imply a permit for said project.   

F.   Village Board action. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on any proposal to create or change a planned development district, with public notice, as provided by law as in the case of any amendment to a zoning ordinance. The Village Board may amend this chapter to establish and define the type and boundaries of the planned district, after a public hearing. 

G.  Approval by Village Board; vote to override Planning Board. A building project within a planned district shall conform substantially with the preliminary construction plans approved by the Planning Board. A building permit may be issued only after construction plans and specifications have been filed and approved by resolution of the Village Board. In the event the Planning Board disapproves a building project within a planned development district, or approves with modifications which the applicant is unwilling to make, an affirmative vote of not less than 3/4 of the members of the Village Board shall be required to approve the said building project. 

H.  Time limitations. If construction work on the proposed building project is not begun within time limits specified by the building permit, or if such work is not completed within the period of time specified by such permit, approval of the project application shall become null and void and all rights therein shall cease, unless the Village Board for good cause authorizes an extension. 

I.    Conditions to run with land. All conditions imposed by the Village Board, including those the performance of which are conditions precedent to the issuance of any permit necessary for the development of any part of the entire site, shall run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change in the tenancy or ownership of any or all of said area. Such conditions shall be stated in any certificate of occupancy issued for any use or structure in such development.   

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE III, Supplementary Regulations
Body:
§ 200-12.  Zoning regulations schedule.

 

The following schedule entitled "Schedule A sets forth in outline form the permitted principal uses, uses permitted upon special permit, minimum lot sizes, maximum lot coverage, maximum building heights and minimum yard dimensions. In case of conflict, the provisions of the various sections of this chapter shall supersede the provisions of this schedule, which is included for quick reference. 

 

§ 200-13.  Additional area regulations. 

 

A.  Existing lots of record. A single-family structure may be constructed on any lot in any residence district even if said lot has less than the minimum area required for building lots in the district in which it is located, subject to the following conditions: 

(1)   Adjoining vacant land. The owner of said lot owns no adjoining vacant land which would create a conforming lot if combined with the lot which is deficient in area. 

(2)   Side yards. Any structure erected on a nonconforming lot shall have a minimum side yard of five feet, or a minimum side yard of 10 feet adjacent to a side street lot line. 

(3)   Front and rear yards. Any structure erected on a nonconforming lot shall have front and rear yards conforming to the minimums required for the residence district in which said lot is located, except as said lot may meet the conditions set forth in this section of this chapter.   

B.  Lot width. The minimum width of any lot shall be measured along the minimum building setback line required for the district in which it is located. 

C.  Reduction of lot area. The minimum yards and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this chapter shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building, nor shall any lot be reduced below the district requirements of this chapter. 

D.  Number of dwellings on lot. Two permanent residential structures on one lot, other than group housing, shall be prohibited unless lot area and yard requirements are met for each dwelling, including required street frontage. 

E.   Corner lot. On a corner lot in any district where a front yard is required, a yard shall be provided on each street equal to the required front yard on each such street. One rear yard shall be provided on each corner lot and the owner shall designate the rear yard on his application for a permit. The Board of Appeals shall determine the yard and building width of a corner lot facing an intersecting street, and of record at the time of the passage of this chapter, if the yard requirements would result in a residential structure less than 24 feet wide. 

F.   Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street or alley, the wider street shall be deemed the street upon which the property fronts, and no principal structures and no dwelling shall be erected on the rear of such a lot, except where such lot may be subdivided to create not less than two conforming lots. Where a single lot extends between two streets of equal width, either of the two streets may be deemed as that upon which the property fronts. The building height shall be measured from the grade of the street on which the building fronts. 

G.  Visibility at street corners. On a corner lot in any district where a front yard is required, no fence, wall, hedge, or other structure of planting more than 2 1/2 feet above the finished grade on the street center line shall be erected, placed or maintained so as to obstruct visibility of vehicular traffic within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line joining said lines at points 30 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said lines. 

H.  Front yard exception. When a vacant lot is situated between two improved lots, each having a principal building within 25 feet of any side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard of the vacant lot may be reduced to a depth equal to the greater of the depths of the front yards of the two adjoining improved lots, but not less than 10 feet. 

I.    Transition yard requirements. 

(1)   Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district at a street line, there shall be provided in the nonresidential district for a distance of 50 feet from the district boundary line, a front yard at least equal in depth to that required in the residential district. 

(2)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in one ownership at the time of adoption of said district line, the regulations for the more restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 50 feet into the less restricted portion provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. 

(3)   Where the side or rear yard in a residential district abuts a side or rear yard in a nonresidential district, there shall be provided along such abutting line or lines in the nonresidential district, a side or rear yard at least equal in depth to that required in the residential district. In no case, however, shall the abutting side yard be less than 10 feet and the abutting rear yard less than 20 feet.   

J.    Projections into required yards. 

(1)   The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings in a side or rear yard and except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, and other architectural features, provided, however, that such features shall not project more than two feet into any required yard. 

(2)   A paved terrace shall not be considered as part of a building in the determination of yard sizes or lot coverage, provided that such terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets, or other form of enclosure exceeding six feet in height. 

(3)   In determining the percentage of building coverage or the size of yards for the purpose of this chapter, roofed or enclosed porches shall be considered a part of the building. 

(4)   An open fire escape may extend into any required yard not more than six feet, provided that such fire escape shall not be closer than four feet at any point to any lot line. 

(5)   Unenclosed entrance steps or stairways providing access to the first story of a building may extend into any required yard a distance not to exceed six feet.   

K.  Walls, fences, and hedges. [Amended 12-9-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997] 

(1)   Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 

FENCE  -- Any structure, regardless of composition, including a living fence, that is erected or maintained for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land or dividing a piece of land into distinct portions.  

FRONT YARD  -- Applies to that portion of the yard in front of the front building line of any building. All corner properties adjacent to a public street, alley or highway shall also be considered as "front yard" for the purposes of this chapter. However, this definition shall specifically not apply for purposes of swimming pool protection.  

HEIGHT  -- The distance measured from the existing grade to the top of the fence.  

REAR YARD  -- Applies to that portion of the yard in front of the rear building line of any building and to the rear of the front building line of any building.  

SIDE YARD  -- Applies to that portion of the yard in front of the rear building line of any building and to the rear of the front building line of any building.  

(2)   Approval required. No fence, wall or other type of construction shall be erected without the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. 

(3)   Application for permit; issuance. Any person or persons, corporation, firm or association intending to erect a fence shall, before any work is commenced, make application to the Code Enforcement Officer on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. Said application shall be accompanied by a plan or sketch showing the proposed location of any fence and the materials proposed to be used therein, which must be in accordance with this chapter and any other pertinent local law regulating construction within the Village, and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee. Upon approval by the Code Enforcement Officer, a permit shall be issued. Said permit shall be available on the job during the progress of the work so that it may be inspected by proper village officials. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect any such fence and may revoke said permit if the fence does not comply with all provisions of this code. 

(4)   Height limitations in rear and side yards. No fence shall be more than six feet in height at the rear of homes or buildings situated in a residentially zoned district, which fence shall not extend forward of the rear building line of any existing or proposed building. No other fence or portions of a fence shall be higher than 72 inches in any side yard. 

(5)   Materials and composition. Any fence, wall or similar structure, as well as shrubbery, which unduly cuts off light or air, which may cause a nuisance, a fire hazard or a dangerous condition or an obstruction to combating fires or an obstruction to men and equipment for combating fires, which may affect public safety, is hereby expressly prohibited 

(6)   Prohibited fences. The following fences or fencing materials are specifically prohibited: 

(a)  Barbed wire. 

(b)  Short, pointed fences. 

(c)  Canvas fences. 

(d) Cloth fences. 

(e)  Electrically charged fences. (Except underground low voltage dog type.) 

(f)  Poultry fences. 

(g)  Turkey wire. 

(h)  Temporary fences. (Snow fences are allowed November 1 - April 1 as permitted by the Code Enforcement Officer.) 

(i)   Expandable fences and collapsible fences, except during construction of a building.   

(7)   Chain link fences. All chain link fences erected shall be erected with the closed loop at the top of the fence. 

(8)   Entrances and gates. All entrances or gates shall open into the property. 

(9)   Finished side; posts. Any fence, wood, stockade, chain link or other type of fence shall have the smooth side or finished side facing to the outside of the property owner installing the fence. Fence posts will be placed on the inside of the fence. 

(10) Security fences for commercial and industrial properties. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for the construction of a security fence for commercial and industrial properties, upon due application to and approval by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village. The Code Enforcement Officer may deny such application if it is found that the application for such fence is not appropriate and is unnecessary. Upon such denial, the applicant may appeal the Code Enforcement Officer's decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village by notice to the same within 30 days of such denial. In the event that said Zoning Board substantiates the denial of the Code Enforcement Officer, the applicant may resort to proper legal proceedings according to the statutes of the State of New York. 

(11) Location within property line. All fences or walls must be erected no less than two feet within the property line, and none shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or interfere with visibility on corner lots and/or other structures or vehicles, whether stationary or transitory, on private or public property. 

(12) Visibility at intersections; enforcement authority. The Code Enforcement Officer, Superintendent of Public Works or Police Chief shall have the authority to direct, in writing, the removal, trimming or modification of any shrubs, bushes, plants, trees, flowers or other vegetation, fence, wall hedge or other structure on private or public property wherever the same shall interfere with adequate visibility of operators of motor vehicles at street intersections or curbs.   

L.   Side yards. 

(1)   Side yard width may be varied. Where the side wall of a building is not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the side yard may be varied. In such case, the average width of the side yard shall not be less than the otherwise required minimum width; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be narrower at any one point than one-half the otherwise required minimum width. 

(2)   Width of one side yard may be reduced. When authorized by the Board of Appeals, the width of one side yard may be reduced to a width of not less than five feet, provided that the sum of the width of the two side yards is not less than the required minimum for both side yards, and further provided that the distance between the proposed structure, and any structure, existing or proposed, on an adjacent lot is not less than the required minimum sum of the widths of the two side yards. Such reduction may be authorized only when the Board of Appeals finds it to be warranted by the location of existing buildings or conducive to the desirable development of two or more lots.     

 

§ 200-14.  Additional height requirements. 

 

A.  General application. No building or structure shall have a greater number of stories, nor have an aggregate height of a greater number of feet than is permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 

B.  Chimneys, spires, etc. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to belfries, church spires, cupolas, penthouses and domes which are not used for human occupancy; nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level; nor to flag poles, monuments, transmission towers and cables, radio and television antennae or towers and similar structures. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended. No advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to that part of any chimney, tower, tank or other structure which extends above the height limitations. 

C.  Permitted exceptions to height regulations. Schools, public buildings and institutions may be erected to a height not exceeding 85 feet in any district in which they are permitted, provided front, side, and rear yards are increased in width one foot for each foot of height that the building exceeds the height regulations of the district in which it is located.   

 

§ 200-15.  Accessory buildings; number, height and location. 

 

A.  Number. On any lot intended or used for residential purposes, accessory buildings may include a garage or workshop for personal use in connection with the principal dwelling. 

B.  Height. Maximum height of accessory buildings shall be one story or 15 feet. 

C.  Location. Accessory buildings in residence districts which are not attached to a principal building may be erected within the rear yard in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1)   Rear yard. Five feet from side or rear property line, except when abutting an alley, then 10 feet. 

(2)   Side yard, street side of corner lot. Same as for principal building. 

(3)   Adjacent building. Not closer to a principal or accessory building than 10 feet.   

D.  Attached accessory building in residence district. When an accessory building is attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building. 

E.   Accessory building. Nonresidential accessory buildings shall comply with front and side yard requirements for the principal building to which they are accessory and shall be not closer to any rear property line than 10 feet.   

 

§ 200-16.  Access to improved street.

 

In any district, a lot to be used for residential dwelling purposes shall have direct frontage on a public or private street. 

 

§ 200-17.  Residential living area requirements.

 

Minimum living areas, measured from exterior faces of exterior walls, exclusive of garages, cellars and unenclosed porches, shall be as follows for dwelling units hereafter established:

 

  

 Stories 

 Minimum Living  

 District 

 One 

 More than One 

 Area Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)    

 

 R-1 Residence - One-family 

 X 

  

 1,000  

 

  

  

 X 

 1,200  

 

 R-2 Residence - General 

 X 

  

 750  

 

  

  

 X 

 1,000  

 

  

 Apartments 

  

 1,000 - 2-bedroom  

 

  

 Apartments 

  

 720 - 1-bedroom  

 

  

 Apartments 

  

 600 - efficiency    

 

 

§ 200-18.  Screening and fencing regulations. 

 

A.  Enclosed uses. For any use required by this chapter to be screened in accordance with this section, the owner shall provide a fence, screen, or landscaping sufficient to obscure such uses from view from abutting properties in residence districts or from the public right-of-way. 

B.  Unenclosed uses. Any commercial or industrial use which is not conducted within a completely enclosed building, including, but not limited to, junkyards, storage yards, and used building material yards and which use is in, abuts, or is adjacent to a residence district, or fronts on a public right-of-way, shall be screened from view from such residence districts and public rights-of-way in an effective manner. 

C.  Approval by the Planning Board. Plans and site design for the installation of such fencing or screening as are required by this chapter shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board prior to issuance of a building permit. Any fencing or screening installed in accordance with this section shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of this section. Failure to maintain fencing, screening or plant material shall be considered a violation of this chapter.   

 

§ 200-19.  Signs.

 

Signs shall comply with the following regulations: 

A.  Residential districts. In R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, nonadvertising signs are permitted, but not in any required yard, as follows: [Amended 2-9-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976] 

(1)   One nameplate, identification or professional sign not to exceed two square feet of sign area, showing the name and address of the resident or a permitted home occupation of the resident of the premises. In the case of a corner lot, such sign shall be located on the principal street frontage of the dwelling unit. For multiple dwellings, fraternities or sororities, a sign shall not exceed 12 square feet of sign area. 

(2)   One nonilluminated sale or rental sign not to exceed six square feet of sign area during and pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of the land or building. Such sign shall be removed after the premises have been sold or rented. 

(3)   One temporary artisan's sign not to exceed six square feet of sign area during and pertaining to construction, repairs or alterations on the property. Such sign shall be removed promptly upon completion of the work. 

(4)   Institutional or religious announcement sign not to exceed 15 square feet in area. 

(5)   Signs advertising the sale or development of a tract of land may be erected upon the tract by the developer, builder, contractor or owner. The size of sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and not more than two signs shall be placed upon the tract. 

(6)   Signs advertising functions, uses, products or services not pertaining to the premises on which they are located, and mobile advertising or attracting devices shall not be permitted in any "R" residence district.   

B.  Commercial districts. In the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts the applicable signs above are permitted, and, in addition, the following: 

(1)   Any business sign erected hereafter in the C-1 District shall not project into a public way and shall not be located or placed within five feet of any public way. No sign shall be higher than the building to which it is attached, and no sign shall be erected above the roof of any building. The gross surface area of business signs in the C-1 District shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage for nonilluminated signs or 1/2 square foot per lineal foot of building frontage for illuminated signs. 

(2)   Any business sign erected hereafter in the C-2 District shall not be located within any required yard in the district. No sign shall be higher than the building to which it is attached, and no sign shall be erected above the roof of any building. The gross surface area of any sign shall not exceed six square feet per lineal foot of the building frontage for nonilluminated signs nor three square feet per lineal foot for illuminated signs.   

C.  Manufacturing districts. In the M-1 Manufacturing Districts the applicable signs above are permitted, and, in addition, the following: 

(1)   Business signs are permitted, provided that such signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area, and if illuminated, the light shall not be directed toward any public street or adjacent residential property. 

(2)   Advertising signs and commercial billboards are permitted as follows: 

(a)  The maximum size of any advertising sign or commercial billboard shall be 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, and the bottom of such sign shall be at least four feet from the ground and no more than six feet above ground. 

(b)  Any advertising sign or commercial billboard shall be located at least 50 feet from the edge of the pavement of the nearest street or highway. No such sign or billboard shall be erected or established within 200 feet of any street or road intersection. 

(c)  No commercial billboard shall be erected or established without first filing with the Village Clerk an application in writing and obtaining a permit. The application shall be made by the person proposing to erect or establish the billboard. At least once annually, the Zoning Officer shall inspect each billboard and shall cause any unsafe or unlicensed billboards to be removed. The annual inspection fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, and shall be paid on or before the first day of July each year to the Village Clerk. The annual inspection and fee shall apply to all existing and future billboards.     

D.  Planned development district. In any planned development district the Planning Board shall review and approve any proposed business signs. No advertising signs shall be permitted in any planned development district. 

E.   General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all permitted sign and billboard uses: 

(1)   Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not allowed to become dilapidated. Temporary or superfluous signs shall not be permitted. 

(2)   Signs, other than an official traffic sign, shall not be erected within the right-of-way lines of any street. 

(3)   Signs shall not project beyond property lines nor over public sidewalk areas, except as noted. 

(4)   A permit shall not be required for the erection, alteration or maintenance of any permitted signs in an R District. 

(5)   A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any business or advertising sign. 

(6)   All temporary signs erected for a special event shall be removed by the property owner when the circumstances leading to their erection no longer apply. 

(7)   In all districts, nonconforming signs shall be required to terminate in three years. 

(8)   There shall be no restrictions on signs erected by property owners of property located on Commercial Drive in the Village of New York Mills and the above provisions shall not apply to such signs. [Added 3-11-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985] 

(9)   All flashing signs are prohibited in this municipality. [Added 3-11-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]     

 

§ 200-20.  Off-street parking. 

 

A.  Off-street parking space. Off-street parking space shall be required for all buildings constructed or substantially altered after the effective date hereof, except nonresidential uses in the C-1 Retail Commercial District. Each off-street space shall consist of at least 180 square feet with a minimum width of nine feet. In addition, space necessary for aisles, maneuvering and drives shall be provided. Required off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and regulated as not to interfere with pedestrian or motor traffic on the public street or highway and no parking or maneuvering incidental to off-street parking shall be on any public street right-of-way or walkway. Parking requirements are specified in Schedule B, which is hereby made a part of this chapter. 

B.  Unspecified uses. For uses not specified, the Board of Appeals, shall, and after recommendation of the Planning Board, establish parking requirements in specific cases consistent with those specified in Schedule B. 

C.  Multiple use buildings. For any building having more than one use, parking space shall be required for each use. 

D.  Residential districts. In residential districts, the required off-street parking established in Schedule B shall be located only in the side or rear yard of the lot and not between the street and the building setback line. Any additional off-street parking over and above that required by Schedule B shall be limited to a designated driveway as defined in § 200-3. [Amended 9-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000] 

E.   Commercial or industrial districts. Required off-street parking in commercial or industrial districts shall be located within 250 feet of the commercial or industrial use but not in any residence district, and, if such parking area abuts a dwelling or a residence district, the parking area shall be screened in accordance with § 200-18. 

F.   Computation of floor areas. Floor areas for the purposes of computing parking requirements shall be the sum of the horizontal area within exterior walls of the several floors of a building, excluding basement, cellar and attic areas used primarily for storage or service. 

G.  Travel-trailers or boats in residence districts. Parking or storage in residence districts of travel-trailers or boats out-of-doors shall be confined to the side or rear yard and not within five feet of any property line or in plain view facing a public street or highway.  [Amended 2-9-1976 L.L. No. 1-1976] 

H.  Commercial vehicles restricted in residence districts. Overnight parking or storage out-of-doors in any residence district of any vehicle licensed for commercial purposes shall be prohibited. 

I.    Parking lots for five or more vehicles; Planning Board approval. Off-street parking lots for five or more cars or trucks shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access, pedestrian walkways, ingress and egress, and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall site design, and the plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.

 

  

 Schedule B
Off-Street Parking Requirements  

  

 Use 

 Spaces Required    

  

 Dwellings 

 1 space for each dwelling unit  

  

 Apartments

 2 spaces for each dwelling unit  

  

 Motel, hotel, rooming house 

 1 space for each guest room  

  

 Fraternity, sorority, dormitory 

 1 space for each resident  

  

 Office 

 1 space for each 400 square feet of floor space  

  

 Funeral home 

 15 spaces, plus space for all employee and resident personnel  

  

 Church or temple 

 1 space for each 4 seating spaces in main assembly room  

  

 Schools: 
  Elementary 
  High 
  College or University 

 2 spaces for each classroom 
4 spaces for each classroom 
1 space for each 5 students  

  

 Theatre or other place of assembly 

 1 space for each 5 seating spaces  

  

 Hospital, nursing or convalescent home 

 1 space for each 2 beds, plus 1 for each employee  

  

 Retail store (no requirement in C-1) 

 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor space devoted to retail or customer use  

  

 Shopping center 

 3 square feet per square foot of retail area   

  

 Club or restaurant 

 1 space for each 3 persons capacity  

  

  

 Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand 

 In addition to above, 30 spaces  

  

 Bowling alley 

 5 spaces for each alley.  

  

 Wholesale, storage, freight terminal 

 1 space for each employee on maximum shift. Parking area shall not be less than 25% of the building floor area.  

  

 Industrial or manufacturing use 

 1 space for each 4 employees on the maximum working shift  

  

 Home occupation 

 Off-street parking space for all customers, patients, clients and residents  

  

 Auto wash

 1 space for each bay, plus space for all employee cars and stacking space for 4 cars per bay    

 	 	 	 
   

§ 200-21.  Off-street loading.

 

Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for each commercial or industrial establishment hereafter erected or substantially altered and shall be so arranged as not to interfere with pedestrian or motor traffic on the public street or highway and shall be adequately screened if adjacent to a dwelling or a residential area. Such off-street loading space shall be logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. Any required off-street loading berth shall have a clear area not less than 12 feet in width by 25 feet in length.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE IV, Site Plans and Special Use Permits
Body:
§ 200-22.  Site plan review. 

 

A.  Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 7-725-a of the Village Law.  

B.  The applicant shall also provide for the management of stormwater quantity and quality and soil erosion and sediment control as described in Chapter 170, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. [Added 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]   

 

§ 200-23.  Special use permits.

 

Special use permits shall be granted in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 7-725-b of the Village Law.  


PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE V, Nonconforming Uses
Body:
§ 200-24.  Continuation of nonconforming uses.

 

The lawful use of any land or building existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, and any such building may be reconstructed or structurally altered and the nonconforming use therein changed, subject to the following regulations. 

 

§ 200-25.  Nonconforming use regulations. 

 

A.  Additions. A nonconforming building or use shall not be added to or enlarged unless such nonconforming building or use is made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 

B.  Alterations. A building nonconforming as to use may not be reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50% of the fair value of the building, unless the use of such building is changed to a conforming use. 

C.  Changes. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or higher classification according to the provisions of this chapter and when so changed such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a lower classification. 

D.  Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, any future use shall be in conformity to the provisions of this chapter. 

E.   Restoration. A building nonconforming as to use which has been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of not more than 50% of its fair value may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided the bulk, height, and area requirements shall not exceed that which existed before said damage. Said restoration must be completed within one year of such occurrence or the use of the building or land as a legal nonconforming use thereafter shall be terminated. [Amended 6-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003] 

F.   Removal. If any building in which any nonconforming use is conducted is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on which such building was located and the subsequent use of any building erected thereon shall conform with the regulations of the district. 

G.  Validity of permit. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted, and on which the construction has been started and diligently prosecuted before the effective date of this chapter or any amendment hereto may be completed.    

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE VI, Administration
Body:
§ 200-26.  Enforcement.

 

This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer who shall also be known as and designated in this chapter as the "Zoning Officer." He shall not grant a permit for any building or use on premises where the proposed erection, alteration, relocation, or use would be in violation of this chapter, all other provisions of the Municipal Code, rules and regulations of the Village, or any of its officers, boards, agencies, commissions and departments, the laws of the State of New York, and the ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of any other political entity having jurisdiction over the subject matter. The Zoning Officer shall make such inspections of buildings or premises as are necessary to carry out his duties. No permit nor certificate of occupancy required hereunder shall be issued by the Zoning Officer except in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter or as directed by the Board of Appeals under the provisions of Article VII herein and all other applicable provisions of law. 

 

§ 200-27.  Building permit.

 

No building shall hereafter be erected, relocated or altered as to outside dimensions or so as to permit a change in its use and no excavation for any building shall be begun unless and until a permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning Officer, or by the Board of Appeals wherever it is provided in this chapter that the approval of the Board of Appeals is required. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, no permit shall be issued except in accordance with the provisions of the Building Codes of New York and Chapter 70, entitled "Building Construction," and in particular Article III thereof and the payment of fees as prescribed therein.

 

 *Note:
Application shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by him (§ 70-14).  

 Work under building permit must be commenced within six months and completed within one year unless extensions are granted (§ 70-16).  

 Building permit fees are as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees (§ 70-17).    

 

§ 200-28.  Certificate of occupancy. 

 

A.  No building or other structure, hereafter erected, altered, extended, enlarged or restored, shall be used or occupied or changed in use, until the provisions of Article IV, entitled "Certificate of Occupancy," of Chapter 70, entitled "Building Construction," of this Municipal Code are complied with and that such building or structure or proposed use complies with all other provisions of this Municipal Code, rules and regulations of the Village or any of its officers, boards, agencies, commissions, and departments, the laws of the State of New York, and the ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of any other political entity having jurisdiction over the subject matter.

 

  

 *Note: Certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 30 days after application to Code Enforcement Officer (§ 70-23B). Before issuance, an inspection must be made (§ 70-22). A temporary certificate may be granted under certain circumstances (§ 70-24).    

 

B.  The use of a building or premises shall not be deemed to have changed because of temporary vacancy or change of ownership or tenancy.   

 

§ 200-29.  Completion of existing buildings.

 

Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building actually under construction legally at the time of the passage of this chapter or any amendment hereto, and which entire building shall be completed within one year from the date of the passage of this chapter or any amendment hereto. 

 

§ 200-30.  Violations.

 

Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law. Each week a violation continues shall constitute a separate additional violation. Upon determination by the Zoning Officer that a violation of this chapter exists, he shall send written notice to the last known owner of record of the property, as determined by the assessment records, informing said owner of the violation of specific provisions of this chapter and stating that action is to be taken by said owner to remove such violation in 20 days; or proceedings to compel compliance with this chapter will be instituted. Any violation of this chapter may also be enjoined pursuant to law.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE VII, Board of Appeals
Body:
§ 200-31.  Membership; terms of office; rules and regulations.

 

There is hereby established a Board of Appeals consisting of three members which shall function in the manner prescribed by law. The members of the Board of Appeals shall be residents of the Village and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, to serve for three-year terms as prescribed by law. Vacancies occurring in said Board by expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled in the manner provided by law. The Board of Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter, and all its resolutions and orders shall be in accordance therewith. 

 

§ 200-32.  Procedure.

 

The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter involved, and shall set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the variance that is applied for, or the use for which the special exception is sought, and the basis thereof. At least seven days before the date of the hearing required by law on an application or appeal to the Board of Appeals, the secretary of said Board shall transmit to the Planning Board a copy of said application or appeal, together with a copy of the notice of the aforesaid hearing and shall request that the Planning Board submit to the Board of Appeals its opinion on said application or appeal, and the Planning Board shall submit a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of said hearing. Upon failure to submit such report, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have approved the application or appeal. 

 

§ 200-33.  Meetings.

 

All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as such Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Such Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. 

 

§ 200-34.  Records.

 

All decisions of the Board shall be by resolution and a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant, to the Village Clerk and to the Zoning Officer. Every rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the decision of the Board and the findings of fact on which the decision was based. Such findings and reasons shall include references to the standards pertaining thereto where the appeal is for a variance or a special exception. 

 

§ 200-35.  Appeal to Board of Appeals. 

 

A.  Matters reviewable; vote required; parties. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer. It shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. The concurring vote of a majority of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this chapter. Such appeal may be taken by any persons aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village. 

B.  Time limit on appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days or such additional time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing with the Zoning Officer and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.   

  

§ 200-36.  Stay on appeal.

 

An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of acts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, otherwise proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 

 

§ 200-37.  Hearing and determination. 

 

A.  The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give due notice thereof to the parties, and by publication at least once in the official newspaper five calendar days before the date of the hearing, and shall decide the same within 62 calendar days. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 

B.  The applicant shall bear those costs directly attributable to the hearing which shall be determined and payable in advance as established by the Board of Appeals.   

 

§ 200-38.  Jurisdiction.

 

The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties prescribed by statute and by this chapter as described below: 

A.  Appellate jurisdiction. 

(1)   Appeals from the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 

(2)   To grant a variance in case of unnecessary hardship.   

B.  Original jurisdiction. 

(1)   The granting of special exceptions for certain uses stated in this chapter.   

C.  Determinations. 

(1)   Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Zoning Officer to hear and decide on questions where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer involving the interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 

(2)   Variance. On appeal from a determination of the Zoning Officer, to grant a use variance or area variance in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in §§ 7-712 and 7-712-b of the Village Law. 

(3)   Special exception. On application, supplementing an application to the Zoning Officer for a permit or certificate of occupancy, the Board of Appeals may authorize the Zoning Officer to grant a permit for any use for which approval of the Board is required by this chapter. The Board shall, pursuant to law, hold a public hearing on any such application prior to acting thereon. In authorizing such permit, the Board may designate appropriate conditions in harmony with the following standards: 

(a)  The use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts and uses. 

(b)  The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout, and its relation to streets giving access to it shall be such that traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the neighborhood or conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood. In applying this standard, the Board of Appeals shall consider, among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic, particularly of children, relation to main traffic thoroughfares and to street and road intersections, and the general character and intensity of development of the neighborhood. 

(c)  The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the proper development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.       

 

§ 200-39.  Special exceptions.

 

Special exceptions to be considered by the Board of Appeals include the following: 

A.  Public utility station or structure. Such uses shall include electric substations, transformers, switches, and auxiliary apparatus serving a distribution area, and water pumping stations in any residential district and shall be subject to the following regulations: 

(1)   Such facility shall not be located on a residential street (unless no other site is available), and shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets. 

(2)   The location, design, and operation of such facility shall not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area. 

(3)   Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided, and the facility shall be screen planted in accordance with the provisions of § 200-18.   

B.  Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand. In addition to meeting the minimum yard and lot coverage requirements, such businesses, where persons are served in automobiles or out-of-doors shall be subject to the following regulations: 

(1)   Such use shall be not closer than 200 feet to a residence district. 

(2)   Shall have frontage on a public street. 

(3)   Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic congestion, and for this purpose, the number and location of driveways shall be subject to review and approval of the Board of Appeals. 

(4)   Such use shall be adequately fenced and screened from any adjacent residential property, and lighting shall be directed away from adjacent property.   

C.  Auto wash. In addition to meeting the minimum yard and lot coverage requirements, any auto wash establishment shall be subject to the following regulations: 

(1)   Such establishment shall not be closer than 200 feet to a residence district. 

(2)   The wash water shall not pollute any stream, nor create a hazard because of surface drainage. 

(3)   The number and location of driveways shall be subject to review and approval of the Board of Appeals. 

(4)   Such establishment, in addition to meeting the off-street parking requirements of Schedule B, shall provide four stacking spaces per bay on the lot to prevent the waiting of automobiles in the public street.   

D.  Commercial excavation. Except in a commercial excavation district, and except when incidental to the construction of a building on the same lot, the excavation, processing or sale of topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, clay or other natural deposits is subject to the following conditions. 

(1)   An application shall be made to the Board of Appeals for a special exception for commercial excavation. 

(2)   In its consideration of said application, the Board of Appeals shall find that such excavation will not endanger the stability of adjacent land or structures nor constitute a detriment to public welfare, convenience or safety by reason of excessive dust, noise, traffic or other condition. The Board of Appeals shall specify any reasonable requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare in granting such permit, including the following: 

(a)  The slope of material in such topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or other earth shall not exceed the normal angle of repose of such material. 

(b)  The top and the base of such slope shall not be nearer than 50 feet to any property line nor nearer than 50 feet to the right-of-way line of any street or highway. 

(c)  A plan for restoration and rehabilitation of a commercial earth excavation area or burrow pit shall accompany the application for a special exception and shall assure conformance with the public health, safety and welfare. The Board of Appeals, upon approval of such plan, shall require a performance bond to assure rehabilitation of commercial excavation sites in conformance therewith.     

E.   Junkyard, automobile junkyard. 

(1)   No junkyard or automobile junkyard shall be operated or established hereafter in any area of the Village unless a special exception shall have been granted by the Board of Appeals for such use. Any such use existing at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be discontinued within two years unless such use shall comply with the requirements below and shall be granted a special exception by the Board of Appeals. 

(2)   Before a permit for a junkyard, or automobile junkyard is authorized, the Board of Appeals shall find that such use will not constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property values by reason of dust, smoke, fumes, noise, traffic, odors, vermin or other condition. The Board of Appeals may specify any reasonable requirements to safeguard the public health, welfare, safety, convenience and property values in granting such permit, including the following: 

(a)  Said use shall not be located within 50 feet of any highway, stream, or property line; or 500 feet from any existing church, school, public building or place of public assembly. 

(b)  Any new junkyard or automobile junkyard shall be completely surrounded with a fence which substantially screens said area and shall have a suitable gate which shall be closed and locked except during the normal working hours of said use. Such fence shall not be erected nearer than 50 feet to any highway or property line. All junk and dumping materials stored or deposited at the site shall be kept within the enclosure of the fence and below the top of the fence except during transportation of same in the reasonable course of the business. No dumping or burning of same shall be accomplished within the Village. 

(c)  Where the topography, land forms, natural growth of trees or other considerations accomplish the purpose of this section in whole or in part, the fencing requirements hereunder may be reduced by the Board of Appeals, provided, however, that such natural barrier conforms with the purposes of this section. Where the topography, land forms, natural growth of trees or other considerations are such as to prevent effective screening, other means shall be designed, or the use shall not be allowed in the particular location.      

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE VIII, Amendments
Body:
§ 200-40.  Amendments; referral to Planning Board. 

 

A.  Amendments to this chapter shall be made in accordance with law and only after referral of any proposed amendments, supplements or changes to the Village Planning Board for a report and recommendation thereon. 

B.  The Village Planning Board shall submit its report within 30 days after receiving such referral. Failure of the Village Planning Board to report within the required time shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed amendment.   

 

§ 200-41.  Periodic review of zoning regulations.

 

From time to time, at intervals of not more than three years, the Village Planning Board shall reexamine the provisions of this chapter and the location of district boundary lines and shall submit a report to the Village Board, recommending such changes or amendments, if any, which may be desirable in the interest of public safety, health, convenience, necessity or welfare.  

PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION Chapter 200, ZONING, ARTICLE IX, Penalties
Body:
§ 200-42.  Penalties for offenses.

 

A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and, upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 


APPENDIX Chapter A205, FEES (See Amendment A205-2 Building Fees also)
Table Of Contents:
Overview
Body
Documents
Overview:
 

Body:
§ A205-1.  Amusements. 

 

A.  Any person applying for a license fee shall at the time of making application therefor pay a fee as follows (§ 58-2): 

(1)   For each license for a circus, for one day's performance: $100. 

(2)   For each license for a menagerie, for each day's performance: $10. 

(3)   For each license for tent show and outdoor theatrical performance, each day: $25. 

(4)   For all other outdoor exhibitions and performances mentioned in Chapter 58, for each day's performance: $25. 

(5)   For each license for keeping or conducting theater or moving picture theater: $100 for each year. 

(6)   For each license for conducting a dance or dance exhibition by a duly constituted religious, education, or charitable organization, no fee. Conducted by any other person, organization or group: $50 per day. 

(7)   For each license for keeping a billiard room, shooting gallery, bowling alley, or other similar place or amusement for money or hire: $100 for each year.   

B.  The fee for the license of an amusement center: $5 for each game operated therein (§ 58-9). 

C.  The license fee for owners or operators of three or more amusement center games within the Village: $100; and for owners or operators of less than three: $50 (§ 58-12).   

 

§ A205-2.  Building construction.

 

Building permit fees (§ 70-17). 

A.  Single-family, multifamily residential development (apartment, condominium, townhouses are zero lot line): 

(1)   Each 100 square feet: $15.   

B.  Commercial and industrial development (building layout) required: 

(1)   Each 100 square feet: $12.   

C.  Additions/accessory buildings: 

(1)   Each 100 square feet (habitable): $50 plus $15 per 100 square feet.

(2)   Each 100 square feet (non-habitalbe) $12 pr 100 square feet.   

D.  Swimming pools: 

(1)   Inground: $75 

(2)   Above ground: $30.   

E.   Certificates of occupancy: 

(1)   Residential buildings, one and two family: $75. 

(2)   Multiple dwellings per dwelling: $50. 

(3)   Nonresidential buildings: 

(a)  First 1,000 square feet: $50. 

(b)  Each additional 1,000 square feet: $15.     

F.   Applications to Zoning Board of Appeals: $40. Applicants shall also be responsible for costs associated with publishing legal notice. 

G.  Request for amendment to zoning law, text or map amendment (excluding planned development): $100. Applicants shall also be responsible for costs associated with publishing legal notice. 

H.  Request for amendment to zoning law for planned development: $500. 

I.    Copy of zoning law: $25.   

J.    Permits:

      (a)  Fence Permit $10.

      (b)  Demolition - Residential $50

      (c)  Demolition - Commercial $150

      (d) Signs $50 per face

 

§ A205-3.  Fireworks.

 

Permit for the public display of fireworks: $150 (§ 94-2). 

 

§ A205-4.  Flood damage prevention.

 

Applications for a floodplain development permit: $10 ( § 98-11B). 

 

§ A205-5.  Peddlers. 

 

A.  License fees (§ 149-12A). 

(1)   The license fee for each person licensed as a "hawker," "peddler" or "solicitor" shall be $25 per annum, or fraction thereof. 

(2)   The license fee for each person licensed to assist a "hawker," "peddler" or "solicitor" shall be $10 per annum, or fraction thereof.   

B.  The fee for a transient merchant's license shall be at the rate of $500 for each thirty-day period or portion thereof (§ 149-19A).   

 

§ A205-6.  Solid waste.

 

Solid waste collection rates shall be as follows (§ 167-20): 

A.  Designated bag: 

(1)   For 32 - 33 gallon: $2.75. 

(2)   For 20 gallon: $2.00.   

B.  Heavy trash label: $5. 

C.  Tire label: 

(1)   Tire with rim: $4.50. 

(2)   Tire without rim: $2.50.   

   

§ A205-7.  Streets and sidewalks.

Street opening permit: $25 (§ 171-4). 

 

§ A205-8.  Subdivision of land. 

 

A.  Application for plat approval for minor subdivision: $50 [§ 175-7A(2)]. 

B.  Applications for plat approval for major subdivisions: $100, plus $20 per lot. (§ 175-9A).   

 

§ A205-9.  Zoning.

 

Annual inspection fee for commercial billboards: $25 for each 25 feet, or fraction thereof, of the length of the billboard [§ 200-19C(2)(c)]. 


ZONING
200 Attachment 1
Schedule A
Village of New York Mills

Zone standards

District
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front 
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total

R-1
Residential
One-family dwelling 10,000 100 20 2½ 35 25 10 25 50

R-2 one-family 7,200 dwelling unit
100 25 2½ 35 25 10 25 50
R-2 Two-family dwelling 5,000
dwelling unit
100 25 2½ 35 25 10 25 50
R-2 multi family 4,000 100 25 2½ 35 25 10 25 50

R-2 Residential 10,000 100 25 2½ 35 30 15 35 50

R-3 Residential 2,500 dwelling unit 100 20 2½ 35 40 15 30 50


C-1
Retail/
Commercial
Existing residential uses
Retail store, bakery for retail sale of
goods primarily on the premises
Personal service shop
Launderette
Restaurant, tavern
Business or professional office, studio
Educational, eleemosynary, religious, or
philanthropic institutions
Florist shop
50 2½ 35 35
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:2 07 - 15 - 2007
ZONING
Schedule A
Village of New York Mills
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article V, Use Regulations,
for complete list)
Special Exception
By Board of
Appeals
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front1
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
C-1
Retail/
Commercial
Existing residential uses
Retail store, bakery for retail sale of
goods primarily on the premises
Personal service shop
Launderette
Restaurant, tavern
Business or professional office, studio
Educational, eleemosynary, religious,
or philanthropic institutions
Florist shop
50 2½ 35 35
Funeral home 24,000 120 25 2½ 35 25 20 50 50
Club or lodge, except those the chief
activity of which is a service
customarily carried on as a business
Radio, television, or household
appliance sales or service
Antique sales and accessory service
Public utility station or structure
Business signs
Customary accessory uses
24,000 120 25 2½ 35 25 20 50 50
Gasoline station 10,000 100 20  35   25
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:3 07 - 15 - 2007
NEW YORK MILLS CODE
Schedule A
Village of New York Mills
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article V, Use Regulations,
for complete list)
Special Exception
By Board of
Appeals
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front1
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
C-2
General
Commercial
C-1 Commercial District uses, except
residences
Motel, restaurant tavern
Auto, boat, farm implement, mobile
home, trailer, snowmobile or
motorcycle sales or rental
Garage, gasoline station
Used car sales
Laundry or dry-cleaning plant
Office equipment, business machines
Letter press shop, printing plant
Animal hospital, kennel
Hardware, building supplies
Heating, plumbing electrical or
cabinet fabrication
Bowling, pool, billiards
Business sign
Accessory uses
No minimum required 25 10 25 25
Auto wash 12,500 100 20 15 40 25 50 25
Drive-in restaurant 12,500 100 20 15 40 25 50 25
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:4 07 - 15 - 2007
ZONING
Schedule A
Village of New York Mills
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article V, Use Regulations,
for complete list)
Special Exception
By Board of
Appeals
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front1
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
M-1
Manufacturing
C-2 Commercial District uses
Development or research center
Light manufacturing, assembly plant
Wholesale, storage or warehouse
facility
Cold storage, meat packing plan
Concrete products, monuments
Machine shop
Welding or metal craft shop
Business sign
Customary accessory building or use
No minimum required 25 25 50 50
Auto wash
Truck terminal
Junkyard, auto
junkyard
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:5 07 - 15 - 2007
NEW YORK MILLS CODE
Zoning Schedule A
Village of New York Mills
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article V, Use Regulations,
for complete list)
Special Exception
By Board of
Appeals
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front1
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Planned Development
All requirements for dwelling unit density, lot width, lot
coverage, building height and interior yard dimensions
shall be as recommended by the Planning Board using the
numbers contained herein as guidelines subject to final
approval by the Board of Trustees. [Added 4-4-1977 by
L.L. No. 1-1977]
Exterior yards on
planned district
boundaries
50 50 50
Interior yards
within district
P-R
Residential
One-family dwellings - maximum 4
dwelling units/acre
All requirements for
minimum lot sizes
shall be as
recommended by the
Planning Board
using the numbers
contained herein as
guidelines subject to
final approval of the
Board of Trustees.
20 2½ 35 35 15 30
Two-family dwellings - maximum 6
dwelling units/acre 20 2½ 35 35 15 30
Multifamily dwellings - maximum 16
dwelling units/acre 30 3 40 40 15 30 50
For apartments over two
stories:
+5 feet/
story
+5 feet/
story
+5
feet/
story
Townhouses - maximum 16 dwelling
units/acre 3 40 35 15 30 50
Combination of dwellings
Neighborhood park, playground 25 
As above for each
dwelling unit type
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:6 07 - 15 - 2007
ZONING
Schedule A
Village of New York Mills
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article V, Use Regulations,
for complete list)
Special Exception
By Board of
Appeals
Minimum
Lot Size Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Building Height
(maximum)
Yard Dimensions
(minimum, in feet)
Front1
Side
Rear
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
(in
stories) (feet) One Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
P-C
Commercial
Professional or business office
All requirements for
minimum lot sizes
shall be as
recommended by the
Planning Board
using the numbers
contained herein as
guidelines subject to
final approval of the
Board of Trustees.
30    25 50 50
Office equipment, business machines
Personal service shops
Motel, restaurant
Bank, savings and loan institution
Bowling alleys
Laundry, dry-cleaning plant
Retail store or shopping center
Data processing center 25 75 75
P-M
Manufacturing
Uses permitted in Planned
Commercial Development or research
center 40    25 50 50 Printing or publishing plant
Light manufacturing
Tool, die, machine or metal craft shop
PDMU
Planned
Development
Mixed Use
Retail store
Office
Professional office
Bank
Bakery
All requirements for
minimum lot sizes
shall be as
recommended by the
Planning Board
using the numbers
contained herein as
guidelines subject to
final approval of the
Board of Trustees.
50
50
50
50
50
2
2
2
2
2
30
30
30
30
30
25
25
25
25
25
10
10
10
10
10
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
Grocery store 50 2 30 25 10 25 30
Public building/use 50 2.5 35 25 10 25 25
Multifamily dwelling 50 3 40 50 10 25 30
NOTES:
1 Zero (0) frontage may be allowed on Main Street from Mill Street to Church Street.
200 Attachment 1:7 07 - 15 - 2007